S/PV.8465

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8465th meeting

Tuesday, 19 February 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ndong Mba. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Equatorial Guinea)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Moriko
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Michon
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Djani
Mr. Almunayekh
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Mielus
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Van Shalkwyk
Mr. Allen
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in Burundi

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-04786 (E)
*1904786*

S/PV.8465

The situation in Burundi

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Burundi
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Burundi to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Michel
Kafando, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Burundi; Her Excellency Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed,
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United
Nations; and His Excellency Mr. Jürg Lauber, Permanent
Representative of Switzerland to the United Nations, in
his capacity as Chair of the Burundi configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Kafando.
Mr. Kafando (spoke in French): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to once
again brief the Security Council on the situation in
Burundi. Before doing so, allow me to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month.
My briefing will focus on the main developments
in Burundi and in the region since my last briefing
(see S/PV.8408), in particular the activities that I have
carried out on behalf of the Secretary-General, as well
as the prospects for resolving the political crisis, only
16 months before the holding of general elections,
including the presidential election. Since my briefing
last November, the situation in Burundi has been
marked by the following major developments.
On the political front, on 22 December 2018,
President Pierre Nkurunziza reiterated his decision not
to seek another mandate in 2020. The new opposition
party, the Congrès national pour la liberté, whose request
for official recognition was made by Mr. Agathon
Rwasa on 14 September 2018, was finally approved
by the Government on 14 February. That decision is a
step in the right direction and could help open up the
2/23

19/02/2019

political space. I encourage the Government to continue
in that direction and urge it to be more inclusive, in
particular in the context of ongoing discussions on the
adoption of a new electoral code for the 2020 elесtiоns.
The platform of the Conseil national pour le respect de
l’Accord d’Arusha pour la paix et la réconciliation au
Burundi et la restauration de l’état de droit continues
to be undermined by various defections. Opposition
parties have reiterated their call for the African Union
and the United Nations to take over the inter-Burundian
dialogue process.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights believes that the human rights
situation remains worrisome, in the light of the reports
it receives from Burundi. The humanitarian situation
has improved since 2017, except in some parts of the
country, in particular in the eastern and north-eastern
border provinces. However, approximately 1.5 million
people remain threatened by food insecurity due to
persistent socioeconomic difficulties. According to
United Nations estimates, as of 31 December 2018,
there were 140,000 displaced persons and more than
347,000 Burundian refugees still living in neighbouring
countries. It should be noted that that number is down
from the 380,000 refugees reported in November.
The Government of Burundi and the United Nations
country team signed a $784.4 million cooperation
agreement on 25 January as part of the United Nations
development assistance framework for the period 20192023, of which 46 per cent is immediately available,
thereby cementing the continued support of the United
Nations for the Government’s priority programmes,
which are outlined in its national development plan. The
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees launched a $296 million appeal on 9 February
to assist refugees in camps in Tanzania, Rwanda,
Uganda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I visited Burundi from 20 to 29 January with the
intention of discussing with President Nkurunziza
and Burundian officials the conclusions of the
Security Council meeting held on 21 November 2018
and reaffirming, on the eve of the Summit of the
East African Community (EAC) Heads of State, the
support of the United Nations for the inter-Burundian
dialogue process. Regrettably, such discussions could
not take place. However, as I was in Bujumbura, I
took the opportunity to interact with members of the
international community and the diplomatic corps.
My interlocutors welcomed the encouraging security
19-04786

19/02/2019

The situation in Burundi

developments in the country, despite the recurrence
of violent border incidents reported by the media and
some neighbouring countries.
I then visited Kampala on 31 January for a
working visit with President Museveni, mediator of
the inter-Burundian dialogue. That meeting enabled
me to reiterate to President Museveni the support of
the Secretary-General, as well as that of the Security
Council, for the inter-Burundian dialogue process led
by the region. Above all, I noted his willingness and
commitment to achieve inter-Burundian dialogue at
all costs, as well as his determination to contribute to
easing the crisis in Burundi and the tensions among the
countries of the region.
The day after my visit with President Museveni, on
1 February, the Arusha Summit opened, during which
President Paul Kagame of Rwanda succeeded President
Museveni as Chair of the East African Community. In
addition to other agenda items, the Summit took note
of the facilitator’s final report on the inter-Burundian
dialogue but decided that the leaders of the region
would consult each other on it later. The facilitator,
whom I met on 4 February, informed me that he had
completed his facilitation work and that it was now
up to the mediator to take over the process. He also
confirmed that consultations were ongoing among the
Heads of State of the subregion.
Since the Ordinary Summit meeting of the East
African Community Heads of State, Burundi has
renewed its confidence in the mediator, who has
already begun initial consultations with his peers
in the subregion. Council members will recall that,
in his most recent report to the Security Council
(S/2018/1028), the Secretary-General proposed various
options on the role of the United Nations in Burundi,
in close consultation with international partners, and
in particular with East African countries, including
the country concerned, Burundi, not to mention the
African Union, whose presence and participation
in today’s important meeting I welcome. A new deal
was proposed by the EAC Summit and the Presidents
of Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda were appointed to
conduct the mediation. I intend to contact them again to
find out the details of their new approach. The aim will
be to reassess together the ways and means of helping
the region to assist Burundi effectively in resolving the
current political crisis.

S/PV. 8465

In that regard, if it is their intention to adopt a press
statement, I would like to suggest that Council members
reiterate their encouragement for the efforts of the region
and the full support of the Secretary-General for the
mediation. It is vital that the mediation process ensure
that the facilitator receives support and assistance in
conducting his mission. Nonetheless, all such proposals
for support must have only one objective, namely, that
is for the inclusive inter-Burundian dialogue to remain
the only viable option for a lasting settlement of the
political crisis and the holding of elections in 2020, in a
peaceful environment and in the letter and spirit of the
Arusha Agreement.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Kafando for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mohammed.
Ms. Mohammed: At the outset, I wish to reiterate
our congratulations to you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month and to
express our sincere admiration for your able leadership
in guiding the work of this important United Nations
organ to deliver constructive outcomes. Let me assure
you that you have our full support and cooperation.
I would also like to thank you for convening today’s
meeting and giving us an opportunity to share the
views of the African Union (AU) on the situation
in Burundi. Let me also take this opportunity to
thank His Excellency Mr. Michel Kafando, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Burundi, for his
comprehensive briefing.
As all are aware, the African Union attaches great
importance to the restoration of peace and stability in
Burundi and has been very active in supporting the
mediation efforts led by the East African Community. I
would like to take this opportunity to reiterate the AU’s
deep appreciation to President Yoweri Museveni, in his
capacity as mediator, and to former President Benjamin
Mkapa, facilitator of the of the inter-Burundian
political dialogue — as expressed by the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of the African Union at
its just-concluded summit — for their relentless efforts
in assisting the Burundian parties to find a consensual
and lasting solution and agree on a road map for the
holding of credible elections in 2020.
Nevertheless, the general situation and ensuing
economic crisis, which continue to have an impact on
the people of Burundi, remains a preoccupation for
the African Union. The AU supports the need for an

19-047863/23

S/PV.8465

The situation in Burundi

inclusive dialogue through the Inter-Burundi dialogue
process, which has yet to yield the desired dividends.
Consequently, the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission continues to urge all Burundian actors
to demonstrate a spirit of compromise, while stressing
that inclusive dialogue remains the only way to enable
Burundi to sustainably overcome the current challenges
and maintain national cohesion.
It is in that context that, from 5 to 7 November 2018,
the AU Commissioner for Peace and Security and the
former President of the Transition of the Central African
Republic, Her Excellency Ms. Catherine Samba-Panza,
visited Burundi in order to explore, among other things,
ways and means for the African Union to support
Burundi in the preparations for the elections scheduled
for 2020. The African Union continues its support
for the East African Community as it works towards
unblocking the stalemate in the inter-Burundi dialogue,
and urges all Burundian actors to demonstrate a spirit
of compromise. Against that background, allow me to
focus my intervention on the following four key points.
First, concerning the political context, the
Government has commenced preparations for the
elections by establishing, on 31 August 2018, the
Independent National Electoral Commission in
accordance with the Burundian electoral code, adopting
an electoral code and establishing the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission, made up of 13 members,
as called for by the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement of August 2000. Following that level of
preparation, the Assembly, at its recent meeting,
expressed appreciation to President Pierre Nkurunziza
and thanked him for his declaration not to run for
re-election during the 2020 presidential election, while
urging the Government and the political parties to work
together to ensure a credible electoral process.
Secondly, with regard to the security situation,
it should be recalled that the situation has remained
relatively stable overall, with intermittent skirmishes
reported along the border separating Burundi and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo between national
forces and unidentified armed men.
Thirdly, concerning the humanitarian and
socioeconomic situation, it has presented some
challenges over the past reporting period, especially
in the wake of displacements in the region, as we just
heard. That is compounded by economic recession.
While hundreds of Burundian refugees were voluntarily
4/23

19/02/2019

repatriated from the Nduta and Mtendeli camps in
Tanzania in 2018, many still remain in doubt over their
final return from their camps to Burundi.
Fourthly, with regard to the human rights situation,
The African Union continues to maintain its human
rights observers and military experts in the country to
monitor the day-to-day situation on the ground. Plans
are under way to increase the number of human rights
officers and military experts, which is critical given
that African Union human rights officers and military
experts are the only foreign observers who have been
allowed to operate in the country.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate the African
Union’s commitment to continue supporting all efforts
aimed at finding a lasting, peaceful and consensual
solution to the situation in Burundi. The AU encourages
the Government and the opposition groups to intensify
efforts towards reaching the conclusion of a consensual
and inclusive agreement that is consistent with the spirit
and content of Arusha Agreement of 2000. We further
encourage the Government of Burundi to continue
its preparations for the elections by putting in place
relevant mechanisms and instruments in accordance
with the Burundian electoral code for the conduct of
transparent and peaceful elections in 2020.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Mohammed for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lauber.
Mr. Lauber (Switzerland): On behalf of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
I thank you, Sir, for inviting me to brief the Security
Council and for the excellent cooperation between
the Council and the configuration. As per established
practice, the following statement has been approved by
the members of the PBC configuration, including the
country concerned — Burundi.
I previously had an opportunity to brief the Council
on 21 November 2018 (see S/PV.8408) following my visit
to Burundi earlier that month. The Burundi configuration
convened shortly thereafter, on 26 November 2018. In
addition to receiving a comprehensive report of my
visit, the configuration heard briefings on the United
Nations peacebuilding engagement and refugee
returns to Burundi. The Peacebuilding Support Office
informed the configuration about its support for the
socioeconomic dimension and Peacebuilding Fund
funding for projects in support of the role of women
19-04786

19/02/2019

The situation in Burundi

and youth in peacebuilding efforts. The Regional
Refugee Coordinator of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
in Nairobi, Ms. Catherine Wiesner, indicated in her
briefing to the configuration that refugee returns to
Burundi will possibly peak in 2019, with more than
100,000 returnees. She noted that an innovative crossborder project supported by the Peacebuilding Fund
and implemented by the International Organization for
Migration, the United Nations Development Programme
and UNHCR, in coordination with the Governments
of Tanzania and Burundi, had improved co-existence
among returnees, refugees and host communities in
targeted areas, including through livelihood activities
to reduce socioeconomic pressures.
However, she drew attention to the fact that the
Burundi regional refugee response plan, designed to
assist refugees in neighbouring countries, is among
the least-funded appeals in the world. Unfortunately,
three months later, that observation is still correct.
The challenge posed by severe underfunding remains
acute. Funding is also required to support the joint
refugee return and reintegration plan, an integrated
response designed to assist refugee returnees in
Burundi by addressing their immediate and longerterm reintegration needs. Members of the configuration
commended the critical assistance provided by UNHCR
for the voluntary return of refugees and underlined
the need to respect international standards in order to
facilitate the conditions necessary for the sustainable
reintegration of returnees.
Furthermore, the members of the configuration
remain committed to drawing the attention of
bilateral, regional and international partners to the
persistent need for support in reducing vulnerabilities,
strengthening resilience and improving disaster
preparedness and response in Burundi. They also
agree on the need to continue supporting the ongoing
efforts towards national reconciliation and helping to
preserve the gains achieved through the Arusha Peace
and Reconciliation Agreement.
Finally, members of the configuration underlined
the important supporting role of the East African
Community (EAC) in the run-up to the 2020 elections
in Burundi. Free, inclusive and democratic elections are
most likely to prevent violence and unrest and produce
an outcome that will be perceived as legitimate inside
and outside of Burundi.

S/PV. 8465

A number of significant developments occurred
since I last had an opportunity to brief the Council; some
of them were already mentioned by the Special Envoy
and by the observer of the African Union. According to
the information from the ground, the security situation
has remained generally calm since the previous briefing
to the Security Council, held in November.
At the recent EAC Summit in Arusha, former
President Mkapa submitted his report on the EAC-led
inter-Burundian dialogue process. The configuration
has always considered its role as complementary and
supportive to the ongoing political processes at different
levels. I want to take this opportunity to thank former
President Mkapa for his tremendous efforts.
On 25 January, the Minister of Finance, Budget
and Economic Development of Burundi and the
United Nations Resident Coordinator jointly signed
the United Nations development assistance framework
for Burundi for the period from 2019 to 2023. On
1 February, the President of Burundi, His Excellency
Pierre Nkurunziza, officially launched the localization
strategy for the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in the
presence of Ministers, State authorities, local leaders
and international partners. I encourage bilateral and
multilateral partners and the Government of Burundi to
continue their dialogue on the implementation of those
objectives, as well as for the resumption of assistance.
In December 2018, the Government requested that
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights terminate its activities in the
country and withdraw its staff. Human rights are an
important element of peacebuilding; peaceful and
resilient societies are an essential part of sustainable
development. Stakeholders need to continue supporting
the authorities in Burundi on their path towards building
capacity for the protection and promotion of the full
range of human rights, including civil and political, as
well as social, economic and cultural rights.
The preparations for the 2020 elections already
seem to absorb much of the energy and attention of
the authorities, as well as many other stakeholders in
Burundi. As we move closer to those elections, I invite
the Government of Burundi and the political parties
to work together to create the conditions for the next
elections to be inclusive, free, democratic and peaceful.
In that regard, I welcome the news from Bujumbura that
the Minister of the Interior of Burundi gave approval

19-047865/23

S/PV.8465

The situation in Burundi

19/02/2019

of the new political party, the Congrès national pour
la liberté, of Agathon Rwasa, who is also the current
Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly.

to the previous year. With its support, bilateral and
multilateral partners can contribute to a conducive
environment for peaceful and inclusive elections.

Meanwhile, the persistent challenges in the
socioeconomic area shall remain at the core of the
configuration’s attention for the current year. The
national development plan, issued by the Government
of Burundi, provides an opportunity for Burundi
and its bilateral and multilateral partners to engage
in a strategic and substantive exchange on the plan’s
implementation, as does the recently approved
development assistance framework. The alignment
between the national development plan, the national
priorities of the development assistance framework and
the SDGs provides the basis for strategic and coherent
engagement among all stakeholders towards the
common objective of building resilience, eliminating
poverty and reducing inequality and vulnerabilities. I
encourage the Government of Burundi and its partners
to engage in an open and substantive strategic dialogue
on the implementation of the plan, followed by sectorspecific discussions on concrete projects.

Fourthly, the PBC Burundi configuration
should continue supporting the ongoing process of
national reconciliation and work with the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission, among others.

The Burundi configuration will pursue its
discussions and activities in the coming months on the
priorities that I have outlined. Allow me to conclude
with the following recommendations.
First, the Government of Burundi, political parties
and other stakeholders should work together closely,
with the support of the Member States of the subregion,
and build on previous efforts in order to create an
enabling environment for free, inclusive, democratic
and peaceful elections in 2020. The configuration
stands ready to support Burundi and its neighbours in
all possible ways in that effort.
Secondly, Burundi and its international partners
should keep the focus on mid- and long-term
socioeconomic development, even as the preparations
for the 2020 elections increasingly move to the centre
of attention. I reiterate my invitation to the Government
of Burundi and its partners to enter into a strategic
conversation on how the implementation of the national
development plan can foster mutually beneficial,
people-centred and innovative forms of engagement.
Thirdly, the international community should
remain responsive to the importance of providing
adequate assistance to help address the urgent needs
of the people of Burundi and reduce vulnerability,
which remains high in spite of improvements compared
6/23

The PBC Burundi configuration remains
committed to supporting the Government of Burundi
and its partners in those areas, with a continued focus
on the socioeconomic dimension, particularly on the
implementation of the national development plan.
I thank the Council for its interest and continuous
support for the configuration.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Lauber for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Michon (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to warmly thank Mr. Michel
Kafando, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Burundi, for his informative briefing and personal
commitment to the matter at hand. I also thank the Swiss
Ambassador, Mr. Jürg Lauber, who is doing extremely
useful work as Chair of the Burundi configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission. I also thank Ms. Fatima
Mohammad, Permanent Observer of the African Union,
for her important statement.
Today I want to focus on three points: first, the
preparation of the 2020 elections; secondly, the human
rights situation; and, thirdly, the role of the international
community in supporting Burundi.
First, I will address the elections in 2020. France
would like to welcome the recognition last week of the
Congrès national pour la liberté, led by Agathon Rwasa,
as a political party, which allows it to participate in the
upcoming elections. That is a step in the right direction
and confirms the approach initiated by President
Nkurunziza last June in committing to not stand for
re-election.
We are indeed convinced that Burundi will find
its way back to stability by holding free and inclusive
elections in 2020, in accordance with the Arusha Peace
and Reconciliation Agreement. It is now time for
Burundi to prepare, without delay, for those elections in
the best possible way. The positive momentum that has
19-04786

19/02/2019

The situation in Burundi

been kick-started must now be maintained by ensuring
that all political parties have fair and equitable access to
the elections. The democratic space must be preserved
and open to all, and civil and political rights must be
respected to allow for a peaceful debate.
To that end, I encourage the Burundian authorities
to continue the inter-Burundian dialogue, which
is a key dialogue between the authorities and the
opposition. In that regard, I would like to acknowledge
the personal involvement of the facilitator mandated by
the East African Community, former President Mkapa,
whose determination to stay on course deserves to be
commended. We must build on the work he has done
and find ways together to continue his efforts.
Secondly, with respect to human rights, France
respects Burundi’s sovereignty but remains particularly
vigilant and expects Burundi to take additional and
concrete measures to respect human rights. After the
unfortunate closure of the Burundi office of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, we wish to reiterate our call on the authorities
of Burundi to engage in fuller cooperation with the
United Nations human rights protection mechanisms
and to fight impunity. We stand ready to support the
Burundian authorities in the resumption of dialogue
with United Nations entities.
France is closely monitoring the humanitarian
situation and the fate of internally displaced persons
and refugees. It is important that refugee returns
take place on a voluntary basis and in a safe and
dignified manner, in accordance with the principles
of international humanitarian law. We count on the
Burundian authorities to ensure that refugee returns
take place in the best possible conditions and we are
ready to assist them in so doing.
Finally, the international community must remain
fully mobilized to support the people of Burundi. Next
year’s elections will be a crucial and sensitive time.
We must not abandon Burundi in midstream. It is up to
the East African Community and the African Union to
continue their work to provide the best possible support
for the preparation of the elections and the emergence
of the country from crisis. The United Nations will of
course have an important role to play in providing the
best possible support for the process at the regional level.
We are also increasingly concerned about the
increase in violence in the Great Lakes region. We
would like to express our concern at the possibility that

S/PV. 8465

increased tensions could lead to further destabilization
at the regional level. Nevertheless, we note the desire
for peaceful change that has been expressed in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in the course of the
recent presidential elections, which reflects a collective
aspiration for greater stability and prosperity. We
hope that this positive development will inspire all the
countries of the region and we are ready to support
them as they move in that direction.
In conclusion, we would like to say that the mission
of Mr. Kafando and his team remains necessary and
we encourage the Special Envoy to continue his
consultative work in order to rapidly present the Council
with options on the role that the United Nations could
play in support of regional efforts.
Mr. Moriko (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
Мy delegation congratulates Mr. Michel Kafando,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Burundi,
Ambassador Jürg Lauber, Permanent Representative
of Switzerland to the United Nations and Chair of
the Burundi Configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, and Ambassador Fatima Kyari
Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations, for their briefings, which
have provided the Council with an update on the
sociopolitical and humanitarian situations in Burundi.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the improvement in the
humanitarian situation in Burundi. However, it notes
with regret the persistence of a deadlock in the political
process in that country.
My country takes note of the resignation of
Mr. Benjamin Mkapa, facilitator of the inter-Burundian
political dialogue, after completing three years of
work. We would like to acknowledge his commitment
and express our appreciation for his efforts to promote
peace and stability in that country. Côte d’Ivoire also
welcomes the decision taken at the 20th Ordinary
Summit of Heads of State of the East African
Community, held in Arusha on 1 February, to maintain
direct consultations between the Community and the
protagonists of the Burundi crisis.
The humanitarian situation is marked by the
ongoing voluntary return of Burundian refugees.
Indeed, according to the Regional Coordinator of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, based in Nairobi, 100,000 people could be
affected by the voluntary return in 2019. In that regard,
my delegation welcomes the efforts made, in the context

19-047867/23

S/PV.8465

The situation in Burundi

of assistance and support for the voluntary refugee
return programme, by the Burundian authorities,
host countries, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the donor community.
We encourage the donor community to increase its
contributions to the financing of the humanitarian
response plan in Burundi.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire calls on the
international community to support the actions and
initiatives of the East African Community to revitalize
the inter-Burundian dialogue for national reconciliation
and stability in the country. My country expresses its
support for the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
and reiterates its readiness to support all his efforts in
the context of the inter-Burundian political dialogue.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I would
like to thank the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Burundi, Mr. Michel Kafando, for today’s
briefing on the latest developments in Burundi,
and to thank Ambassador Jürg Lauber, Permanent
Representative of Switzerland to the United Nations
and Chair of the Burundi Configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, and Ambassador Fatima
Kyari Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations, for sharing the views of
the African Union and the Burundi Configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission, respectively.
The United States is deeply concerned by the stalled
status of the inter-Burundian political dialogue led by
the East African Community (EAC), particularly by the
manner in which the talks broke down. We express our
deep appreciation to former President Benjamin Mkapa
of the United Republic of Tanzania for his continuous
efforts as the facilitator of the dialogue, which have
been critical and trying to advance discussions on
strengthening political stability in Burundi.
That work remains unfinished and we will need
new regional champions. The United States urges the
Government of Burundi, the EAC and the guarantors
of the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement
to renew their commitment to finding consensus on a
2020 elections road map and preparing a free and fair
electoral process that will allow all Burundian voters
to participate in choosing their leaders. We urge the
Government of Burundi to engage with these partners
and view the Government’s attendance at the EAC
Heads of State Summit earlier this month as a potential
sign of progress.
8/23

19/02/2019

Burundi’s 2020 elections are a unique opportunity
that must not be missed. Despite our concerns about
the dialogue, the United States continues to welcome
President Nkurunziza’s announcement that he would
not seek a fourth term and will support his successor.
A peaceful transition of power based on an inclusive
electoral process will signal to the international
community a renewed commitment to democracy and
political stability.
In our view, a peaceful transition would become
more likely if the Kayanza road map were expanded
to include the input of all stakeholders, including
women and youth, opposition and ruling party leaders,
civil society representatives and prominent political
activists, and if steps were taken to ensure that all
eligible candidates are allowed to contest for the
presidency. We welcome the Government of Burundi’s
recent steps on political party registration, which
demonstrated that commitment.
Long-term political stability, however, cannot
be achieved without respect for human rights. The
United States is deeply concerned by the Government’s
decision to close the Burundi office of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
We fear that the further deterioration of respect for
human rights will isolate the Government of Burundi
in both regional and international bodies, which does
not bode well for prospects for peace and security in
the region. The United States urges the Government of
Burundi to address persistent and reliable reports of
illicit arms transfers, combatant recruitment and armed
group activity in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo that are tied to Burundi.
We are particularly disturbed by reports that the
Burundian military and the ruling party’s youth militia
have been active in South Kivu. We are also concerned
about tensions between Burundi and Rwanda and
reports of cross-border attacks by armed groups in
these countries and the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo. No one wins from a proxy war in the
Great Lakes.
The United States urges all parties to refrain from
the use of violence and to respect territorial integrity.
We encourage more cooperation among United Nations
institutions working in the region, particularly the
Office of the Special Envoy for Burundi, the Office of
the Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region and the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
19-04786

19/02/2019

The situation in Burundi

the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We call on this
Council to support dialogue in the region and believe
that regular briefings to the Council are essential to
address rising tensions.
More than 58,000 Burundian refugees have returned
since the outbreak of violence in 2015. Food insecurity,
poverty and their harassment by local officials to join
the ruling party present major hurdles to voluntary
repatriation for the nearly 350,000 Burundi in refugees
who remain displaced. The United States encourages the
Government of Burundi to continue collaborating with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to facilitate the voluntary, dignified and
safe repatriation of its nationals, whose inclusion in the
political process will strengthen and further legitimize
the 2020 electoral process.
So many Burundians are desperate for basic
services, but the Government’s October 2018 suspension
of some international non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) continues to affect important programmes
assisting the Burundian people. While the majority of
NGOs have been reinstated, approximately 20 remain
suspended and a handful have left the country. We
urge the Government to lift all remaining suspensions
to ensure the continuation of vital services to the
Burundian people and to allow these NGOs unhindered
access to deliver services.
Finally, we understand that the Government of
Burundi objects to being included on the Council’s
agenda. We would like nothing more than to remove
them from it. But the United States is deeply concerned
by rising regional tensions, which are not just a
war of words but of bullets, as well as by Burundi’s
increasing diplomatic isolation and deep domestic
political divides. It would be irresponsible to disengage
before 2020, and we urge our colleagues on the Council
and our Burundian counterparts to put their collective
effort into increasing productive dialogue and reducing
the likelihood of violence on Burundi’s path to peace,
security and development.
Mr. Van Shalkwyk (South Africa): We
thank former President Michel Kafando, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Burundi;
Ambassador Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United
Nations; and Ambassador Jürg Lauber, Chair of
the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), for their important and insightful

S/PV. 8465

briefings on the evolving situation in Burundi and for
their unwavering commitment to the country.
South Africa fully supports the facilitation
process led by the East African Community (EAC)
in the spirit of the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement, with the support of the African Union
and the United Nations. In this regard, the efforts of
the mediator, President Yoweri Museveni of Uganda,
and the facilitator, former President Benjamin Mkapa
of the United Republic of Tanzania, is acknowledged
and commended. We also commend the essential and
valuable work of the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, former President Kafando, as well as the
Burundi configuration of the PBC, under the able
leadership of Ambassador Lauber.
South Africa welcomes Burundi’s participation
in the summit of Heads of State of the East African
Community and the African Union summit of
11 February. That participation is in line with our longstanding position on the importance of the role played
by regional and continental bodies in the resolution of
the impasse.
With the submission of the final report of former
President Mkapa to the EAC, South Africa and the
international community need to await direction from
the leadership of the East African Community and the
African Union in strengthening our commitment to
helping Burundi, especially in view of the elections
scheduled for 2020. South Africa supports a Burundiled process that respects its sovereignty and that is
within the parameters of the Constitution.
Any political impasse in Burundi can be addressed
only through a fully inclusive dialogue. We therefore
call on the international community to continue to
support the initiatives of the EAC. We deplore any
efforts, by any party, that seek to undermine or sidestep
the Arusha accords. As South Africa, we are concerned
with the current trajectory, which has overturned the
2000 Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement for
Burundi. As such, we implore the mediation process to
revert to the principles of that Agreement.
South Africa calls on upon the Burundians to
implement the principles of the 2000 Arusha accords. It
is our view that the global ceasefire agreement flowed
from those accords and that, as such, the two should be
read together. South Africa stands ready to support the
Government and the people of Burundi.

19-047869/23

S/PV.8465

The situation in Burundi

We encourage Burundi to work closely with the East
African Community and the African Union to create an
environment conducive to the holding of elections. In
this regard, all Burundian parties need to demonstrate
a spirit of cooperation in order to ensure peace and
stability beyond 2020. South Africa welcomes the
decision by the Government of Burundi to finance the
elections with the country’s own national budget.
With regard to the political developments in
Burundi, we are encouraged by the continued stable
security situation in the country. We would like to
congratulate the Government of Burundi on having
initiated the preparatory process for the elections,
especially the establishment, on 31 August 2018, of
an Independent National Electoral Commission, in
keeping with the Burundian electoral code.
We commend Burundi’s contribution to peace and
security through its deployment of troop contingents.
Burundi participates alongside other countries in United
Nations and African Union peacekeeping missions
with much success, with more than 6,000 Burundian
men and women deployed in various peacekeeping
operations, mostly in the Central African Republic
and Somalia. We therefore call on the international
community to support Burundi in strengthening its
peacekeeping capacity, as it is of critical institutional
value to the country. We would like to congratulate
Burundi on its appointment to the African Union Peace
and Security Council.
We note Burundi’s adoption of a 10-year national
development plan that provides direction on the way
towards sustainable development by 2030. We urge the
international community to do more to alleviate the
socioeconomic challenges and humanitarian situation
facing the people of Burundi and call on its partners
to support the implementation of the national dialogue
process for the benefit of the Burundian people. In that
vein, we reiterate the call made by the AU during its
thirty-second summit for the European Union to lift
the unilateral sanctions imposed against the Republic
of Burundi.
We encourage Burundi to continue to work towards
the voluntary repatriation and dignified return of
refugees. The gradual return of refugees is evidence
of the improvement in the country’s situation. To
date approximately 210,000 refugees have returned
voluntarily to Burundi. In 2018 alone, 58,262 Burundians
returned, mainly from Tanzania, the Congo, Kenya
10/23

19/02/2019

and Uganda. We call on the international community
to support these efforts and in particular to provide
assistance for the refugees’ return and reintegration.
Finally, we appeal to the international community
to support the Government and the EAC mediation
process so as to lay the foundation for an environment
that is conducive to the holding of democratic elections
and support a peaceful transfer of power, in order to
ensure peace and stability beyond 2020.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Michel Kafando, the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Burundi, and
Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent Observer
of the African Union to the United Nations, for
their briefings on the evolving situation in Burundi.
We listened with interest and gratitude to the
report of Ambassador Jürg Lauber, the Permanent
Representative of Switzerland and Chair of the country
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
We note the balanced approach that the Commission
takes to Burundi, which is one of the reasons why
the PBC continues to be a channel for trustworthy
communication with Bujumbura. We believe that its
initiatives for revitalizing cooperation with Burundians,
with an emphasis on issues related to the country’s
socioeconomic development and re-establishing
donors’ trust, are what is needed.
Based on information we have received, including
from Russian diplomats in Bujumbura, we have
concluded that the situation in Burundi is calm and
trending towards normalization. The improving
security situation has been reflected in a significant
drop in the level of violence, including the attacks on
civilian infrastructure by the radical opposition. We
should also note that the process of refugees’ gradual
return to Burundi from neighbouring States has begun,
as my colleagues have already indicated.
We view the constitutional referendum that took
place on 17 May last year, in an atmosphere of calm
and with the participation of an overwhelming majority
of Burundi’s population, as a key event in the country’s
political situation. We should remind the Council
in that regard that a majority of voters — 73.26 per
cent — expressed support for changing the Constitution
and that the referendum was preceded by a democratic
and transparent information campaign.
The Russian Federation believes that the 2020
presidential and parliamentary elections are a domestic
19-04786

19/02/2019

The situation in Burundi

issue for Burundi and that any outside interference
in them would be completely unacceptable. We urge
the authorities and the opposition to refrain from
any negative rhetoric and to focus on preparing for
the electoral cycle, especially given that despite
the alarmist forecasts of various members of the
opposition and Western experts, the acting President,
Pierre Nkurunziza, has declared that he will not be
participating in the election.
Concerning the problems in promoting the
inter-Burundian dialogue, we would like to point
out that assigning responsibility for them to one side
alone would be counterproductive and even dangerous.
We have been closely following and supporting
the East African Community’s efforts aimed at
relaunching a direct negotiation process between the
Burundian parties. We also welcome any similar efforts
made with Bujumbura’s consent and for the good
of Burundi.
Our overall view is that the situation in Burundi
does not pose any threats to international peace and
security, which gives us good reason to doubt whether
it makes sense to keep Burundi as an item on the
Council’s overburdened agenda. We think that keeping
the Council’s attention focused on Burundi is becoming
counterproductive and is basically there as a convenient
excuse for the unreconciled opposition to complicate
the country’s internal political processes.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I would like to join others
in thanking Mr. Michel Kafando, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Burundi, my colleague
Ambassador Jürg Lauber, Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), and my sister Ambassador, Fatima Mohammed,
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United
Nations. Their briefings have provided us a clearer
picture of the situation in Burundi. I also welcome
my brother Ambassador, Albert Shingiro, Permanent
Representative of Burundi, to the Chamber.
My statement today will centre on three
issues — the progress being made on the situation in
Burundi, humanitarian assistance in the country and
Burundi’s role in maintaining peace and security in
the region.
First, we note that the briefers mentioned that the
situation on the ground in Burundi remains calm, which
is a good sign that we hope will continue. We have seen
the negative impact of political impasses on Burundi’s

S/PV. 8465

economic and social situation in the past, leading to
increases in unemployment and the cost of basic services
and commodities, which in turn have had a negative
effect on the population. Nevertheless, there has been
political progress that should not go unnoticed. Today’s
briefings and the Secretary-General’s November report
(S/2018/1028), for example, have noted improvements
in the situation on the ground. Efforts made by the
leadership of the Burundian Government, such as
the announcement that the President will not seek
re-election in 2020, have also had a positive effect. As
we look forward to those elections, we also welcome
the Burundian Government’s initiative in taking
ownership and full financial responsibility for them.
We encourage the authorities to continue creating
an environment conducive to democratic processes.
However, the Secretary-General’s report makes it
clear that there is still work to be done. We urge the
Government of Burundi to work together with the
United Nations mechanisms on the ground.
We also want to acknowledge the efforts of the
African Union and the East African Community (EAC),
and we note the submission of the final report on the
EAC-led inter-Burundian dialogue process at the recent
EAC summit in Arusha. Of course, we encourage close
cooperation between Africa’s regional and subregional
organizations and United Nations entities, including
the Peacebuilding Commission. In that connection, we
welcome the recommendations made by the Chair of
the Burundi configuration of the PBC that adequate
assistance should continue to be provided to help
address the Burundian people’s urgent needs and
reduce their vulnerability, and that Burundi and its
international partners should continue to focus on midand long-term socioeconomic development. At the end
of the day, socioeconomic development is closely tied to
political development, and we look forward to further
progress in that regard.
Secondly, our priority should be to increase
humanitarian assistance to Burundi and support its
economic and social development, including through
the work of the PBC and the Peacebuilding Fund. We
note from the Burundi Regional Refugee Response
Plan 2019-2020 of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees that refugee returns
to Burundi will peak in 2019, with a projection of more
than 100,000 returnees, compared to 58,262 in 2018.
We also note that the innovative cross-border project
supported by the Peacebuilding Fund has improved

19-0478611/23

S/PV.8465

The situation in Burundi

peaceful coexistence among returnees, refugees and
host communities in the targeted areas. It is nonetheless
disheartening to hear that the Refugee Response Plan
is among the lowest-funded appeals in the world, as
Ambassador Lauber mentioned in his briefing. I urge
countries to continue their support and to deliver on
their commitments made to Burundi in consultation
with that country, including commitments made
through the Peacebuilding Fund, as well as their support
for Burundi’s 10-year national development plan, which
has provided a road map for reaching sustainable
development by 2030.
Lastly, we recognize Burundi’s contribution to the
peace and security effort in the region. Like Indonesia,
Burundi is a participant in peacekeeping operations in
Africa, contributing more than 6,000 peacekeepers to
United Nations and African Union missions and thereby
demonstrating that it is a responsible member of the
United Nations. We also want to congratulate Burundi
on being elected a member of the African Union Peace
and Security Council for a term of three years, starting
this year. Those contributions will certainly help to
restore confidence in Burundi. And as an important
member of the countries of the Great Lakes region,
Burundi’s own stability, security and development will
contribute to peace and stability there. We therefore
encourage the Government and the people of Burundi
to continue on this trajectory of peace, a luxury that is
hard to obtain and more difficult to maintain. Indonesia
looks forward to working as a partner with Burundi
and sharing our own experience with our brothers and
sisters in the region.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): I would first like to
thank our briefers, Mr. Kafando and Ambassadors
Mohammed and Lauber, for their excellent and
comprehensive presentations. I have five points that I
would like to make.
First of all, Burundi’s unresolved political crisis
and volatile security situation, and the consequent
regional tensions, are deeply concerning. The threat
to regional peace and stability is particularly visible in
the increased tensions and alarming troop movements
in North and South Kivu and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, a clear demonstration of the crossborder nature of Burundi’s political crisis. We call
on all stakeholders to refrain from violence and from
engaging in any kind of proxy war in the region.
12/23

19/02/2019

Secondly, we believe firmly that the most promising
solution to Burundi’s crisis lies within the region. We
commend former President Mkapa’s relentless efforts
in support of the inter-Burundian dialogue and in
producing a report and road map. We have taken note
of the summit of the East African Community (EAC)
held earlier this month. It is now up to the EAC to lead
the inter-Burundian dialogue on a successful path. We
trust in the commitment and diligence of East Africa’s
leaders in that regard, especially those of Uganda,
Kenya and Tanzania. We encourage the African Union
to explore the possibilities for further assisting the
EAC in the process. All efforts should be aimed at
creating new momentum for continued negotiations
and dialogue.
Thirdly, the announcement by President Nkurunziza
of Burundi that he will not seek re-election in 2020 is
a positive step, but further serious commitment on the
part of the national authorities will be essential if they
are to ensure free, inclusive and fair elections in 2020,
which are crucial to long-term stability and to building
trust among the people. We call on Burundi to open up
the political space to different candidates and parties,
as well as to ensure the independence of the National
Electoral Commission. The registration of the Congrès
national pour la Liberté party last week was a very
encouraging step in that regard.
Fourthly, in the light of Germany’s strategic focus
on prevention and stabilization, we welcome the efforts
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) in the Burundi
country configuration. The connection between the
PBC and the Security Council is important, and it is not
a one-way street. Jürg Lauber’s briefing is an excellent
example of the added value of the advisory work of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
Germany fully respects the sovereignty of
Burundi. However, we take this opportunity to express
our deep concern about the persistently dire human
rights situation in Burundi over the past weeks and
months, which was also reflected in the most recent
report of the Secretary-General of November 2018
(S/2018/1028). Long-term political stability cannot be
achieved without respect for human rights, which are
also an important part of peacebuilding efforts. That
is why we are deeply worried about the closure of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights in Bujumbura as a sign of the lack of
interest in cooperation with internationally agreed
mechanisms. We also followed the suspension of
19-04786

19/02/2019

The situation in Burundi

international non-governmental organizations with
serious concern. A significant number of those NGOs
have not re-registered and many of them plan to leave
the country. That will make it increasingly difficult to
effectively monitor the human rights situation on the
ground and will further limit the space for political
actors, media and civil society.
In that regard, we welcome the monitoring through
the African Union human rights observer mission
and emphasize their important function and role. We
also value the investigative work of the Commission
of Inquiry on Burundi of the Human Rights Council
and look forward to their update next month. We call
on the Government of Burundi to collaborate with the
Commission of Inquiry.
Fifthly, and lastly, Mr. Lauber talked about the
underfunding for humanitarian purposes. Let me just
say that that is also very important to us. Germany
increased its humanitarian assistance in Burundi
to €15 million in 2018, with a focus on support to
internally displaced people and refugees. Development
assistance is similarly important to protect the Burundi
population from further destabilization. Germany
contributed €24 million in 2018 to ensure the provision
of basic services, including health and sanitation.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Let me join others
in thanking today’s briefers for their updates on the
situation in Burundi.
We welcome the efforts and dedication of former
President Benjamin Mkapa in support of the East African
Community-led intra-Burundi dialogue. We now look
to the East African Community and the Government
of Burundi to take that work forward. We very much
encourage the region to remain engaged. We think that
the support of the region is vital to stability in Burundi.
I would just like to say that I listened very carefully to
what some colleagues have said about this. I would say
to them that we should of course not overstate the risks,
nor can we understate them. No member of the Council
should need reminding of the terrible consequences of
inter-ethnic tension that we have seen in the region in
the past. The East African Community and the African
Union are engaged because stability is at risk. As I have
said, we should not overstate the risks, nor should we
understate them as we consider this issue.
Credible, free and fair elections in 2020 are crucial
to peace and prosperity in Burundi and across the
region. Parties must be allowed to campaign freely in

S/PV. 8465

the run-up to the election. In that light, we welcome the
registration of political parties as a sign of the opening
of political space. We continue to salute the President’s
decision not to stand in the 2020 elections. The United
Kingdom reiterates the African Union’s call for the
Government of Burundi and the political parties in that
country to work together for the smooth conduct of the
next elections. We think that it would be helpful for
there to be engagement between the United Nations and
the Government of Burundi to inform any decisions on
how the United Nations could best support Burundi in
its electoral process.
The continued reports of human rights violations
are deeply concerning. As the November report of
the Secretary-General (S/2018/1028) makes clear,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights continued to receive allegations of
grave violations and abuses, including killings, forced
disappearances, ill-treatment, cases of arbitrary arrest
and detention and threats and restrictions on freedom
of association, expression and movement. It is therefore
extremely worrying that reporting has been restricted
by the Government of Burundi, which requested
the closure of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights on 5 December. We
regret the closure of the Office, and we encourage the
Government of Burundi to continue talks with the
Resident Coordinator’s team to determine how human
rights experts and officers can be attached to the
country team and can help to inform that important part
of the work. As Ambassador Lauber said in a statement
agreed by the Government of Burundi, among others,
human rights are a key part of peacebuilding. We do the
people of Burundi no service if we do not acknowledge
that or even mention it.
The run-up to the 2020 elections is a critical time
for Burundi. We all have talked about and welcomed
the current stability in Burundi, but failure to address
alleged human rights violations will threaten it, as will
the ongoing humanitarian crisis. With those elections in
mind, we believe that it is crucial that the region and the
international community remain seized of the situation.
We therefore believe that Burundi should remain on the
Council’s agenda.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation appreciates the convening of this meeting
and the briefings by Mr. Michel Kafando, Ambassador
Fatima Mohammed and Ambassador Jürg Lauber.

19-0478613/23

S/PV.8465

The situation in Burundi

We would like to begin our statement by
commending the actions of the Government of Burundi
in connection with the upcoming general elections,
including the announcement by President Nkurunziza
that he will not stand, the adoption of the national
development plan and the United Nations Development
Assistance Framework for the period from 2019 to 2023.
However, we believe that those objectives should
be complemented by strengthening the intra-Burundian
dialogue, which does not yet have the participation of
all the stakeholders. It is important to remember that
inclusive dialogue is the only viable way to genuinely
make progress towards peace and reconciliation and the
implementation of the commitments made in the Arusha
Peace and Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi.
We believe that the preparations for the next general
elections, scheduled for 2020, must be complemented
by the necessary confidence-building measures among
all political and social stakeholders. We think that it is
positive that the national development plan, linked to
the Sustainable Development Goals, seeks to promote
the development of rural areas of Burundi based on
good governance, sustainable management of the
environment and planned land use.
In that regard, the support that the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) can provide in that context is
important, as Ambassador Lauber said, with a view
to achieving a sustainable economy. The efforts of the
PBC with regard to promoting dialogue on that issue
between the Government and international institutions
and partners are also significant.
On the other hand, we note with concern the
ongoing reports of human rights violations and
abuses. Like other representatives, we believe that the
Government’s decision to definitively close the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights does not help the objective of providing full
guarantees to all Burundian actors in the free exercise
of their fundamental rights. We believe that it is
important to find points of convergence and to resolve
the differences that prevent the presence of the Office
in the country.
The humanitarian situation continues to be a source
of concern when we see the continuing presence of
Burundian refugees in various neighbouring countries.
We believe that the Government must take action on that
issue with the support of the international community.
14/23

19/02/2019

We therefore believe that it is important for
the Council to continue to monitor and support
developments in the country and for regional and
subregional organizations and neighbouring countries
to continue to provide their assistance and support in
order to strengthen Burundi’s response to its upcoming
objectives and challenges, including the holding of
credible, transparent and inclusive elections in 2020.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to thank Mr. Michel Kafando, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Burundi; Ambassador
Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the
African Union to the United Nations; and Ambassador
Jürg Lauber, Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for their briefings.
At present, calm and stability are prevailing in
Burundi overall. The Burundian Government has
been actively implementing the Arusha Peace and
Reconciliation Agreement, moving the political
process forward and promoting reconciliation among
the country’s political groups. It has drawn up a road
map in preparation for the general elections in 2020
and established the National Independent Electoral
Commission. China welcomes the fact that Burundi
refugees have also begun returning home. We
congratulate Burundi on its election to the African
Union Peace and Security Council.
Burundi is an important country of the Great Lakes
region of Africa. The aforementioned developments
fully attest to the assured ability and commitment of the
Government and the people of Burundi to resolve the
country’s internal political issues and maintain national
peace and stability on their own. The international
community should fully acknowledge the efforts of the
Burundian Government to maintain peace and stability
in the country. In that context, China would like to
underscore the following two points.
First, we should respect Burundi’s sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity and
genuinely support the Burundian Government’s
prerogative to take charge of managing the country’s
domestic affairs. The international community should
take a comprehensive, impartial and objective view
of the current situation in Burundi and contribute
constructively to the long-term stability and
development of the country and of the region at large.
China welcomes the efforts of regional and subregional
organizations, such as the African Union and the East
19-04786

19/02/2019

The situation in Burundi

African Community, to mediate in the political process
in Burundi. We hope that those regional organizations
will continue to strengthen engagement and consultation
with the Burundian Government and provide assistance
to the Government, as needed.
China notes that the Burundian Government has
time and again stated that the situation in Burundi is
not a threat to regional peace and security and that
the issue should not remain on the Council’s agenda.
The Security Council should heed the sentiments
voiced by the representatives of Burundi and make
the necessary adjustments promptly in the light of
the latest developments, with a view to sending a
positive message.
Secondly, we should continue to increase
humanitarian assistance and economic support for
Burundi. China notes that, in recent years, Burundian
refugees abroad have begun returning to the country
in large numbers. The number of returnees may
peak in 2019. We hope the international community
will provide the necessary and timely assistance
to help the Burundian Government accommodate
returning refugees.
Development is a guarantee of peace. We hope the
international community and international partners can
meet their commitments in a timely manner and, in line
with development plans of the Burundian Government,
focus on supporting agriculture, infrastructure,
education, environmental protection and so on. We
call on the international organizations and institutions
concerned to resume economic cooperation with and
development assistance to Burundi as soon as possible.
China commends and supports the continued efforts
of the United Nations Peacebuilding Commission and
the United Nations country team to promote Burundi’s
reconstruction and socioeconomic development.
As a long-standing supporter of Burundi’s peace
process, China stands ready to continue playing a
constructive role in helping Burundi to achieve peace,
stability and sustainable development.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): First of all, I would like to thank the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Burundi, the Chair
of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations for their briefings.
I would like to address three main points.

S/PV. 8465

First, with regard to the internal situation in
Burundi, we welcome President Nkurunziza’s
repeatedly stated intention not to stand as a candidate
in the 2020 presidential elections. At the same time,
we remain concerned about a few issues. The region
and the international community agree on the goal of
holding credible, fair, inclusive and free presidential
and legislative elections in 2020. To that end, we
again stress the need to follow a consensus-based and
inclusive road map, and the importance of respecting
the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement.
In that regard, we welcome the substantive work
conducted by Mr. Mkapa, the former facilitator of the
inter-Burundian dialogue initiated by the East African
Community. We share that view. It is unfortunate that
the Burundian Government refused to participate in the
most recent round of the dialogue, despite the fact that
many differences of opinion remain as we approach the
end of the process.
Respect for the freedom of opposition parties will
be an essential part of the electoral process. We welcome
the fact that the new party of the main opponent,
Agathon Rwasa, has been officially recognized. That is
an undeniably positive development.
Regrettably, the human rights situation in Burundi
remains a source of concern. We are particularly
concerned about the fact that there is still a considerable
number of arrests, arbitrary detentions, threats to and
restrictions on the freedom of association, freedom
of expression and freedom of movement, as reported
by the Commission of Inquiry, as well as in the most
recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/1028).
In that difficult context, we deplore in particular the
decision to close the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights. We call on the
Government to make progress in the area of human
rights and to step up dialogue with a view to resuming
close cooperation with the United Nations and the
African Union on the issue.
From a socioeconomic perspective and in particular
with regard to the national development plan, it is
essential to deepen and intensify dialogue with various
cooperation partners. Belgium certainly stands ready to
do so. I would also like to underscore the participation
of all main actors, in particular women, young people
and civil society. That is why we are concerned about
the measures taken by the Burundian Government
to suspend foreign non-governmental organizations

19-0478615/23

S/PV.8465

The situation in Burundi

(NGOs), which, in turn, has led to the departure of
some NGOs.
Secondly, at the regional level, we note several
spin-off developments that are equally important. The
latest report of the Group of Experts on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (S/2018/1133) appears to indicate
that the activities of some Burundian rebel groups in
South Kivu are on the rise. The report also references
Burundi in the context of the recruitment of fighters
and the transfer of weapons, ammunition and fighters.
I also refer to reports citing cross-border incidents with
Rwanda. Although the reason for such incidents is not
always clear, they have the potential to destabilize
the region. In addition to cross-border incidents, the
ongoing problem of Burundian refugees also requires a
lasting regional solution.
Thirdly, with regard to the importance of the
region, regional problems require regional solutions. It
is for that reason that we support strong and increased
leadership on the part of the East African Community,
as well as the substantial involvement of the African
Union and other guarantors of the Arusha Agreement.
Strong leadership within the region is indeed a
prerequisite for resolving the current crisis, but the
commitment of the Burundian authorities is also vital.
We therefore call on them to demonstrate meaningful
openness and pursue dialogue without preconditions.
Lastly, we remain convinced that the Security
Council can and must contribute to this discussion as
long as the crisis has yet to be completely resolved.
As I said, the situation in Burundi continues to have
ramifications for the entire region. In that regard, we
commend the Secretary-General’s proposal to submit
to the Council a list of options as to the role that the
United Nations can play in Burundi. The Council must
remain seized of this issue.
Mr. Mielus (Poland): At the outset, I would like
to thank Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
Michel Kafando; Ambassador Jürg Lauber, in his
capacity as Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission; and Ambassador Fatima
Kyari Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations, for their valuable briefings.
I would like to focus my intervention on three
issues: first, the political process; secondly, human
rights aspects; and, thirdly, the socioeconomic situation.
16/23

19/02/2019

The political situation still remains a matter of
serious concern for us, especially as the presidential
elections planned for 2020 are approaching. The risk
of the further escalation of violence and ethnic tensions
persist, and it is the role of the Burundian authorities
to ensure that the electoral process will be free, fair,
transparent and truly inclusive.
The prevailing situation in Burundi has serious
regional security implications. Poland continues to hold
the position that concerted regional support for resolving
the crisis is crucial. We hope for collective leadership and
unity of purpose to prevent the resurgence of violence in
Burundi. Poland commends all the efforts made by the
East African Community and the facilitator, Benjamin
Mkapa, to enable the inter-Burundian dialogue, and
hopes that this process will lead to a widely accepted
road map that sets the path for the holding of credible
and peaceful presidential elections scheduled for mid2020, in the spirit and the letter of the Arusha Peace
and Reconciliation Agreement.
We remain concerned about the human rights
situation in Burundi, which could undermine any
initiative for reconciliation, peace and justice. Poland
supports the efforts of the United Nations, the African
Union and the countries of the region to effectively
improve the situation on the ground in that regard.
Poland once again calls on the Government of Burundi
to take tangible steps to restore cooperation with
international human rights mechanisms, mainly the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the Commission of Inquiry on
Burundi of the Human Rights Council. At the same
time, we urge the Burundian authorities to improve
good governance, ensure media freedom and open
up democratic space ahead of the elections scheduled
for 2020.
The ongoing political impasse has also had a
negative impact on the economy and the humanitarian
situation in the country. We commend the efforts made
by the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission to bring about a sustainable improvement
to the lives of Burundian society. At the same time,
Poland welcomes the continuation of the process of
repatriating refugees under the tripartite agreement
with Tanzania and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees. However, we emphasize
that such a process needs to be voluntary and based on
individual choices.
19-04786

19/02/2019

The situation in Burundi

In conclusion, Poland still believes that the Arusha
peace agreement remains the main instrument for
achieving peace and stability in Burundi and in the
whole Great Lakes region. In the face of renewed
tensions and the deadlock in the inclusive dialogue,
it is crucial to address the current challenges on a
sustainable basis and enable elections to be held in 2020
in satisfactory conditions. In that context, the situation
in Burundi continuously requires the special attention of
the Security Council and the international community.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Michel Kafando,
Ambassador Fatima Mohammed and Ambassador
Lauber for their informative briefings on the current
situation in Burundi.
The Dominican Republic notes with concern the
ongoing humanitarian situation in Burundi. Despite
positive news, such as improvements in malnutrition
levels, millions of people, including 3 million children,
continue to suffer from food insecurity. Likewise, the
outbreak of cholera in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo puts Burundi at high risk of an epidemic, with
more than 140 cases already having been reported since
December 2018. It is important that we not lose sight of
the situation. We believe that the outbreak must be dealt
with aggressively in its early stages, with the support of
the relevant sectors, so as to prevent its further spread.
Although the number of refugees and persons
seeking asylum has decreased, the International
Organization
for
Migration
estimates
that
approximately 300,000 Burundian refugees, most of
whom were displaced by natural disasters, continue to
live in shelters, which demonstrates the need to address
the causes of those flows of people and their possible
solutions, while duly and systematically considering
the terrible impact of climate-related disasters. In so
doing, we would contribute to building not only lasting
peace in Burundi, but the foundations necessary for
development, based on resilience and sustainability,
that would lead to the return of those people to their
homes and the restoration of their livelihoods. As the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has
urged, it is also imperative to ramp up investment in
host countries with a view to prioritizing the protection
of the environment and economic development.
The human rights situation in Burundi remains
a matter of concern, especially in the light of alleged
cases of intimidation of members of the opposition and

S/PV. 8465

the continued restriction of civil liberties, such as the
freedoms of expression, association and movement.
In that regard, the recent suspension of international
non-governmental organizations, which has created
gaps in the aid received by Burundi’s most disadvantaged
and vulnerable people, is particularly troubling.
We welcome the allocation of $7.1 million by the
Peacebuilding Fund in September 2018 to expand
political space and strengthen the new Government,
with two projects aimed at, inter alia, empowering
women mediators, women’s groups and young
people as key actors in establishing social cohesion,
community security and political processes, as well
as strengthening the rule of law and good governance.
We are convinced that the meaningful participation
of women and young people is critical to achieving
stability and peace in Burundi. We therefore urge the
Government of Burundi to continue to move forward
in preparations of the 2020 electoral process, while
prioritizing the creation of the conditions necessary for
the holding of free and fair elections and respecting the
Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement.
Burundi can and must take advantage of the
current democratic transition process to move
towards the stability that its citizens deserve. In that
regard, we encourage the resumption of the internal
political dialogue.
Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Michel Kafando; the
observer of the African Union, Ms. Fatima Mohammed;
and the Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Mr. Jürg Lauber, for their
valuable briefings. I would like to address three issues
in my statement
First, the political situation has been returning to
relative calm since the political tensions and acts of
violence began in Burundi in 2015. The Republic of
Burundi witnessed important political developments in
2018, including the constitutional referendum in May
2018, which took place under stable and calm conditions;
the announcement by President Nkurunziza that he
would not run in the presidential elections in 2020; the
announcement of a road map to organize presidential
elections in 2020, as well as the outline of provisions
provided by the National Independent Electoral
Commission; and the decision of the Government of
Burundi to finance the 2020 elections in its entirety

19-0478617/23

S/PV.8465

The situation in Burundi

and its intention to begin an inclusive national dialogue
among all sectors of the population.
Those steps represent important political
developments. We hope that they will quickly be put
into action so that the Burundian population can benefit
from the relative calm until the presidential elections.
We also hope that the elections will involve the
participation of the entire population and all political
parties, and that they will be free, fair, transparent and
credible. Free expression by all the different factions of
civil society, including young people, women, regional
and international organizations must be guaranteed.
In that regard, we commend the efforts that have
been made by the African Union and the East African
Community with a view to a peaceful solution to the
political and security situations in Burundi, through
an inclusive dialogue based on the Arusha Peace and
Reconciliation Agreement. We also welcome Burundi’s
participation in the East African Community Summit
that was held on 1 February. We greatly appreciate
as well the mediation efforts facilitated by President
Museveni of Uganda and Mr. Mkapa as part of the
inter-Burundian political dialogue. I especially thank
Mr. Mkapa, since he has come to the end of his
three-year mandate as facilitator. I wish him every
success in his future endeavours.
There is no doubt that cooperation between the
Government of Burundi and international and regional
organizations, including the United Nations, the
African Union and East African Community, as well
as neighbouring countries, is of great importance
to achieve the desired stability. Cooperation is one
of the factors in reaching a sustained solution before
the presidential elections. We are fully confident that
the inter-Burundian dialogue is an important means
that will greatly contribute to facilitating the political
process. In addition, it is important for political leaders
in exile to be able to return to the country, and political
prisoners to be freed following their arrest during the
acts of violence in 2015. There is also the issue of the
return of refugees and their reintegration into society.
All of those different steps are important and necessary
for achieving political, security and economic stability.
I would also like to note the outcome of the thirtysecond African Union summit, which took place last
week, and its recognition of the fact that Burundi is
returning to peace and stability. I welcome the efforts
made by the Government of Burundi to prepare for
18/23

19/02/2019

free and democratic elections in 2020, as well as
the creation of national mechanisms to prepare for
those elections, and the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission in accordance with Arusha Agreement of
2000, which has made welcome efforts with regard to
the security situation in Burundi, which is generally
relatively stable.
Secondly, concerning security and humanitarian
situations, the security situation in Burundi is generally
calm and improving despite some acts of violence
and continued activities by armed groups in certain
regions. We hope that the security situation will remain
stable and that the Government of Burundi will take
the opportunity that provides to intensify its efforts
for holding of the national dialogue so as to bring all
political parties to the negotiating table and guarantee
the holding of peaceful and credible elections in 2020
that are free of acts of violence.
As for the humanitarian situation in Burundi,
although it is improved compared to the last two years,
with a decrease in the number of people who face food
insecurity, it is still a subject of concern due to acts of
violence that constitute violations of human rights and
international law. We call for ending them and bringing
the perpetrators to justice.
I would like to commend the progressive voluntary
return of Burundian refugees. We underscore the
importance of the Government ensuring the social
and economic reintegration of those who have already
returned, while providing guarantees for the remaining
refugees to return to their homes.
Thirdly, and lastly, concerning the economic and
social sector, the including the people in the development
and reform efforts is a vital and important factor to
build societies with a secure and bright future. We look
forward to the establishment of genuine cooperation
among all the people of Burundi and their inclusion in
the decision-making process, including young people
and women.
In conclusion, we hope that the Government of
Burundi will achieve a positive outcome as a result of its
development plans. It is also our hope that those plans
will contribute to permanent stability in the security
and political situations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Equatorial Guinea.
19-04786

19/02/2019

The situation in Burundi

We thank the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Michel Kafando, for his updated briefing
on the situation in Burundi. We are also grateful for the
presence, participation and statement of Her Excellency
Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent Observer
of the African Union to the United Nations, as well
as for the Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Jürg Lauber.
We appreciate the efforts and work of Mr. Benjamin
Mkapa, facilitator of the inter-Burundian dialogue,
whose final report was presented at the East African
Community regional summit, which coincided with
the end of his term of office. We hope that work will
be followed by His Excellency Mr. Yoweri Museveni,
President of Uganda, current Chair of the East African
Community, so as to continue supporting dialogue
among Burundians before the next elections, which are
scheduled for 2020.
As a member State of the African Union and a
non-permanent member of the Security Council, we
believe and are convinced that respect for the order and
constitution of each country defines and sustains what
modern States are today, which therefore guarantees
their stability and plurality.
We appreciate the efforts made by the stakeholders
involved, which led to the signing of the Kayanza road
map for the 2020 general elections and the appointment of
the new members of the National Independent Electoral
Commission. We encourage the Government and all
those involved to continue promoting inter-Burundian
dialogue, with a view to the Burundians themselves
taking the lead in the process.
In that context, we must acknowledge that today in
Burundi there is a return to normalcy after the tensions
that followed the 2015 elections. Presently, Burundi
has democratically elected institutions throughout the
country. They will be renewed in the same fashion in
the 2020 elections, the preparations of which are taking
place in an atmosphere of tranquillity and calm. We
should at this point express our satisfaction at the strong
political will the Government of Burundi has shown
by financing all the expenses of the 2020 elections,
thereby demonstrating its desire to take ownership of
the elections.
I should also like to point out that the 32nd Summit
of the Heads of State and Government of the African
Union, held recently in Addis Ababa, praised the efforts
of the Government of Burundi to prepare for free,

S/PV. 8465

democratic and peaceful elections in 2020 by setting
up appropriate mechanisms in accordance with the
Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement. It also
commended President Nkurunziza’s decision not to run
in the presidential elections of 2020, even though there
is no legal obstacles to his doing so.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea expresses its
appreciation for the spirit of reconciliation and tolerance
that currently prevails in Burundi following the return
from exile of five political leaders, including former
President Sylvestre Ntibantunganya and former Second
Deputy President Alice Nzomukunda, among others, at
the invitation of the authorities and with guarantees for
their security and protection.
These facts, along with the release last year of
more than 2,000 prisoners, including insurgents who
took part in the violent demonstrations of 2015, the
contribution by Burundi of more than 6,000 troops
to the peacekeeping missions of the African Union
and the United Nations and the return of 210,000
refugees from 2016 to date, together represent real and
palpable demonstrations of the very positive evolution
of the situation is this Central African country. The
recognition of the National Congress for Freedom
political party led by Agathon Rwasa is another sign of
the unequivocally positive improvement of the situation
in Burundi.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is greatly
encouraged by the current situation in Burundi. The
peace and calm that currently prevail in that country
should lead the Security Council to seriously consider
removing Burundi from its agenda.
Equatorial Guinea aligns itself with the efforts of
the international community to find a peaceful way
out of conflict situations by the commitment to the
establishment and consolidation of stable, peaceful
and prosperous societies, in which the national interest
and the internal coexistence of fair, transparent and
inclusive sociopolitical and cultural institutions are
paramount. Therefore, any initiative whose objective is
the consolidation of peace and the return to international
legality and that gives priority to a negotiated and
peaceful end to conflict will always have our support.
We take this opportunity to call on the international
community to continue providing strong support to
the Government and other concerned parties in the
development of confidence-building measures that will
guarantee an appropriate environment for peaceful

19-0478619/23

S/PV.8465

The situation in Burundi

elections and in the commitment to the Constitution
and the road map for a peaceful transfer of power after
the elections in 2020 in an environment of peace and
national reconciliation.
In conclusion, the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea welcomes the launch of Burundi’s national
development plan for the period from 2018 to 2027,
whose implementation is a crucial element for the
sustainable development of Burundi in the framework
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development of the
United Nations and the African Union’s Agenda 2063.
We congratulate Burundi on its election as a
member of the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union at the 32nd Summit of the Heads of State
and Government of the African Union, held recently in
Addis Ababa.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Burundi.
Mr. Shingiro (Burundi) (spoke in French):
As this is the first time I am taking the floor under
your presidency, Sir, I would like to extend my warm
congratulations to you personally and to your country,
Equatorial Guinea, on your deserved assumption of
the rotating presidency of the Security Council for
the month of February. We are very grateful for your
country’s unparalleled leadership in defending Africa’s
interests and for its efforts to ensure that the principles
of the Charter are respected by the Council.
I have the honour to express the same thanks to
the other members of the Council for sparing no effort
to uphold respect for the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations, and especially for addressing the
situation in Burundi in the Council since 2015. It would
not be out of place to once again express my regret at
the fact that there are still a number of delegations —
although certainly in the minority — who have held on
to the same manifestly fixed positions for more than
four years, instead of viewing the situation in Burundi
with objectivity and discernment.
I cannot help but thank my colleague Ambassador
Jürg Lauber, Chair of the Burundi configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission, for his constructive
contribution to this debate. We reaffirm our full support
for and cooperation with Mr. Lauber.
20/23

19/02/2019

I would also like to thank my colleague Ambassador
Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent Observer of
the African Union to the United Nations, for the very
constructive contribution of her briefing to this debate.
If I may, I would like to encourage her participation
from time to time in future discussions by the Council
of the situation of Burundi.
Allow me also, through you, Mr. President, to thank
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Burundi,
Mr. Michel Kafando, for his briefing this afternoon.
The purpose of my statement this afternoon is
to share with you, Mr. President, and the members
of the Council an overview of the new developments
at various levels that have taken place since the last
Council meeting on the situation in Burundi, held on
21 November 2018 (see S/PV.8408).
At the political level, the trajectory of peace and
reconciliation and the strengthening of democracy
in Burundi have been positive since 2017. That trend
continued in 2018 and the first two months of 2019.
National mechanisms for the organization of peaceful
elections in 2020 are gradually being put in place. A
Constitution that affirms democratic achievements,
national
sovereignty,
dignity,
inclusiveness,
reconciliation and national cohesion was promulgated
on 7 June 2018 by the Head of State.
The National Independent Electoral Commission
(CENI) has already been set up and is operational.
A dialogue between the approved political parties
was organized in a politically, ethnically and genderinclusive manner to reach agreement on the Kayanza
road map leading to peaceful elections in 2020. In the
same vein, inclusive discussions on the revised draft of
the electoral code were initiated and the document has
been analysed at the level of the Council of Ministers.
The reform of the electoral code aims to adapt it to the
new Constitution of 7 June 2018. The ultimate objective
is to move towards an electoral code that will lead to
orderly, transparent and peaceful elections in 2020.
At the budgetary level, the Burundian people have
chosen to take full ownership of their electoral process
by financing it with domestic funds without recourse
to external resources, which are often unpredictable
and conditional.
At the organizational level, everything will be
done to create an environment that is conducive to the
holding of democratic, credible, inclusive and peaceful
19-04786

19/02/2019

The situation in Burundi

elections, which would be a guarantee of political
stability in our country. Since the beginning of 2018,
the Government of Burundi has consistently been
making goodwill gestures aimed at creating a general
atmosphere of calm in the country.
Without being exhaustive, I wish to stress the
repeated statements by the Head of State regarding his
decision not to run in the 2020 elections, even though
he has every right to under the current Constitution.
This is a very important political and democratic
gesture that can serve as an example for the subregion
and elsewhere.
The transfer of power from an outgoing President
who has completed his term to the President who will
take office in 2020 will be a watershed moment in
Burundi’s political history, because this will be the
first time since the independence of our country, in
1962, that a democratically elected president was able
to complete his constitutional mandate without being
assassinated, as happened in 1993 with the despicable
killing of President Melchior Ndadaye after only 101
days in power.
The freeing of more than 2,000 prisoners last year,
which you, Mr. President, highlighted in your national
capacity, which included young troublemakers and
insurgents from the 2015 events, also falls within the
ongoing trend of reconciliation, social cohesion and
political tolerance in the country.
Concerning the inter-Burundian dialogue, my
delegation wishes to recall that dialogue is a culture
and a cardinal virtue that is anchored in the lives of
the people of Burundi. There is no longer a need
for outside actors to take a leadership role in this
process, which is our very own. It is clear that the
conclusion of the dialogue, which up to now had been
conducted by the subregion, does not mean an end to
dialogue on the electoral process. The current political
consultations under way in Burundi between registered
political parties will continue, in a patriotic, open and
constructive spirit, until the successful conclusion of
the process.
On security, the situation in Burundi is calm, stable
and fully under control. This trend is irreversible. Like
2017, 2018 was characterized by a largely satisfactory
security situation throughout the national territory,
with the exception, of course, of some isolated cases
of ordinary crime such as can also found in other
countries, including those represented here.

S/PV. 8465

Thanks to this peace and stability, regained at a
high cost, the thirty-second summit of Heads of State of
the African Union, held on 10 and 11 February in Addis
Ababa, welcomed the efforts made by the Government
of Burundi in the process of preparing for the 2020
elections, which included by putting in place, inter alia,
national mechanisms to prepare for those elections as
well as the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, in
keeping with the 2000 Arusha Agreement. The summit
also welcomed the exemplary decision of the Head of
State to voluntarily forgo his constitutional right to run
in the 2020 elections.
The summit also reiterated its many calls on
the European Union to lift the unilateral sanctions
imposed on Burundi. These are politically motivated,
immoral sanctions, imposed in violation of the Charter
of the United Nations and of the duty of international
solidarity. The near-automatic renewal of the sanctions
each year, without taking account of the remarkable
progress that has been made since 2015, should by any
line of thinking cease so as to give a chance to frank
and sincere dialogue aimed at a resumption of mutually
beneficial and respectful cooperation.
I turn now to Burundi’s contribution to peacekeeping
operations and to the fight against terrorism at the
continental level. Burundi has contributed more than
6,000 soldiers to United Nations and African Union
peacekeeping operations, mainly in Somalia and the
Central African Republic. The laudable work carried
out by all of our peacekeepers, who have voluntarily
chosen to sacrifice their lives to save those of others,
far from their home countries and in particularly hostile
conditions, must be rightly appreciated.
Among other things, we must refrain from any
differentiated treatment of our troops as a tool of
political pressure. Operational capacity in the context
of the implementation of United Nations peacekeeping
mandates should be the main criterion for the evaluation
of soldiers in peacekeeping missions.
Burundi, which has just been elected as a member
of the African Union Peace and Security Council, will
remain deeply committed, alongside other nations,
to promoting peace by silencing the guns in Africa
by 2020. I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President,
for having chosen to consider this important issue
during your presidency, towards the end of the month,
on 27 February, I believe. This renewed confidence
demonstrated in Burundi by the States members of

19-0478621/23

S/PV.8465

The situation in Burundi

the African Union is fresh evidence of the credibility
of Burundian diplomacy and its increasing role in the
maintenance of international peace and security at the
regional and international levels.
On the return of refugees, in 2018 we received
58,262 voluntarily repatriated people returning from
Tanzania, the Congo, Kenya and Uganda, as well as
several thousand others who returned without the help
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR).
The voluntary return movement is tremendous,
averaging more than 1,000 returns a week. By way
of illustration, today alone UNHCR repatriated from
Tanzania 595 Burundians, including 177 families,
through the Mugina border crossing, in Makamba
province, in the southern part of the country. To properly
manage this process, my delegation wishes once again
to reiterate its call on UNHCR and on friends of the
region to intervene with certain host countries who are
holding hostage some exiled compatriots by erecting
artificial obstacles to their voluntary return home,
and to ensure that refugee camps retain their civilian
character, in keeping with the 1951 Convention relating
to the Status of Refugees.
Speaking of the civilian character of refugee
camps, Burundi accepted the public excuses of
UNHCR authorities following the startling discovery
by the Tanzanian authorities of more than 1,500
military uniforms distributed by UNHCR under
unclear conditions in refugee camps in Tanzania. My
delegation hopes that such a questionable undertaking,
which could have destabilised my country, will not
recur.
For its part, the national reconciliation process
is continuing under the leadership of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission. Its mission is to inquire
into and establish the truth about the serious violations
of human rights and humanitarian law committed in
Burundi during the period from 26 February 1885 to
4 December 2008, when the armed conflict in Burundi
ended.
The establishment of the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission, in line with the Arusha Agreement, is
crucial in our country, above all in moving towards
a Burundi that is reconciled with its past, which was
characterized not only by glorious events but also by
fratricidal wars whose scars remain fresh in many of
our families and communities.
22/23

19/02/2019

Beyond rewriting the history of Burundi, which
has often been falsified, the Commission must carry
out an important and sensitive undertaking aimed at
healing wounds, restoring the dignity of victims and
expressing gratitude to those who protected others
during the various crises that Burundi has gone
through, slowly but daily working to clear the path
towards national reconciliation in our country. As the
Chair of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission so aptly noted, besides national efforts,
this ambitious reconciliation process requires the
support of all.
On the promotion and protection of human
rights, Burundi reiterates its readiness and its will to
cooperate with other countries and the United Nations
in promoting the protection of human rights in Burundi
and elsewhere in the world, based, of course, on the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations. This
noble mission will be feasible only through mutually
respectful cooperation, frank and sincere dialogue
among Member States, and the use of mechanisms
accepted by all, such as the Universal Periodic Review.
The dangerous tendency of certain States to seek to
transform the Human Rights Council into a tool for
exerting political pressure and regulating geopolitics
in the countries of the South risks undermining the
objectives set by Member States when the Human
Rights Council was established on 15 March 2006
through General Assembly resolution 60/251.
The drift towards the excessive politicization of
human rights and the policy of selectivity and double
standards run counter to the principles of the universality
of human rights. The Government of Burundi is more
committed than ever. Dialogue and cooperation based
on mutual trust will always be the cornerstone of its
initiatives in the process of promoting human rights.
I cannot conclude my remarks without reiterating
once again what has now become my slogan before
the Council — our usual and legitimate appeal to the
Security Council to remove the issue of Burundi from
its agenda. We maintain that the current political and
security situation in the country in no way constitutes
a threat to international peace and security that
could justify its being arbitrarily maintained on the
Council’s agenda.
The series of meetings on Burundi, held on
the basis of resolution 2303 (2016), which is now
essentially obsolete, could become yet another factor
19-04786

19/02/2019

The situation in Burundi

of destabilization instead of promoting peace and calm.
For four years, a handful of external stakeholders have
stubbornly ignored these multiple calls for Burundi
to be removed from the Council’s agenda, and it is

S/PV. 8465

beginning to feel like an eternity for the people of
Burundi. It is time for those who are still wavering to
come down on the right side of history.
The meeting rose at 5.10 p.m.

19-0478623/23
