A/63/PV.57

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-third session

57

th plenary meeting
Monday, 24 November 2008, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. D’Escoto Brockmann. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nicaragua)

The meeting was called to order at 3.30 p.m.
Agenda item 64
Promotion and protection of human rights
Draft resolution (A/63/L.31)
The President: Before we proceed, I would like
to inform Member States that, on behalf of the entire
membership, representatives of all regional groups —
Algeria, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Germany and
Indonesia — were appointed as facilitators by the
President of the General Assembly in connection with
draft resolution before us today. As a result, no more
sponsors will be accepted for draft resolution
A/63/L.31.
(spoke in Spanish)
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/63/L.31, entitled “Commemoration of the
sixtieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/63/L.31?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
63/25).
The President (spoke in Spanish): The General
Assembly has concluded this stage of its consideration
of agenda item 64.

Agenda item 16
Question of Palestine
Report of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
(A/63/35)
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/368)
Draft resolutions (A/63/L.32, A/63/L.33,
A/63/L.34 and A/63/L.35)
Statement by the President
The President: I am pleased to open this plenary
meeting, in which we take up the question of Palestine.
This morning, with heavy hearts, we observed the
International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People. I joined His Excellency Ambassador Paul
Badji, Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, and
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon to voice our ongoing
concern about the terrible situation in the Gaza Strip
and the West Bank and to express our solidarity with
that long-suffering people.
We heard the comprehensive report of the
Chairman on the current situation of Palestinians living
under occupation. As well, the Secretary-General
summarized the complex initiatives that are being
undertaken by the international community to move
forward peace talks and the establishment of the
Palestinian State. I urged the international community
to raise its voice against the collective punishment of
the people of Gaza, a policy that we cannot tolerate.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

08-61587 (E)

*0861587*

A/63/PV.57

We demand an end to that massive abuse of human
rights and call on Israel, the occupying Power, to allow
humanitarian and other supplies to enter the Gaza Strip
without delay.
I spoke this morning about apartheid and how
Israeli policies in the occupied Palestinian territories
appear so similar to the apartheid of an earlier era a
continent away. I believe it is very important that we in
the United Nations use that term. We must not be afraid
to call something what it is. It is the United Nations,
after all, that adopted the International Convention on
the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of
Apartheid, making clear to the entire world that such
practices of official discrimination must be outlawed
wherever they occur.
We heard today from a representative of South
African civil society. We know that civil society
organizations all around the world are working to
defend Palestinian rights and are trying to protect the
Palestinian population, which we, the United Nations,
are failing to protect. More than 20 years ago, we in
the United Nations took the lead from civil society
when we agreed that sanctions were required to
provide a non-violent means of pressuring South Africa
to end its violations. Today, perhaps we in the United
Nations should consider following the lead of a new
generation of civil society, who are calling for a similar
non-violent campaign of boycott, divestment and
sanctions to pressure Israel to end its violations.
I have attended a great many meetings on the
rights of the Palestinian people. I am amazed at how
people continue to insist on patience while our brothers
and sisters are being crucified. Patience is a virtue in
which I believe, but there is nothing virtuous about
being patient with the suffering of others. We must
endeavour, with all our heart, to put an end to the
suffering of the Palestinian people.
I have great love for the Jewish people, and that
has been true all my life. I have never hesitated to
condemn the crimes of the Holocaust or any of the
many abuses committed against our Jewish brothers
and sisters. However, their suffering does not give
anyone the right to abuse others, especially those who
historically have such deep and exemplary relations
with the Jewish people.
Having said that, I would like to remind our
Israeli brothers and sisters that, even though they have
the protective shield of the United States in the

2

Security Council, no amount of arm twisting and
intimidation will change resolution 181 (II), which was
adopted 61 years ago and called for the creation of two
States. Shamefully, there is no Palestinian State to
celebrate today, and the prospects are as distant as ever.
All explanations notwithstanding, that central fact
makes a mockery of the United Nations and gravely
hurts its image and prestige. How can we continue like
that? I urge the international community to defuse the
political deadlock that cynically perpetuates that
hatred, isolation and abuse. Our solidarity must prompt
concrete action to realize those elusive rights, which
most of us can take for granted.
(spoke in Spanish)
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Paul
Badji of Senegal, who will speak in his capacity as
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
Mr. Badji (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would
like, at the outset, on behalf of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, to most sincerely thank all who participated
this morning in the special meeting held to observe the
International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People. On that solemn occasion, the importance and
urgency of achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting
solution to the question of Palestine was forcefully and
unanimously reaffirmed. There was also considerable
support for the exercise by the Palestinian people of its
inalienable rights.
Before I introduce the four draft resolutions that
the Committee has prepared under the agenda item
under consideration, I should like to make some brief
remarks with regard to the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory and on developments in the
political process.
One year ago, the international community as a
whole welcomed the holding of an international
conference at Annapolis convened by the United States
of America to follow up an initiative by the Quartet.
The Conference led to the resumption of the political
process between Israelis and Palestinians and elicited
an unprecedented level of political, economic and
financial support by the international community for
the Palestinian Authority, and subsequently led to
substantial pledges at the donors’ conference held in
Paris in December 2007. The Committee joined the
groundswell to relaunch the peace process and, in the

08-61587

A/63/PV.57

context of its programme of work, worked to establish
an environment conducive to advancing permanent
status negotiations.

However, they cautioned that any final IsraeliPalestinian peace agreement must encompass a just and
fair solution to the Palestine refugee question.

Under the auspices of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, the Secretariat’s Division for Palestinian
Rights organized three major international meetings in
2008. The Palestinian Reform and Development Plan
was at the heart of the debate that took place at the
United Nations seminar on assistance to the Palestinian
people held in February 2008 at Amman, during which
donors were encouraged to become active participants
in the implementation of the Plan. The seminar also
made it possible to undertake an assessment of the
numerous obstacles impeding the achievement of that
goal, namely, the hundreds of checkpoints and the
routine closure of the occupied Palestinian territory,
which stifle economic development, the expansion of
settlements and the construction of the wall on
Palestinian land, which further fragments the West
Bank.

The Committee’s delegation took advantage of its
stay in Paris to meet with officials of the French
Ministry for Foreign Affairs and with French
parliamentarians at the Palais Bourbon and Palais
du Luxembourg. Those meetings resulted in useful
exchanges of views on the role of the European Union,
the United Nations and the Committee in international
efforts to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

The delegation that represented the Committee at
the seminar took up the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, during a
meeting with the Prime Minister of the Kingdom of
Jordan. Following the Amman seminar, a delegation of
the Committee visited two refugee camps in Jordan and
obtained first-hand knowledge of the living conditions
of its inhabitants.
The United Nations International Conference on
Palestine Refugees, which was organized by the
Committee in April at the Paris headquarters of
UNESCO, took up the issue of the many Palestinians
forced to live for over 60 years in refugee camps in the
West Bank, the Gaza Strip, Jordan, Lebanon and the
Syrian Arab Republic. Participants at the Conference
stressed the fact that a durable solution to the Palestine
refugee problem and to the Israeli Palestinian conflict
could only be achieved if those refugees could exercise
their inalienable right to return to their homes and to
recover the property of which they had been deprived.
The Conference highlighted that the right of
return of refugees, which is a fundamental and widely
acknowledged humanitarian and human rights
principle, did not diminish with the passage of time
and remained fully applicable to Palestine refugees.
Participants in the Conference also unreservedly
supported the resumption in the political process.

08-61587

In June 2008 in Malta, the Committee held the
United Nations International Meeting on the Question
of Palestine to assess difficulties impeding the parties
from making progress in the peace process.
Participants at the Meeting expressed particular
concern about the ongoing expansion of settlements in
the West Bank and East Jerusalem and the continuation
of the construction of the wall, both of which are
contrary to international law and serve to prejudge, as
has been pointed out numerous times, the outcome of
permanent status negotiations.
While affirming that acts of violence by either
side were damaging to the political dialogue, the Malta
Meeting also expressed support for every effort to
achieve a ceasefire. It also welcomed the important
role played by European countries and encouraged
them to become more active in various aspects of the
political process.
The Committee’s delegation to the Meeting also
met with Malta’s President and Minister for Foreign
Affairs. On its return through Rome, it also visited
Vatican City to meet with the Secretary for Relations
with States of the Holy See.
I should now like to highlight an important aspect
of the mandate conferred upon the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People by the General Assembly, so as to illustrate how
the Committee contributes to the comprehensive efforts
of the United Nations to find a peaceful solution to the
question of Palestine through the establishment of a
Palestinian State living side by side with Israel in
peace and security.
Having listened to assessments by Palestinian and
Israeli experts and the analyses made by renowned
international specialists on the issue, the Committee
concluded that there is a widening gap and stark

3

A/63/PV.57

discrepancy between bilateral negotiations, the efforts
of the international community and the deteriorating
situation on the ground. Even more worrying are the
ongoing settlement activities, the blockade of Gaza, the
construction of the wall on Palestinian land, the
demolition of houses in East Jerusalem, the daily
incursions by the Israeli army into Palestinian areas
and violence by Israeli settlers — all of which threaten
to derail already fragile negotiations.
Today, one year after the Annapolis Conference,
the Committee cannot but encourage the parties to
continue the political process by building on the
achievements. The only solution is to undertake serious
negotiations on the substantive issues. At the same
time, actions on the ground must change dramatically.
Settlement activities must be stopped. Extremists must
be brought to justice for their acts of violence. The
blockade of Gaza must be lifted. The ceasefire should
be maintained and expanded to the West Bank.
Economic activity should be relaunched in the
Palestinian territories by lifting restrictions on the
movement of people and goods. Those measures will
make it possible to restore confidence in the peace
process and to gradually build public support among
Palestinians and Israelis. That will allow the parties to
take decisions, even though they may appear difficult
at the moment.
The Committee believes that the basic reason for
the conflict continues to be the ongoing illegal
occupation of Palestinian territory. We emphasize the
urgent need to find a negotiated solution that will end
the occupation, ensure that the Palestinian people can
exercise their inalienable rights and guarantee the
security of the State of Israel. Such a settlement must
be based on international law, Assembly resolution
194 (III), Security Council resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003), other
relevant United Nations resolutions and the principles
outlined in the road map and the Arab Peace Initiative.
The Committee continues to be extremely
concerned about internal Palestinian divisions, which
pose obstacles to national reconciliation and the
reunification of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip
under the control of the Palestinian Authority. The
Committee supports efforts by Arab and other
countries, as well as the initiatives of the President of
the Palestinian Authority, Mahmoud Abbas, aimed at
restoring the national unity necessary for embarking on

4

the path towards a permanent settlement of the
question of Palestine.
The Committee firmly believes that the United
Nations should continue to maintain its permanent
responsibility with regard to the question of Palestine
until it is resolved in all its aspects in accordance with
international legitimacy. The Committee calls on the
Security Council to act decisively to implement its own
resolutions regarding the question of Palestine, in
particular resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). The
Committee also expects that the Council — on which
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security has been conferred —
will fulfil its obligations under the Charter. For its part,
the Committee will continue to fulfil the mandate
entrusted to it by the General Assembly, so as to help
the Palestinian people achieve its inalienable rights.
In this context, I would now like to introduce to
the General Assembly the four draft resolutions
approved by the Committee and circulated under the
agenda item under consideration, namely, A/63/L.32,
A/63/L.33, A/63/L.34 and A/63/L.35.
The first three draft resolutions concern the work
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, the Division for
Palestinian Rights of the Secretariat and the special
information programme on the question of Palestine of
the Department of Public Information of the
Secretariat. Those draft resolutions reaffirm the
important mandates entrusted to those three entities by
the Assembly. As in the past, the Committee intends to
make sure that resources available to it are used
judiciously to carry out all the activities envisaged. The
three draft resolutions have also been updated.
The fourth draft resolution, which is entitled
“Peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine”,
reiterates the position of the General Assembly with
regard to the essential elements of such a settlement
and includes references to the developments of the past
year. The draft resolution notes with satisfaction,
among other things, the international community’s
redoubled efforts to support the political process, the
reaffirmation of the Arab Peace Initiative and the
follow-up steps undertaken by Arab States, as well as
the activities by the Quartet and its Special
Representative.
The four draft resolutions that I have just
introduced
outline
positions,
mandates
and

08-61587

A/63/PV.57

programmes that are of special importance, particularly
at this crucial moment. I call on the General Assembly
to vote in favour of those draft resolutions and to
support the important goals contained therein.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Saviour Borg of Malta,
Rapporteur of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, to
introduce the Committee’s report.
Mr. Borg (Malta): It is an honour for me, in my
capacity as the Rapporteur of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, to introduce to the General Assembly the
annual report of the Committee, which is contained in
document A/63/35. Allow me to summarize each
section of the report.
Chapter I contains the introduction, which
outlines the Committee’s objectives and its general
perspective on the events that have taken place in the
course of the past year. The chapter highlights, in
paragraph 4, “the dichotomy between the resumption
of the Israeli-Palestinian political negotiations and
intensified international engagement on the issue, and a
deteriorating situation on the ground”.
Chapters II and III summarize the mandates
entrusted by the General Assembly to the Committee,
the Division for Palestinian Rights and the Department
of Public Information. They also contain information
on the organization of the Committee’s work during the
year under review. Those two Chapters also reconfirm
the Committee’s declared position that all United
Nations Member States and Observers wishing to
participate in the work of the Committee as observers
are welcome to do so.
Chapter IV reviews the situation relating to the
question of Palestine and the relevant political
developments as monitored by the Committee during
the year in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem. That includes the situation of
Palestinian refugees; the Israel Defense Forces’ deadly
military incursions into the Gaza Strip, which have
resulted in a large number of civilian casualties; the
rocket and other attacks by Palestinian militants
against Israeli civilians; the Egyptian-mediated
ceasefire in the Gaza Strip between Israel and
Palestinian groups; and efforts aimed at Palestinian
national reconciliation.

08-61587

Also in that Chapter, the Committee denounces
the excessive and indiscriminate use of force by Israel,
the occupying Power, against the Palestinian civilian
population in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, and condemns extrajudicial
killings, the destruction of Palestinian homes, civilian
infrastructure and agricultural lands and the attendant
devastating effects on the Palestinian population. At
the same time, the Committee strongly condemns all
attacks against Israeli civilians and infrastructure.
That Chapter also addresses other issues of
serious concern, including the increasing number of
obstacles to movement and access; the continued
construction of the separation wall, in contravention of
the Advisory Opinion of the International Court of
Justice; the demolition of Palestinian homes; the
continued blockade imposed by Israel on the Gaza
Strip, which is obstructing the movement of persons
and goods and exacerbating the humanitarian situation
in the Gaza Strip; the detention of approximately
11,000 Palestinian prisoners in Israeli prisons; Israel’s
continued settlement expansion activity; the continued
violence, harassment and intimidation by settlers
against Palestinian civilians; the water crisis
throughout the occupied Palestinian territory; the
deterioration of the agricultural sector; the halting of
the import of fuel, food and medical and relief items;
and the difficulties still faced by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East in carrying out its mandate.
The political developments reviewed in that
Chapter include the convening of the Annapolis
conference
and
the
Israeli-Palestinian
joint
understanding reached at the conference, as well as the
Paris international donors’ conference and the resulting
$7.4 billion in pledges. The Chapter also highlights the
efforts being made by the Palestinian Authority to
advance economic development, as well as the
important role being played by the Quartet and its
representative, Mr. Tony Blair.
Chapter V reviews the action taken by the
Committee to mobilize the international community in
support of the Palestinian people, in cooperation with
United Nations bodies, Governments, intergovernmental
and civil society organizations and others. It is divided
into two main sections. Section A describes action in
the General Assembly and the Security Council, as
well as statements issued by the Committee’s Bureau.
Section B contains a detailed account of the

5

A/63/PV.57

implementation of the programme of work and
activities of the Committee and the Division. It also
provides information on the continued dialogue
between the Committee and members of the European
Union and other intergovernmental organizations.
Sub-section 1 gives an account of the various
international meetings and conferences organized in
the course of the year, including those held in Amman,
Paris and Malta. The Committee’s delegation also met
at Vatican City with the Secretary of Relations with
States of the Holy See.
Sub-sections 2 to 7 deal with the Committee’s
cooperation with intergovernmental organizations and
civil society, including parliaments and interparliamentary organizations; the Division’s research,
monitoring and publications work; the administration,
maintenance, expansion and development of the United
Nations Information System on the Question of
Palestine (UNISPAL); the training programme for staff
of the Palestinian Authority; and the observance of the
International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People held here in New York, in Geneva and in
Vienna.
Chapter VI provides an overview of the work
done over the year by the Department of Public
Information (DPI) in pursuance of General Assembly
resolution 62/82 of 10 December 2007, whose
objective is to raise international awareness on the
question of Palestine and on the situation in the Middle
East with a view to contributing effectively to an
atmosphere conducive to dialogue and supportive of
the peace process. Important contributions by DPI
included the coverage of intergovernmental meetings,
reports by the United Nations Radio Arabic Language
Unit of meetings organized by the Committee, the
highlighting of stories by the United Nations News
Centre, a training programme for young Palestinian
journalists, the permanent exhibits at United Nations
Headquarters and at Geneva, and the dissemination of
information by United Nations information centres,
services and offices.
The last chapter of the report contains the
conclusions and recommendations of the Committee.
In that chapter, the Committee notes that the year 2008
marked 60 years of Palestinian dispossession — the
Nakba — and reiterates the permanent responsibility of
the United Nations towards the question of Palestine

6

until it is resolved in all its aspects in accordance with
international law.
Encouraged by the outcome of the Annapolis
conference and the Paris donors’ conference, the
Committee stresses the need for a complete cessation
of all acts of violence, including military attacks,
destruction and acts of terror. It calls upon Israel, the
occupying Power, to end its illegal policies and
oppressive practices in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, such as settlement
activities, the construction of the wall and numerous
measures of collective punishment.
The Committee also emphasizes the importance
for both sides to implement their road map obligations.
The Committee also stresses that the political
momentum provided by the Annapolis and Paris
conferences must not be lost, and supports all efforts
towards the goal of achieving a final status agreement
by the end of 2008.
The Committee expresses its view that the illegal
Israeli occupation of the Palestinian territory must end
without conditions, which should allow the Palestinian
people to establish an independent State on all
territories occupied in 1967, including East Jerusalem,
and to exercise their inalienable rights, including the
right to self-determination.
The Committee also expresses its firm support for
the two-State solution, in accordance with Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397
(2002) and 1515 (2003). The Arab Peace Initiative
remains a crucial element for advancing peace in the
region.
While welcoming the unwavering and substantial
budgetary support for the Palestinian Authority by the
European Union and other major donors, the
Committee encourages member States of the European
Union to take a more proactive role in international
efforts at resolving the conflict. The Committee also
calls upon all donors to live up to their pledges in order
to ensure the continued functioning of the institutions
of the Palestinian Authority.
The Committee calls upon Israel to end its
military operations in the occupied Palestinian territory
and to stop any other measures that further undermine
Palestinian institutions. The Committee expresses its
strong opposition to the illegal construction and
expansion of settlements in the West Bank, as well as

08-61587

A/63/PV.57

the unlawful construction of the wall, and finds those
activities incompatible with negotiations on a
permanent settlement.
The Committee again reminds Israel, the
occupying Power, that it is bound by the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, which, inter alia, obliges
parties to the Convention to protect civilians during
hostilities. The Committee also calls on Israel to
release, immediately and unconditionally, all
Palestinian prisoners, including imprisoned Cabinet
members and parliamentarians. Also, the Committee
strongly condemns the killing of innocent civilians by
either side, denounces rocket attacks on Israel and calls
for a cessation of those activities by Palestinian armed
groups.
The Committee calls upon the Palestinian
leadership, the leaders of all factions and all
Palestinians to unite in support of President Abbas, his
Government and all democratically elected Palestinian
institutions, and to resolve their political differences by
peaceful means. The Committee also calls for a
comprehensive national dialogue, supported by
confidence-building measures, to start a process of
regaining national unity and the reunification of Gaza
and the West Bank under the Palestinian Authority.
The Committee, convinced that its own work and
the programme of mandated activities of the Division
for Palestinian Rights represent a significant
contribution by the United Nations and its membership
in the search for a solution to the question of Palestine,
also emphasizes the useful and constructive
contribution of the Division for Palestinian Rights of
the Secretariat in support of its mandate aimed at
enabling the Palestinian people to exercise their
inalienable rights.
The Committee stresses that its programme of
international meetings and conferences contributes to
focusing
the
attention
of
Governments,
intergovernmental and civil society organizations and
the general public on the need to advance a peaceful
settlement of the conflict and to mobilize much-needed
assistance for the Palestinian people. It also suggests,
in its report, themes for its programme of meetings for
the year 2009.
The Committee commends civil society
organizations for their efforts to uphold international
legitimacy with regard to the question of Palestine

08-61587

through advocacy and the mobilization of public
opinion, as well as for their initiatives aimed at
alleviating the plight of the Palestinian people. It also
expresses its intention to develop its cooperation with
parliamentarians and their umbrella organizations.
The Committee requests the Division for
Palestinian Rights to continue its substantive and
secretariat support; its programme of research,
monitoring and publications and other informational
activities, such as the further expansion and
development of UNISPAL, including the graphic
enhancement of the website on the question of
Palestine; the annual training programme for staff of
the Palestinian Authority; and the annual observance of
the International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People.
The Committee requests the continuation of the
special information programme on the question of
Palestine of the Department of Public Information,
with the necessary flexibility called for by
developments relevant to the question of Palestine.
Finally, while reiterating its desire to make a
contribution to the achievement of a comprehensive,
just and lasting settlement of the question of Palestine,
the Committee calls upon all States to join it in that
endeavour and to extend their cooperation and support
to the Committee. It also again invites the General
Assembly to recognize the importance of the
Committee’s role and to reconfirm its mandate.
In conclusion, may I express my thanks and
appreciation to the Chairman and the other members of
the Committee, as well as the officials of the United
Nations Division for Palestinian Rights, for the
assistance they have extended to me as Rapporteur of
the Committee. I would like to express the hope that
the report I have just introduced will be of assistance
and guidance to the Assembly in its deliberations on
the question of Palestine.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Riad Malki, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Palestine.
Mr. Malki (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to take this opportunity to reiterate Palestine’s
pleasure at seeing you, Mr. President, preside over the
General Assembly during its sixty-third session. We
reiterate our confidence in your abilities and wisdom in

7

A/63/PV.57

guiding the Assembly’s efforts to address the important
and critical issues on its agenda.
Mr. Tommo Monthe (Cameroon), Vice-President,
took the Chair.
We are gathered in the Trusteeship Council
Chamber this morning once again to solemnly
commemorate the International Day of Solidarity with
the Palestinian People. Our people are filled with deep
gratitude for the outpouring of solidarity, support and
concern expressed to them on this Day from all corners
of the world. The Day is traditionally observed on
29 November, the date in 1947 when the General
Assembly adopted resolution 181 (II), which
partitioned historic Palestine into two States — one
Arab and one Jewish — and led to the tragedy and
injustice that befell the Palestinian people with their
uprooting, dispersion, dispossession and loss of their
homeland in the Nakba of 1948.
The annual observance of the Day reassures the
Palestinian people of the continuing international
commitment, especially on the part of the United
Nations, to uphold its historic responsibility with
regard to the question of Palestine until it is resolved in
all its aspects, in accordance with international law and
United Nations resolutions. That commitment and the
ongoing solidarity have helped to strengthen
Palestinian perseverance over the many years of
struggle against injustice, oppression and occupation
on the long road towards the realization of the
Palestinians’ inalienable human rights and national
aspirations. Yet, today, as the Palestinian people
solemnly reflect on the passage of 60 years since the
Nakba, they are also filled with grief at the immense
suffering and losses they have endured, collectively
and individually. Our people are tired and drained from
the suffering and hardships that they have withstood,
and they are filled with longing for the rights and
freedom they have for so long been denied, including
their rights to self-determination and return.
More than half of the Palestinian people,
comprised of more than three generations of families,
continue to live in exile as refugees. They are dispersed
throughout the diaspora, with millions still languishing
in refugee camps and denied the right to return to their
homes to live in peace with their neighbours, and
suffering innumerable hardships. In the meantime, the
remainder of the Palestinian people, including
refugees, continue to live under Israeli occupation in

8

the occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem, and are continually subject to oppression
and the violation of their human rights.
As they reflect on that reality, the Palestinian
people are filled with sorrow and resentment at the
injustice, endless humiliation and affronts to their
dignity that they have been forced to endure for so long
before the eyes of the world as they have continued to
appeal for their rights. Moreover, they are deeply
disappointed by the many promises repeatedly made,
yet unfulfilled, to uphold the law and resolutions of
international legitimacy to justly resolve the question
of Palestine and finally bring peace and stability to our
region.
However, the Palestinian people remain hopeful
and are reassured by the justness of their cause and the
international support that has helped to sustain their
steadfastness over the decades. The political, socioeconomic, humanitarian and moral support and
assistance that has been extended to the Palestinian
people from around the world has helped to ease their
suffering and strengthen their resolve to bring an end to
the occupation, realize their rights and achieve a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace.
Indeed, despite repeated crises, upheavals and
displacement, the Palestinian people have never given
up on their legitimate national aspirations. Under the
leadership of their sole legitimate representative — the
Palestine Liberation Organization — they have
remained determined to achieve justice and to live in
peace and security in their homeland. As embodied in
the 1988 Palestinian declaration of independence and
as pledged at the Middle East peace process launched
in 1991, they are committed to the two-State solution
as the means of peacefully establishing their
independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, in the Palestinian territory under Israeli
occupation since 1967.
The Palestinian leadership therefore remains
committed to the Madrid terms of reference, Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the
principle of land for peace. Our leaders have also
strived to fulfil our obligations under the Quartet’s
Road Map and have fully endorsed and committed
themselves to the Arab Peace Initiative. In addition,
our leaders have made every effort to follow up on the
joint understandings agreed at Annapolis.

08-61587

A/63/PV.57

Moreover, the Palestinian people and their
leadership remain convinced that, as regards the
question of Palestine, the international community will
ultimately fulfil its responsibilities by upholding
international law and the Charter of the United Nations
so as to achieve a peaceful settlement that will give our
people the freedom for which they have waited so long
and allow them to take their rightful place among the
nations of the world, including here in the General
Assembly.
We have therefore returned to the General
Assembly to renew our appeal to the international
community to continue and intensify efforts in support
of the peace process in order to achieve a peaceful and
just settlement of the question of Palestine in all its
aspects, including a just solution to the plight of
Palestine refugees on the basis of resolution 194 (III).
In today’s world, there is no doubt that the question of
Palestine is at the core of the Arab-Israeli conflict and
that rectifying the injustice that has been done to the
Palestinian people is fundamental to ensuring peace
and stability in the Middle East. The positive effects of
such an accomplishment will no doubt extend beyond
our region, as has been repeatedly asserted for many
years in numerous debates regarding Palestine.
In addition, the issue of Palestine has emerged as
a central theme in debates concerning other relevant
issues of our time, including at the recent high-level
meeting on dialogue among religions and cultures.
During that meeting, country after country referred to
the pressing need to resolve the Palestine question, as
it is at the centre of widely held perceptions among
States regarding the lack of justice, equality and
respect for human rights in the world and the existing
tensions and sensitivities among religions and between
East and West.
In fact, a just and peaceful resolution to the
question of Palestine and the closing of this tragic era
will allow the peoples of the world to truly believe that
the wrongs of history can be righted and that dialogue
and peaceful negotiation, rather than military force and
aggression, are the means to resolve conflict. That will,
in turn, allow us to turn our attention and energies from
conflict to the pursuit of coexistence and the
development of our societies. The resulting hope and
political, social and economic stability and security
will allow us to make the necessary efforts to lift our
peoples from the suffering caused by armed strife,
poverty and hunger and to harness our true potential.

08-61587

That will benefit our people and the international
community as a whole and help us to establish a more
harmonious and prosperous future.
Regrettably, we have not made significant strides
towards the realization of those goals since we last met
in this Hall to consider the question of Palestine. An
honest and careful assessment of the current situation
reveals little progress in the peace process since its
resumption a year ago. It also shows a continuing
deterioration of the situation on the ground in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, as a result of ongoing illegal Israeli policies
and practices.
Even under the aegis of the peace process, Israel,
the occupying Power, has continued to commit
countless violations of international law, including
humanitarian and human rights law, many of which
amount to war crimes. Israel continues with impunity
to kill, injure, imprison, displace and collectively
punish Palestinian civilians. It is destroying their
homes, properties, infrastructure and lands and
continues to inflict immense losses and humanitarian
suffering on our people. At the same time, Israel
continues its unlawful colonization campaign, in
particular by building and expanding settlements and
constructing the wall in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. All those efforts are
aimed at creating facts on the ground in order to alter
the territory’s character, status and demographic
composition, entrench Israel’s presence on the territory
and advance its expansionist agenda.
For many decades, Israel has relentlessly pursued
the two-pronged policy of subjugating and oppressing
the Palestinian people and confiscating and colonizing
their land. As time and developments in the situation
on the ground have demonstrated, Israel’s deliberate
intent in that regard has been to consolidate its control
over the Palestinian territory it has occupied since 1967
in order to forcibly acquire, and de facto annex, as
much of that land as possible. Israel’s pursuit of that
policy has entailed establishing a vast web of illegal
practices and crimes and violating every human rights
standard. That has caused extensive hardships for the
Palestinian people, including widespread socioeconomic devastation and the fragmentation of the
unity, contiguity and integrity of the occupied
Palestinian territory, thereby fuelling the cycle of
violence and instability and undermining every effort
at peace.

9

A/63/PV.57

In the past year, Israel’s occupying forces have
continued to use excessive and indiscriminate military
force against Palestinian civilians and their property, in
grave violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention. That
has resulted in major losses of innocent lives, including
children and women, as well as thousands of injuries
and psychological trauma among the population and
the further destruction of property, homes, agricultural
land and infrastructure.
Death, injury and property destruction have also
continued to be perpetrated by extremist armed Israeli
settlers who have been illegally transferred to the
occupied Palestinian territory. They continue to carry
out acts of violence, harassment, incitement,
provocation and terror against Palestinian civilians.
The situation, which is especially severe in Al-Khalil
(Hebron), is worsening as settler attacks intensify and
the occupying Power continues to fail to halt their
lawlessness and to hold them accountable for their
crimes.
In addition, Israel, the occupying Power, has
arbitrarily detained and imprisoned approximately
11,000 Palestinian civilians, including women and
children. Despite the release of some prisoners in
recent months, ongoing Israeli raids and arrests have
kept the number of prisoners at a high level. Moreover,
Palestinian prisoners and detainees continue to be
subjected to physical and mental ill-treatment, abuse,
solitary confinement and torture. They are denied
family visits, adequate medical care and food and are
held in completely unsanitary and inhumane
conditions.
Israel is also continuing its policy of collective
punishment against the Palestinian people by imposing
closures and restrictions on the movement of persons
and goods within, into and out of the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, which
has been virtually cut off from the rest of the territory.
Palestinian access to schools, hospitals, employment,
agricultural land, food supplies, holy places and
humanitarian assistance, as well as to each other, is
being severely obstructed by the complete closure of
the Gaza Strip and by a labyrinth of more than 630
checkpoints and roadblocks in the West Bank — to say
nothing of the settlements, the wall, the bypass roads,
the permit regime and, in particular, the imposition of
residency restrictions on Jerusalem residents. All of
that has had a tragic and catastrophic impact on the
Palestinian economy and the social fabric.

10

In that regard, Israel’s continuing siege of the
Gaza Strip has transformed the area into a huge prison.
That is the most inhumane form of collective
punishment, and is tantamount to a war crime. That
deplorable situation has continued despite a ceasefire
brokered by Egypt in June, which aimed at breaking
the cycle of violence as well as the blockade. The
sealing of border crossings, the restrictions on the
movement of persons and goods in Gaza — including
humanitarian personnel and the import of food,
medicine and other essential supplies — the complete
prohibition of exports and the cutting off of fuel and
electricity have increased socio-economic deprivation
in Gaza and deepened the already dire humanitarian
crisis. Every aspect of life has been disrupted; poverty,
hunger, disease and unemployment are continuing to
increase, with 80 per cent of Gaza’s civilians now
living below the poverty line and completely
dependent on food aid to survive. In addition, half of
the labour force is unemployed and more than 90 per
cent of industry and businesses are closed.
At the same time, Israel is continuing its massive
settler colonization campaign in the occupied
Palestinian territory, in grave breach of the Fourth
Geneva Convention and its Additional Protocol I. That
effort, also in violation of United Nations resolutions,
shows complete disregard for the 9 July 2004 Advisory
Opinion of the International Court of Justice and flouts
the commitments made by Israel in the peace process.
That campaign includes ongoing illegal confiscation of
Palestinian land, the construction and expansion of
settlements and outposts, the transfer of hundreds of
thousands of Israeli settlers, the construction of the
wall, the establishment of a bypass road system
prohibited to Palestinians and intended to connect the
settlements to each other and to Israel and numerous
other illegal measures.
Israel is continuing its intensive settlement
activities, especially in and around occupied East
Jerusalem, where it is expanding settlements and
transferring settlers. In pursuing its efforts there, Israel
continues to demolish Palestinian homes, impose
residency restrictions and carry out excavations. The
purpose is to alter the city’s demographic composition
and character and to force the “quiet transfer” of
Palestinians and ensure a Jewish majority in the city.
Taken as a whole, the settlements, the wall, the
bypass roads, the checkpoints and other Israeli military
installations occupy huge swaths of Palestinian land,

08-61587

A/63/PV.57

including areas with water and natural resources that
are daily being exploited and which total
approximately 50 per cent of the West Bank’s occupied
land area. Moreover, that vast settler colonial network
is separating Palestinian communities, especially in
East Jerusalem, transforming many of them into
walled-off cantons, thereby causing the displacement
of thousands of civilians.
In addition to the direct humanitarian
consequences for the Palestinian people, the
continuation of Israel’s unlawful colonization
campaign seriously jeopardizes future prospects for
peace. That campaign is altering the demographic
composition, character and status of the occupied
Palestinian territory and is undermining its contiguity,
integrity and unity. It is the main obstacle to efforts to
politically and physically achieve the two-State
solution of Palestine and Israel, living side by side in
peace and security on the basis of the pre-1967
borders, in accordance with Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and
1515 (2003), the Arab Peace Initiative and the Road
Map.
All of Israel’s illegal actions must be firmly
repudiated and condemned. A complete cessation of all
Israeli settlement activity and human rights violations
is required, both in order to stem the human suffering
caused by the occupation and to create a more stable
environment conducive for peacemaking. It is the
collective duty of the international community,
including the Security Council, to uphold the law,
implement all relevant United Nations resolutions and
act in unison to compel Israel to abide by its legal
obligations, truly pursue peace with the aim of
achieving the two-State solution and end the IsraeliPalestinian conflict as well as the entire Arab-Israeli
conflict.
The continuation of the current situation is
unacceptable. There can never be peace and security in
the Middle East as long as the question of Palestine
remains unresolved. Moreover, peace can never be
achieved as long as Israel continues to defy the law,
remains an unwilling or absent partner in the peace
process and continues to attempt to impose an
unlawful, unilateral military solution. Only a peaceful
settlement, including a just solution to the Palestinian
refugee problem, can bring an end to the conflict and
establish the peace, stability and security that we all
seek and to which all peoples are entitled.

08-61587

The Palestinian people and their leadership
remain committed to the peace process on the basis of
the clear principles of international law and the
resolutions of the United Nations, which serve as the
terms of reference for peace. We urge all concerned
parties, including the Quartet, to seize the historic
opportunities created by the Arab Peace Initiative and
the Annapolis conference and make every effort
necessary to help the parties to advance their
negotiations to bring an end to Israel’s occupation of
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, and all
other Arab territories occupied since 1967. We also call
for their help in realizing the Palestinian people’s
inalienable rights, including their right to selfdetermination and to their independent State of
Palestine, as well as a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace.
Indeed, at this critical time, it is incumbent upon
the international community to redouble its efforts to
uphold its legal, political and moral responsibilities to
promote a peaceful settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. After 60 long years, during which both
Palestinian and Israeli peoples have lived in conflict,
no effort should be spared to bring an end to this
tragedy and to the suffering and loss on both sides. In
that regard, we firmly believe in the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and of
international law. We will continue to seek
international support to achieve a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace settlement, in the hope that one
day soon we shall gather here to celebrate the inclusion
of a free and independent Palestine among the family
of nations.
Mr. Hossain (Bangladesh): Let me begin by
thanking the President for scheduling this very
important meeting to coincide with the observance of
the International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People. While reaffirming our full solidarity with the
Palestinian people and lending our unwavering support
to their legitimate struggle for self-determination,
Bangladesh stands firm in its position on the ArabIsraeli conflict in favour of achieving a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East.
The delegation of Bangladesh aligns itself with
the statement that will be made by the representative of
Cuba on behalf of Non-Aligned Movement. In addition
to that, we would like to highlight some of the points
that are of particular concern to us.

11

A/63/PV.57

The people of Palestine have been under Israel’s
illegal occupation for the past four decades. Their
fundamental rights to self-determination and to
establish a sovereign State remain unrealized.
Bangladesh is deeply concerned over the continued
suffering of the Palestinian people and the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in the occupied territory.
Israel has continued to violate international
humanitarian law by committing systematic human
rights violations against the Palestinian people. The
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, remains critical. The blockade of the
Gaza Strip is yet another example of Israel’s violation
of international humanitarian law. Indiscriminate
closures enforced by Israel are impeding access on the
part of humanitarian assistance workers to the occupied
territories, halting commercial activities and causing
the loss of thousands of jobs. That has brought the
economy to the verge of irreversible collapse. Not only
has it restricted access to basic necessities of life, it is
also destroying the social fabric of the Palestinian
people by causing widespread displacement. We
demand the immediate withdrawal of all restrictions on
the movement of Palestinian civilians.
The continued expansion of Israeli settlements in
the occupied territories and the construction of the
separation wall threaten to derail the ongoing peace
negotiations. With the unabated construction of the
wall, which ignores the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice, the occupied territories
are increasingly being fragmented into smaller parts,
which will seriously affect the viability of a Palestinian
State. Bangladesh reiterates its call for the immediate
dismantling of the wall.
My delegation would like to draw attention to the
fact that Israel, as a signatory to the relevant provisions
of the Fourth Geneva Convention, which stipulates the
responsibilities of an occupying Power, cannot, legally
or morally, absolve itself of its responsibilities to
guarantee basic human rights to the people under its
occupation. The General Assembly and the Security
Council, in their resolutions adopted over the years,
have reconfirmed the obligation of Israel to ensure the
basic human rights of the Palestinian people.
Bangladesh believes that only the full and sincere
implementation of the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council can resolve
the Palestinian crisis.

12

The situation in the occupied territories has
further deteriorated during the past year in the face of
relentless violence, destruction, killing, curfew,
closures and systematic violations of human rights and
legal norms by Israeli forces. The concerted Israeli
actions to subdue the resistance of the Palestinian
people in the form of collective punishment have
broken all known international humanitarian norms. As
mentioned in the Secretary-General’s latest report
(A/63/368), the situation on the ground in Israel and
the occupied territories, including East Jerusalem, has
hampered political efforts to achieve the vision of two
States living side by side in peace and security.
We concur with the Secretary-General’s
observation that, with the launch of the Annapolis
process and regular bilateral negotiations between
Israel and Palestinians, new hopes for the achievement
of a peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine
have emerged. Bangladesh is ready to play a supportive
role in that collective endeavour to achieve a just and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East. But unless
the two parties join the process in all sincerity and with
genuine political willingness, the process, like many
other attempts in the past, will only raise some
optimism before unravelling into yet another let-down.
The just and legitimate struggle of the Palestinian
people for self-determination and freedom from foreign
occupation enjoys the strong support and solidarity of
the entire international community. We welcome all
recent regional and international efforts, including the
revival of the Arab Peace Initiative and the Conference
on the Middle East hosted by the United States in
Annapolis last year. We welcome the commitment to
the establishment of the Palestinian State and the
agreement to start final status negotiations to resolve
all core issues, including those pertaining to borders,
refugees, settlements and Jerusalem. In order to be fair,
those issues must be resolved on the basis of previous
agreements, especially the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations and the Security Council, the principle
of land for peace, the Madrid Peace Conference terms
of reference, the Quartet’s Road Map and the Arab
Peace Initiative. That will entail Israel’s complete
withdrawal from occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem. We are hopeful that a peace
treaty will be achieved without further delay in the
near future, and then implemented quickly and
earnestly. Delay and obstruction will only exacerbate

08-61587

A/63/PV.57

the situation and make the prospects for peace even
bleaker.
The Secretary-General’s report reflects the dire
humanitarian situation in the occupied territories. The
international community must exercise its clout to
ensure Israel’s full compliance with its obligations in
all the occupied territories. Israel must also end
policies and actions that seek to change the reality on
the ground and that could prejudice a final settlement,
including the integrity and viability of the future
Palestinian State. The discussions at Annapolis also
recognized the crucial importance of addressing all
aspects of the Arab-Israeli conflict in order to achieve
comprehensive peace. We hope to see tangible progress
on those parallel tracks, so as to reach a just and
durable resolution of the conflict.
A lasting and sustainable resolution of the ArabIsraeli conflict, including the issue of Palestine, which
is at the core of that long-lasting crisis, must be our
collective strategic objective. All Member States must
pledge complete commitment to that objective and
extend their full moral, diplomatic, political and
economic support for its early realization. We strongly
believe that that would not only help to stabilize other
simmering situations in the region but also have a
resounding positive impact on regional and
international peace and security as a whole.
In conclusion, we would like to underscore that
Israeli activities in the occupied territories remain a
matter of grave concern to us. We express our full
solidarity with the Palestinian people and reiterate our
steadfast support for their legitimate and inalienable
rights to a sovereign and independent State with
Jerusalem as its capital.
Mr. Delacroix (France) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union
(EU). The candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the countries
of the Stabilization and Association Process and
potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia; and Ukraine and the Republic
of Moldova align themselves with this statement.
This debate on the situation in the Middle East
and the question of Palestine is being held one year
after the Annapolis conference, whose outcomes
opened up new prospects for the peace process. The
EU wishes to welcome the commitment of both parties
to finding a solution that, in accordance with the

08-61587

Quartet’s Road Map, must permit the creation of an
independent, democratic and viable Palestinian State,
living in peace and security alongside the State of
Israel and its other neighbours.
The EU stresses the importance of the negotiation
process between the parties initiated at Annapolis,
which makes it possible to address all major problems
without exception, in accordance with the
commitments previously agreed between the parties.
The commencement of the negotiations also renewed
the involvement of regional and international partners
in the efforts to achieve a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East. The EU fully
supports the ongoing negotiation process and requests
that the parties maintain a constructive dialogue in
order to find a just and lasting solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict as quickly as possible, based on
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973),
1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003), the principle of land for
peace, the Arab Peace Initiative, the Road Map and
previous agreements between the parties.
In order to consolidate the progress made thus far,
the parties must make further efforts to honour their
previous commitments, in particular those set out in the
Road Map and in the Agreement on Movement and
Access. In that regard, the EU is particularly concerned
at the settlement activities in and around Jerusalem and
in the remainder of the West Bank. Those activities,
which run counter to international law and to Israel’s
Road Map commitments, must be suspended. They
undermine the credibility of the Annapolis process and
affect the future viability of the Palestinian State.
Furthermore, they make the development of the
Palestinian economy more difficult. The EU also calls
on the parties to refrain from any unilateral measure
that could jeopardize the outcome of the negotiations
on a final settlement.
If the peace process is to succeed, it is essential to
put an end to all acts of violence and terrorism between
the parties. The EU firmly condemns the rocket attacks
on Israeli territory carried out by Palestinian militias.
While recognizing Israel’s legitimate right to selfdefence, the EU calls on Israel to exercise the utmost
restraint and stresses that its actions must in no way be
disproportionate to or contravene international law.
The EU condemns in the strongest possible terms the
acts of violence and brutality committed against
Palestinian civilians by Israeli settlers in the West
Bank.

13

A/63/PV.57

The EU commends Egypt’s efforts to overcome
inter-Palestinian divisions and to reunite Palestinians in
the West Bank and the Gaza Strip under the legitimate
Palestinian Authority. The EU is concerned at the
recent return of violence in Gaza and southern Israel.
We call on the parties to respect the calm and hope that
it will lead to increased support for the civilian
population of Gaza, including regular opening of the
crossings for humanitarian or commercial flows, and to
a lasting peace on Israel’s southern border.
The EU appeals once again for the immediate
release of Corporal Gilad Shalit and would like to
commend the efforts made to that end, in particular by
partners in the region. We also call for the immediate
release of Palestinian ministers and legislators held by
Israel.
The EU supports the efforts being made in many
areas by the parties within the framework of the
Annapolis process. In particular, we support the
development of the Palestinian security sector as a
result of the efforts of the European Union Police
Mission for the Palestinian Territories. The EU also
supports the economic development of the future
Palestinian State with continued humanitarian and
financial assistance, in close cooperation with the
Quartet Representative and the EU Special
Representative.
In that connection, the EU wishes to highlight the
importance of the donor conference held in Paris on
17 December 2007, which represented vital support for
the political process initiated in Annapolis. It is now
essential to carefully monitor the outcomes of the
conference in order to ensure that the pledges made in
Paris are actually translated into financial assistance.
The EU thus calls on the donor countries to commit
themselves as soon as possible to fulfilling those
pledges. We also welcome the holding of the
Conference in Support of Palestinian Civil Security
and the Rule of Law, held in Berlin on 24 June 2008.

independence and freedom. Today, we recall that, for
more than 60 years, the Palestinian people have
suffered from statelessness, dispossession and dispersal
in exile, hoping to be able to exercise their right to
return to their lands. For more than 40 years, they have
endured a brutal foreign occupation and have been
denied their inalienable human rights. On this
occasion, we must reaffirm our commitment on the
basis of the Charter of the United Nations, the norms
and principles of international law and the relevant
United Nations resolutions, and we must pledge to
redouble our efforts to bring an end to this injustice by
making the efforts necessary to resolve the question of
Palestine in all its aspects, including a just resolution
of the plight of Palestine refugees, and to achieve long
sought peace and justice.
Regrettably, over the past year, the situation in
the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, has continued to deteriorate and to be
characterized by extreme violence, instability and high
tension. The toll in terms of human lives, the injured,
the displaced, the homeless, the impoverished and
those lacking access to basic needs in the occupied
Palestinian territory, particularly in the besieged Gaza
Strip, continues to increase at an alarming rate. The
poverty rate currently stands at 65.8 per cent in the
occupied Palestinian territory and at 80 per cent in the
Gaza Strip, where the majority of the people depend on
food aid for survival and nearly 50 per cent are
unemployed.

Mrs. Núñez Mordoche (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): On this important occasion, I have the
honour to address the General Assembly on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM).

NAM expresses its great concern at the constant
deterioration of the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem,
particularly as a result of the excessive and
indiscriminate use of force by Israel, the occupying
Power, against the Palestinian civilian population and
many other illegal policies and practices carried out by
Israel, including its inhumane and destructive measures
of collective punishment against the Palestinian
civilian population. Those measures by Israel
constitute grave breaches of international humanitarian
law, violate virtually all of the Palestinian people’s
human rights and have devastated their socio-economic
conditions, resulting in a dire humanitarian crisis.

The International Day of Solidarity with the
Palestinian People is a special opportunity for the
international community to reaffirm its support for the
efforts of that heroic people to exercise their
inalienable right to self-determination and to achieve

In that regard, Israel is continuing to impose
closures by completely sealing off the Gaza Strip,
thereby obstructing the movement of persons and
goods such as food, medicine, fuel and other essential
humanitarian supplies. It is also continuing to impose a

14

08-61587

A/63/PV.57

humiliating and discriminatory network of hundreds of
checkpoints and roadblocks throughout the entire
occupied Palestinian territory. That has resulted in
serious fragmentation and undermined the contiguity
and integrity of the territory, completely isolated East
Jerusalem from the rest of the West Bank and caused
significant damage to the Palestinian economy and
society as a whole.
Moreover, Israel is continuing to detain and arrest
thousands of Palestinian civilians, who are imprisoned
in inhumane conditions and subjected to all forms of
ill-treatment. It is also carrying out intense military
raids and incursions into Palestinian population
centres. That has led to extensive loss of life and injury
to Palestinian civilians, including children, and the
deliberate and widespread destruction of property and
land.
The Non-Aligned Movement condemns Israel’s
prolonged military occupation of Palestinian territory
since 1967 and expresses its grave concern over the
distressing developments and ongoing deterioration of
the situation in the recent period. For four decades, in
its actions in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, Israel has unrelentingly
violated international law, international humanitarian
law and human rights law. As a result, it has caused
immense suffering to the Palestinian people and
obstructed all efforts to achieve a just and lasting peace
agreement.
In addition to the illegal practices and measures
to which I have referred, for four decades, Israel has
carried out deliberate and unlawful policies and
practices aimed at altering the demographic
composition, character and nature of Palestinian
territories and de facto annexing them, in particular
through such measures as the confiscation of large
areas of Palestinian land, the implementation of its
illegal colonial settlement policy and, since 2003, its
illegal construction of a wall in the West Bank,
including in and around East Jerusalem. Israel
continues to pursue those illegal policies and measures
to this day, in total disregard for and in contravention
of international law, including in particular the Fourth
Geneva Convention, United Nations resolutions and
the 9 July 2004 Advisory Opinion of the International
Court of Justice.
The Non-Aligned Movement expresses its grave
concern that, even under the peace process, Israel

08-61587

continues and has accelerated its unlawful settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory,
especially in and around East Jerusalem. Moreover, the
Movement is alarmed by the rising incidence of Israeli
settler violence, harassment and intimidation against
Palestinian civilians, their properties and agricultural
land. We call on the occupying Power to take every
necessary measure to bring an end to settler violence
and lawlessness and to hold the perpetrators of crimes
against Palestinian civilians accountable for their
actions.
NAM condemns all illegal actions by Israel, the
occupying Power, and calls for their immediate
cessation. Israel must cease all settlement activities and
all other illegal policies and practices infringing upon
and violating the human rights of the Palestinian
people. In addition, NAM believes that such illegal
Israeli actions, including ongoing military attacks, have
seriously undermined the functioning of the Palestinian
Authority and have undoubtedly contributed to the
growing polarization of Palestinian society. In that
regard, NAM hopes for a speedy restoration of
Palestinian national unity, which is a crucial element to
achieving the legitimate national aspirations and goals
of the Palestinian people. NAM also calls upon all
concerned parties to make the necessary efforts to
promote reconciliation and unity.
NAM underscores the severity of the situation
faced by the Palestinian civilian population in the Gaza
Strip as a result of the suffocating siege and closure of
all its crossings by Israel, the occupying Power. Such
unlawful collective punishment against the Palestinian
civilian population has caused the further deterioration
of socio-economic conditions. That has led to poverty
and hunger and worsened the humanitarian situation to
alarming levels. In that regard, it is incumbent upon the
international community to demand that Israel respect
all of its obligations under international law, including
humanitarian and human rights law, and cease all such
illegal and inhumane practices against the Palestinian
civilian population of Gaza.
Israel has clear responsibilities as an occupying
Power, from which it must not be absolved. Moreover,
nothing justifies its violation of its obligations and
responsibilities. Israel must comply with its legal
obligations under the Fourth Geneva Convention,
which is applicable to the entire occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. In that regard, it
must be emphasized that the Gaza Strip clearly remains

15

A/63/PV.57

part of the occupied Palestinian territory. NAM
therefore once again urges Israel, the occupying Power,
to put an end to all serious violations of international
law and to fully abide by international humanitarian
law, as it is obliged to do as the occupying Power.
In that regard, NAM demands that Israel open all
crossings to allow for the movement of persons and
goods and the unfettered access and movement of
humanitarian personnel and supplies, including those
of United Nations agencies on the ground. NAM also
demands that Israel honour its responsibility to repair
all the damage caused to the infrastructure of the Gaza
Strip.
Today, we also urge all States and the
international community as a whole to continue to
urgently provide economic and financial assistance to
the Palestinian people during this critical period in
order to alleviate the current financial and
humanitarian crisis they continue to experience.
NAM member countries once again call upon the
Security Council to assume its responsibilities under
the Charter, take the necessary actions to implement its
own resolutions and take the necessary steps to compel
Israel to respect international law and end its
occupation and all illegitimate and illegal practices in
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem. It is unacceptable that the Security Council,
whose primary responsibility is to maintain
international peace and security, continues to fail to
carry out its permanent responsibility with regard to
the Palestinian question until it is resolved in all its
aspects on the basis of international law.
Israel’s unilateral measures in occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, are a
serious threat to the prospects for achieving a
negotiated agreement in the form of the two-State
solution on the basis of the 1967 borders, and
consequently pose a threat to the prospects for peace.
In that regard, NAM expresses its concern about the
little progress that has been made since the
re-launching of the peace process following the
Annapolis Conference, in November of 2007, and the
resumption of direct bilateral negotiations between the
Israeli and Palestinian sides.
Despite ongoing negotiations and meetings
between the two sides, the process continues to be
obstructed and undermined by Israel’s continuing
pursuit of illegal policies and practices in the occupied

16

Palestinian territory and its disrespect for the
commitments it has undertaken in the peace process.
NAM calls upon all concerned parties, including the
Quartet, to make the efforts necessary to promote the
peace process towards the achievement of a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace.
On this occasion, as we gather once again to
address the question of Palestine more than 60 years
after the conflict began, NAM reaffirms its support for
the just cause of the Palestinian people and their efforts
to realize their legitimate national aspirations. NAM
will continue to support the Palestinian people and its
leadership in order to bring an end to the Israeli
occupation begun in 1967, in accordance with the
norms and principles of international law and relevant
United Nations resolutions.
We reaffirm our unwavering commitment to a just
and peaceful solution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
and to the exercise by the Palestinian people of their
inalienable rights, including their right to selfdetermination and sovereignty in their independent
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Mr. Dwivedi (India): We thank the President of
the Assembly for convening this discussion on the
question of Palestine in the General Assembly today as
we mark the International Day of Solidarity with the
Palestinian people.
There can be little doubt that this issue remains of
great concern to the international community.
Instability in that ancient and holy land began with the
question of Palestine, and has since impacted upon the
wider situation in the Middle East and upon the entire
world. As a nation that has had historical and cultural
relations with all the communities of the Middle East
through the millennia and a strong tradition of support
for a just and mutually acceptable solution to the
question of Palestine, India has an abiding interest in
the early resolution of this long-festering problem. The
question of Palestine is a matter for which there is
strong support among all the sectors of society and
political parties in India.
Our meeting takes place almost one year after the
international conference at Annapolis. We in India
shared the sense of anticipation and hope that earnest
and results-oriented discussions would commence at
the earliest time possible, aimed at finding the just,
mutually acceptable and durable solution whose
contours are well-known and hardly need reiteration.

08-61587

A/63/PV.57

We had also hoped that the process of dialogue would
help quickly to address the daily litany of violence,
blockades, rhetoric and privation.
And yet our hopes remain unfulfilled. Settlements
continue to expand in the occupied territories, in
contravention of the Fourth Geneva Convention and
the Road Map. The separation wall continues to be
built, in derogation of the Advisory Opinion of the
International Court of Justice and resolutions of the
General Assembly. The division of Palestinian
territories endures since the events of June 2007,
despite efforts to unify the leadership.
Most damagingly, the blockade of Gaza persists.
Restrictions on movement and the enduring blockade
of Gaza have serious humanitarian consequences in an
already precarious situation. Restrictions on supplies of
fuel and electricity in Gaza have only intensified the
humanitarian challenge.
The announcement late last week of the
suspension of humanitarian aid into Gaza as a result of
the resumption of the blockade was very unfortunate,
troubling and a cause for great concern. While we, too,
hear reports of some resumption of access for
humanitarian relief, we call for the lifting of the
blockade to afford full access to Gaza for the supply of
humanitarian aid and essential commodities.
The security situation also remains a challenge.
Despite efforts to maintain a ceasefire, incidents of
indiscriminate violence and retaliation continue to
erupt, thus perpetuating the cycle of violence. The rise
of incidents of violence by illegal settlers is
particularly disturbing as it runs the risk of inciting
further violence in those highly sensitive locations. In
this context, India notes with satisfaction the positive
progress recorded by the Palestinian Authority in
securing several towns in the Palestinian territory.
It is important that we retain clarity regarding
fundamentals. India believes that all violence must be
eschewed if there is to be a positive atmosphere for any
serious dialogue. However, this is not in itself
adequate. There also needs to be a serious effort to
dismantle the barriers to free movement within the
West Bank and the blockades around Gaza.
Apart from facilitating the entry of humanitarian
relief, it is also essential that normal supplies of basic
facilities, such as power, water and essential
commodities, be resumed. Citizens of Gaza, like any

08-61587

other people, also have the right to expect normal
access to medical facilities. The construction of new
settlements in the occupied territories and of the
separation wall must stop forthwith.
A sovereign, viable and independent State of
Palestine, to which the international community is
committed through all relevant resolutions, cannot be
created under the present circumstances. Our collective
commitment to resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973),
1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003) is devoid of meaning if
we do not ensure that all parties to the conflict abide by
their commitments under the Road Map.
As the Quartet leads the international
community’s efforts to assist the negotiations between
Palestinian and Israeli leaders, we urge the Quartet to
do much more to ensure that the process progresses in
a manner that helps us achieve the desired outcome at
the earliest. India remains in support of a political
solution, based on the Road Map and the Arab Peace
Initiative, which remain the only widely endorsed
framework for an agreement.
While India is not directly involved in supporting
these negotiations, we have maintained our effort to
help avert a larger humanitarian crisis. Last month,
during President Abbas’s visit to India, our Prime
Minister not only reaffirmed India’s earlier
commitment of $20 million — $15 million in project
assistance and $5 million in assistance — but also
announced a grant of $10 million as budgetary support
for the Palestinian National Authority. An additional
sum of $10 million was announced for project
assistance for Palestinian development programmes.
India’s assistance programmes in capacity-building,
and in support for educational programmes were also
expanded.
This leads us to the larger point: The only lasting
solution to the question of Palestine is a just, lasting,
mutually acceptable and comprehensive solution,
drawn up along well-known contours that are set out
and recognized in the relevant Security Council
resolutions. The ongoing violations of the Road Map
and the persistence of actions that vitiate the
atmosphere only make the prospects of an eventual
peace more remote. It remains critical for the parties to
the conflict and the international community, in
particular the Quartet, to redouble efforts to settle the
question of Palestine in the year ahead.

17

A/63/PV.57

India reiterates that an early, amicable and
mutually acceptable solution, in accordance with the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, brooks
no delay.
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): On the
occasion of the International Day of Solidarity with the
Palestinian People, allow me to convey the most
heartfelt greetings of the Government and people of
Viet Nam to the Government and people of Palestine.
The Vietnamese delegation associates itself with
the statement delivered by the representative of Cuba
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Looking back to a year awash with mixed
developments with regard to the Middle East situation,
my delegation welcomes the positive signs visible
across the region, including the continued engagement
of Israel and Palestine in negotiations on final status
issues, guided by the Annapolis process and the Road
Map; the strong support at the international
conferences held in Paris, Bethlehem, London and
Berlin for a viable Palestinian State; and the high-level
diplomacy initiatives and mediation efforts of the
Quartet, the League of Arab States and regional
countries.
Along with the tangible progress reached between
Israel and relevant parties on ceasefires, prisoner
exchange and other areas of mutual concern, further
steps undertaken by the Palestinian Authority to
enhance national unity, security and the rule of law and
to promote foreign investment and socio-economic
development reforms deserve our recognition and
encouragement. We share the intense aspiration for the
process of peace to prevail despite so much frustration
and despair.
This measured progress, albeit doubly prized in
the light of the difficult situation of the past two years,
cannot conceal the fact that, more than six decades
after the General Assembly adopted resolution 181 (II)
on the partition plan, and more than four decades after
the Security Council adopted resolution 242 (1967) on
the Arab-Israel conflict, peace in the Middle East
remains elusive and the Palestinian people continue to
suffer immensely.
This year, despite the investment of so much
hope, energy and effort in the peace process, we
continue to witness a perpetuation of the longest
military occupation in contemporary history, the

18

continued denial and violation of the inalienable rights
of Palestinians, including the right to selfdetermination and the right of Palestinian refugees to
return, and unjustifiable attacks against civilians on all
sides.
Viet Nam shares the concerns of the international
community over Israel’s continued military incursions
into the West Bank, its expansion of illegal settlements
in the Palestinian territory, its ongoing construction of
the separation wall, its imposition of closures and
restrictions on freedom of movement and access to
persons and goods in Gaza, and its continued detention
of thousands of Palestinian prisoners.
In order to further facilitate the ongoing
negotiations, Israel must put an immediate end to its
restrictive measures, open border crossings, and ensure
unfettered access for humanitarian assistance to the
Palestinian people in Gaza. We underline the
importance of the unflagging commitment and
contributions of the international community,
especially the United Nations, the League of Arab
States, the Quartet and regional countries in this
respect.
Peace processes have never been easy ventures.
They can be satisfactorily nurtured only as long as the
peaceful
settlement
of
disputes,
diplomatic
negotiations and dialogue prevail over violence, the
use of military force and confrontation. The Middle
East conflict will remain unresolved unless all parties
concerned go beyond the ordinary in their efforts to
renounce violence, refrain from any action that might
destabilize the explosive situation, implement hardearned agreements and abide scrupulously by their
reciprocal obligations under the Road Map and
international law, particularly human rights and
humanitarian law.
In conclusion, Viet Nam reaffirms its support for
a just, comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle
East on the basis of the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council, including resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003), the Madrid
terms of reference and the principle of land for peace,
as well as the Arab Peace Initiative.
Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Despite
the convening of the Annapolis Conference to revive
the Middle East peace process, new hopes for
achieving a peaceful settlement of the question of
Palestine and realizing the objective of establishing an

08-61587

A/63/PV.57

independent sovereign and viable Palestinian State
before the end of 2008, this objective was not
accomplished, regretfully. The negotiations have not
resulted in any notable progress, while the
humanitarian conditions of the civilian population in
the West Bank and the Gaza Strip have continued to
deteriorate. The progress to which we aspire in
exercising the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people has not been met, because of the illegal
practices by the occupying Power and its constant
rejection of United Nations resolutions.
The General Assembly considered the agenda
item on the question of Palestine in 2007; the
negotiating process continues between the Israelis and
the Palestinians. Yet, Israel, the occupying Power, has
not ceased its unlawful practices in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including the imposition of
collective punishment on the civilian population of the
Gaza strip, as underscored by the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs before the Security
Council in successive meetings. Moreover, Israel has
continued to carry out extrajudicial killings, has used
excessive and indiscriminate force against Palestinian
civilians and has expanded its construction of
settlements,
the
separation
wall,
confiscated
Palestinians lands and destroyed their property. All of
this has prevented the establishment of the necessary
supportive political environment to achieve the peace
objective. It has also affected the endeavours of both
parties to reach an agreement on the final status core
issues, including the Road Map and the Annapolis
understandings.
Consideration of this agenda item on the question
of Palestine by the sixty-third session of the General
Assembly obtains great importance in re-emphasizing
support for the Palestinian people’s endeavours to
restore their inalienable rights, prominent among which
is the right to self-determination and to establish a
viable, independent, geographically contiguous State of
Palestine, living side by side with Israel, within a clear
time frame that addresses the crucial six issues of final
status negotiations with the same effectiveness,
through intensive negotiations between both Israeli and
Palestinian sides, and with the support of the United
Nations and other members of the international
Quartet.
Regrettably, as highlighted in the current report
of the Secretary-General on the peaceful settlement of
the question of Palestine (A/63/368), despite all efforts

08-61587

made by the international community to advance the
bilateral negotiations between the Palestinian Authority
and Israel, and notwithstanding the efforts made by the
Palestinian Authority to fulfil its commitments under
the Road Map, the Israeli side has not honoured its
commitments. The report also refers to the progress
made by the Palestinian Authority in imposing law and
order in the West Bank. It emphasizes that Israel has
not fulfilled its commitments to end its unlawful
settlement activities and states that Israel has continued
to expand settlements at an unprecedented rate, with
the purpose of creating a fait accompli on the ground
and annexing large areas of occupied Palestinian
territory. That has a negative effect on the chances for
successfully carrying out final status negotiations on
such issues as the future border of the Palestinian State
and its geographical contiguity and viability.
Similarly, Israel is continuing its construction of
the separation wall, whose purpose is to bolster its
settlement policy, in contravention of the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice and the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly. That
effort is also part of Israel’s attempts to change the
legal and demographic character of the West Bank in
order to deviate from the 1967 border with the State of
Palestine, established by the Green Line, and to isolate
East Jerusalem from the rest of the occupied West
Bank. It also shows flagrant disregard for the judicial
and moral content of the Court’s advisory opinion and
is a flagrant violation of the Fourth Geneva
Convention.
That is the current situation in the West Bank.
However, the situation in the Gaza Strip is
deteriorating even further as a result of the suffocating
siege imposed by the occupying Power, its closure of
border crossings and its restrictions on movement.
Consequently, there are huge shortages of fuel, food
and medical supplies. Poverty has increased and the
socio-economic and health conditions of the civilian
population have deteriorated. Israel’s most recent
escalation in the Gaza Strip could lead to a resumption
of the horrific vicious cycle of violence and counterviolence. Egypt calls for mutual respect of the truce
agreement and for a halt to the firing of rockets and
shells against civilians in Israel and Palestine.
Moreover, Israel should commit itself to halting all
military operations against Palestinian civilians.
The implementation of the Road Map and the
Annapolis understandings requires that we step up

19

A/63/PV.57

international efforts to achieve agreement on core final
status issues. First, both sides must commit to
implementing several confidence-building measures
under the supervision of the Quartet and the
international community. They must also translate the
outcome of negotiations into reality on the ground,
with a view to achieving a final, lasting and just
solution to the question of Palestine based on Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397
(2002) and 1515 (2003), General Assembly resolution
194 (III), the Arab Peace Initiative, the Road Map, the
Madrid terms of reference and the principle of land for
peace.
The success of the peace process requires serious
efforts by the international community to rectify the
current unlawful situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory and to compel Israel, the occupying Power, to
implement its commitments under the Road Map and
the relevant provisions of international law. It also
requires the immediate cessation of all settlement
activities, the removal of obstacles imposed on
freedom of access and movement, reopening border
crossings into the Gaza Strip, including Palestinian
institutions in occupied East Jerusalem, and the release
of Palestinian prisoners and officials. The Gaza Strip
must also continue to receive fuel supplies and
crossing points should remain open. The contiguity
aspired to by the Palestinian people must also be
ensured, so as to end the suffocating crisis in Gaza.
In that regard, Egypt continues to support efforts
aimed at restoring the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people and to achieve their legitimate
aspiration to establish an independent and viable State
on the basis of two States living side by side. The
solution must also include compensation and the right
of return of refugees, as well as an effort to achieve
Palestinian national reconciliation and the preservation
of the integrity of Palestine’s territory as a single
contiguous political entity in the West Bank and the
Gaza Strip under the leadership of the Palestinian
Authority. Egypt will continue its efforts to maintain
international support until those goals are achieved.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): On behalf of Syria, I would like to express our
deep gratitude to the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian people and its
Chairman, Ambassador Paul Badji, as well as to the
Secretariat’s Division for Palestinian Rights. I would
also like to express our gratitude to the Department of

20

Public Information’s special information programme
on the question of Palestine for its contributions to
implementing resolutions of international legitimacy
related to the Palestinian cause, which call for putting
an end to the suffering of a people that has lasted for
approximately 60 years — the Nakba. I should also
like to thank the President of the General Assembly for
his conscientious appeal in his statement at the opening
of this meeting.
This year’s meeting on the question of Palestine
coincides with six decades of the Palestinian people’s
Nakba and continuous pain and suffering. That has
included their forced displacement and eviction from
their Palestinian homeland and has prevented refugees
from returning to their cities and villages after foreign
settlers seized their homes. All that took place in
blatant disregard for resolutions of international
legitimacy, international law and human rights law.
The General Assembly is meeting to debate the
agenda item entitled “Question of Palestine” in order to
reaffirm its support for the Palestinian people in their
struggle against Israeli occupation and so they can
achieve self-determination and establish their
independent State on their land and fully regain their
legitimate rights. Those include the right of refugees to
return on the basis of resolution 194 (III) of 1948.
Despite the fact that the United Nations has adopted
hundreds of resolutions calling on Israel to end its
occupation of Arab territories, Israel continues to
refuse to heed the will of international legitimacy. The
Palestinian people continue to suffer under the yoke of
Israeli occupation and to be the victims of a policy of
murder and destruction.
In the light of this unfortunate dichotomy of
Israel’s non-compliance with the will of the
international community, on the one hand, and the
continued suffering of the Palestinian people on the
other, it is critical for the United Nations to uphold its
responsibilities to the Palestinians in order to find a
just solution to this question. It was, after all, this
international Organization that adopted resolution
181 (II); therefore, all Member States bear the
consequences of the lack of implementation of that
resolution to the present day. The President of the
General Assembly was indeed correct and courageous
when he described the United Nations inability to
secure the establishment of a Palestinian State as the
most significant failure of this Organization since its
inception.

08-61587

A/63/PV.57

We recall General Assembly resolution 273 (III)
which set the conditions for the acceptance of Israel to
membership in the United Nations. Among the
conditions were Israel’s abidance by the principles of
the Charter and respect for these principles and for
relevant resolutions, particularly resolutions 181 (II)
and 194 (III), both of which affirm the right of the
Palestinians to establish a Palestinian State on their
national soil. These resolutions also establish the right
of return to Palestinian refugees who were forcibly
removed from their homes.
We must recall that the General Assembly when
accepting Israel’s United Nations membership, duly
noted Israel’s statements and explanations presented to
the Special Political Committee at the time as well as
its commitment to implement those two resolutions.
This commitment, however, was very interestingly
removed from the framework of Israel’s international
accountability.
The Security Council has taken no serious
decision on this question because of the objections of a
well-known permanent member State and because of
the automatic bias of some other countries in favour of
Israel’s rejection of its obligations. All of this has sent
the wrong message from the international community
to Israel, declaring, in fact, that Israel is above the rule
of law.
This year, our meeting is being held while the
entire world is watching the Palestinian people being
subjected to destruction, killing and displacement that
are unprecedented in contemporary history. All of this
is a result of Israel’s practice of State terrorism against
the defenceless Palestinian people.
Israel continues to desecrate places of worship
and demolish safe homes. It continues to prevent
medical supplies, water, food and electricity from
reaching an entire population. Using the pretext of
archaeological interests, it continues to excavate in
areas surrounding places of worship, including the
Al-Aqsa
Mosque,
Al-Haram
al-Sharif
and
Al-Maghariba Gate.
Israel continues its policy of collective
punishment and intentional destruction. The most
recent example is the targeting of the entire
infrastructure of the Gaza Strip, which is under a
suffocating siege. Israel has closed border crossings,
thus transforming the Gaza Strip into the largest openair prison in the world.

08-61587

Israel continues to expand its settlements, build
the racist separation wall, destroy infrastructure and
confiscate land. It continues to detain and liquidate key
political personalities who were democratically elected
by the Palestinian people. Nor has Israel spared the
United Nations; Israeli occupation forces continue to
detain and kill members of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East and to limit the movement of its staff, inspect its
vehicles and storm its buildings in violation of the
Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the
United Nations of 1946.
At a time when Arab States are seeking to make
peace, Israel is pursuing its policy of annexing land by
intensifying settlement activity in the occupied
territories and by its continued construction of the
racist separation wall, in blatant violation of the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice.
Most countries of the world and the United
Nations itself, in all its bodies and organs, have
adopted a clear position on Israeli settlement activity,
condemning and demanding a halt to it. The
intensification of Israeli settlement activity contradicts
the desire to achieve peace, is a real obstacle to peace,
and only worsens the situation in the region.
Syria reaffirms its continuing support for the
rights of the Palestinian people to regain their occupied
territories and to establish their independent State, with
Jerusalem as its capital. Syria underscores the need to
regain Palestinian national unity through a national
dialogue that would strengthen the Palestinians’
negotiating position and bolster the will of the
Palestinian people. Furthermore, Syria is working to
that end in its capacity as Chair of the Arab summit.
Syria has always believed that a just and
comprehensive peace can be achieved only through
Israel’s implementation of the relevant United Nations
resolutions, at the forefront of which are Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), as well
as Council resolution 497 (1981), pertaining to the
Syrian Golan Heights. Syria also calls for a revival of
the peace process launched at the Madrid Conference
of 1991.
The Arab Peace Initiative, which was endorsed by
the 2002 Arab Summit in Beirut and reaffirmed by the
Arab Summit Conference held this year in Damascus,
reflects the desire of Arabs to achieve a just and
comprehensive peace and is a sound foundation for the

21

A/63/PV.57

achievement of this peace in a manner that is in line
with resolutions of international legitimacy.
Mr. Mansour (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): Today
as we are discussing agenda item 16 on the question of
Palestine, we are also commemorating the International
Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian People.
This is an opportunity of particular meaning,
because it allows us once again to consider the difficult
situation endured by the Palestinian people, the deep
suffering that they experience every day and the denial
of their basic rights. That is why we reaffirm our
commitment to step up our efforts in order to put an
end to this human tragedy. We also urge all those who
can bring their influence to bear to step up their efforts
in order to bring about a prompt and appropriate
settlement of the crisis in the occupied Palestinian
territories.
Tunisia would like to express its deep concern
regarding Israel’s continuing settlement activities and
its provocative practices against the Palestinian people.
In fact, hundreds of thousands of Palestinians are
enduring great difficulties owing to the siege imposed
by Israel, which impedes the delivery of basic
humanitarian assistance and food. This also impedes
the progress of negotiations and undermines peace and
stability in the region.
At a time when the international community
hopes to reinvigorate the peace process and
negotiations, Tunisia is committed to the protection of
rights based on justice and the legitimacy and
principles of international law. We have always been a
champion of the just cause of the Palestinian people.
This courageous people has always had the full support
of Tunisia, which has stood with the Palestinian people
in their struggle and has always demonstrated that
solidarity, so the Palestinian people can restore their
legitimate national rights and establish their
independent State on their own soil.
My country has spared no opportunity to reaffirm
its ongoing principled support for these policies and
the President of the Republic, Zine El Abedine Ben Ali,
has on many occasions expressed that Tunisia would
always stand with the just Palestinian cause, the cause
of justice and peace in the region and worldwide and a
cause that Tunisia holds most dear.
The responsibility to find a comprehensive, just
and lasting solution to the Palestinian question is a

22

historical and shared responsibility of the international
community, including all its components. Here we will
not fail to reaffirm our appreciation of the continuous
efforts of the international community and the United
Nations to provide the necessary support for the
Palestinian people. I would like, in particular, to
highlight the action of United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
and the actions of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
It is crucial that we step up our efforts and
provide all the necessary support to the Palestinian
people so that we can restore peace in the region.
President Ben Ali has stated that Tunisia, based on its
commitment to peace as a strategic choice and its
tireless commitment to the just Palestinian cause, calls
upon the United Nations to step up its efforts to
implement the rights of the Palestinian people so that
that people can live as it deserves in freedom and
dignity. Tunisia reaffirms its commitment to continue
its efforts and to join any actions or any initiatives that
are pursued in order to bring about a just overall
settlement to the Arab-Israeli conflict and in order to
enable peace and security to reign in the Middle East
region.
It is necessary to pool all the efforts of the
international community in order to put an end to the
suffering of the brotherly Palestinian people. We also
urge the Quartet and the international community to lay
the groundwork for Israeli-Palestinian negotiations in
order to achieve the peace to which the peoples of the
region aspire, based on international legality, the
relevant Security Council resolutions and the Arab
Peace Initiative.
Mr. Al Oyaidi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): I
wish to thank the President of the General Assembly
and His Excellency the Secretary-General for the
efforts they are exerting to establish international peace
and security, given the evolving conditions and threats
that are currently facing the world. The contemporary
issues that we are facing require cooperation among
States in order to maintain international peace and
security in the world, as well as to establish stability.
The situation also requires the United Nations to play a
double role: to ensure the effective and efficient power
of international legitimacy in order to keep the dangers
of war and conflicts at bay, as well as to work to
resolve all issues through peaceful means in

08-61587

A/63/PV.57

accordance
legitimacy.

with

the

principles

of

international

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia participated, along
with other Arab States, at the peace talks held in
Madrid in 1991 and in various other rounds of
multilateral negotiations, in the hope of ending the
unjust occupation of the Palestinian territories and
other occupied Arab lands. All Arabs look forward to
an end of the Arab-Israeli conflict. However, Israel has
not implemented any of the agreements, and stability
continues to be an unlikely possibility in light of
Israel’s continued construction of settlements, the
racist separation wall, the confiscation of land, the
demolition of homes, as well as the practices of
depriving the Palestinian people of their rights and of
preventing humanitarian access.
Palestinians are still suffering from violence and
terrorism committed by armed and fanatical Israeli
settlers. Moreover, Israeli occupation forces continue
to carry out operations aimed at destroying the
Palestinians and their establishments and at further
oppressing and torturing them. Furthermore, current
Israeli practices are aimed at forcing the Palestinians to
surrender to despair and frustration.
Arabs chose peace, not surrender, and their
demands remain as follows: implementation of
international legitimacy, especially Security Council

08-61587

resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the
principle of land for peace, as well as a just and
comprehensive peace. This requires a full Israeli
withdrawal from the Arab lands occupied in 1967, as
well as a return of Palestinian refugees to their homes
and the restoration of their rights and compensation for
those who do not wish to return. Moreover, the
Palestinian people must be allowed to exercise their
right to self-determination and to establish their State
on their national soil, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its
capital. There must also be an Israeli withdrawal from
the Syrian Golan Heights and from the Sheba’a Farms
in South Lebanon.
The Israeli-Arab struggle is still a dominant
factor in many of the issues in the Middle East, as it
has been for the past six decades. It has given rise to
terrorism and extremism and is a basic obstacle for
development and reform efforts in the area. All Arab
States have underscored their commitment to a just and
comprehensive
peace
based
on
international
legitimacy, and these countries are still waiting for a
serious Israeli commitment to that. Partial solutions do
not support the ongoing negotiations between the two
sides to reach a comprehensive final status solution.
This requires the Israeli side to immediately halt
settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian territory.
Israel’s continued settlement activities only empties
those negotiations of any meaning.
The meeting rose at 6 p.m.

23
