V.

157

Resolutions adopted on thc reports of the Second Committce

-------------

--------------

cal development problems and attain thcir objectivcs, giving due regard to the special nccds of the lcast dcvcloped
among them,
1. Decides to Jiquidate thc United Nations Emcrgency
Operation Trust Fund and to allocate thc remaining balance to existing funds and programmes of the United
Nations as follows:
(a) Seventy per cent shall be channelled through
United Nations Development Programme-administered
funds to finance urgently needed projects, primarily in the
food and agricultura) sectors in countries affiicted by famine and malnutrition as a result, particularly, of scvere or
prolonged drought, with special emphasis on African
countries;
(b) Eighteen per cent shall be channelled through the
United Nations Relief and Works Agcncy for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, especially to its educational
programme;
(e) Twelve per cent shall be channelled through the
United Nations Development Programmc for the purpose
ofeconomic and technical co-operation among developing
countries; these funds shall be allocated to activities in
economic and technical co-operation among developing
countries of critica) importancc to developing countries,
according to the priorities set by them;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary
action to ensure that the funds are allocatcd in accordance
with the present resolution as soon as possible;
3. Also requests the Administrator of thc U nited
Nations Development Programme to rcport to the Governing Council at its thirty-first session on action takcn to
implement the present resolution;
4. Further requests the Secretary-Gcneral to monitor
closely the implementation of the prcsent resolution, to
make available progress rcports and to rcport fully to the
General Assembly at its thirty-ninth scssion.
f04th plcnarr meeling
20 Deccmhcr 1983

38/202. Strengthening of the capacity of the United
Nations system to respond to natural disasters and other disaster situations
The General Assemb!y,
Reca!!ing its resolutions 2816 (XXVI) of 14 Deccmbcr
1971, by which the Office of thc Unitcd Nations Disaster
Relief Co-ordinator was established, and 36/225 of 17
December 198 I, by which it reaffirmed the mandate ofthe
Office and, inter afia, called for thc strcngthening and
improvement of its capacity and effectivencss,
Recalling also its resolution 37/144 of 17 December
1982, in which the Assembly rccognized that, in order to
attain an effective co-ordination system of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance, it was essential to strengthen
and improve the capacity and effecti veness of the Officc of
the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator and of
the United Nations system as a whole,
Recalling Jurther Economic and Social Council resolution 1983/47 of 28 July 1983,
Recognizing that, as a result of thosc resolutions and
other relevant resolutions and decisions, there is now in
place a workable system to promotc, facilitate and coordinate relief activities carried out by the l lnited Nations
178 A/38/202-E/ 198 3/94.
179 A/38/201-E/198J/69 and Corr 1 ande

system, in co-opcration with Govcmments and voluntary
agennes.
No/ing that the operation of that system has been much
improvcd but that therc remains a need for its full application.
Noting(urlhcr with appreciation the cffective response of
thc Office of the Umted Nations Disaster Relief Coordinator to reccnt maJor disasters,
Recogniz1ng that shortage of resources has been a constraint on an effectivc response of the United Nations to
disastcr situations.
Rccognizing a/so that the primary responsibility for
administration, relief operations and disaster preparedness
lics with the affected countries and that the major part of
thc material assistance and human effort in disaster relief
comes from thc Govemments of those countries,
Rccognizing furlhcr the importance of the contribution
of thc lnternational Committee of the Red Cross, the
League of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies and
appropriate voluntary organizations,
l. rakes no1c with apprcciation of the comprehensive
report of the Secretary-General on strengthening the
capacity of the United Nations system to respond to natural disasters and other disaster situations, 178 as well as of
his report on the work of the Office of the United Nations
Disaster Relief Co-ordinator 179 and of the statement
made by thc Co-ordinator on JO November 1983; 18º
'
l•./oles with particular interest the observations and
conclusions of the Secrctary-General relating to the transportation, more rapid delivery and distribution of relief
supplics. reconstruction and rehabilitation and the need
for more effeetive monitoring and evaluation procedures
to assess the way in which thc Office ofthe United Nations
Disaster Relicf Co-ordinator and the intemational community as a whole havc dealt with the mobilization and
provision of disaster relief in particular cases;
3. Rccognizcs the importance of disaster preparedness
and prcvcntion activitics, and calls upon the Offi.ce of the
linited Nations Disastcr Relief Co-ordinator, Govemments and agencies involved to ensure that a high leve) of
attcntion is given to them;
4. Rcafjirms the sovereignty of individual Member
States, rccognizes the primary role of each State in caring
for thc victims of disasters occurring in its territory and
stresses that ali relief operations should be carried out and
co-ordinated in a manncr consisten! with the priorities and
needs of the countries concemed;
5. 5itresscs that the quality and appropriateness of
material and other assistance provided by the intemational community should meet the particular needs of the
populations of disaster-affected areas;
6. Rcpca/s its cal! to ali Govemments and competen!
organs and organizations to co-operate with the Office of
the lJnitcd Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator and to
improve. in particular, their flow of information on relief
assistance, action, plans and needs;
7. Rcquests the Officc of the U nited Nations Disaster
Rclief Co-ordinator to continue and improve further the
flow of information to Govemments, organizations and
agencies concerned, so that a more complete picture of
rclicf aetivities, assistance received and further requiremcnts may be provided to ali concemed;
8. Stresscs the need for the continuance and further
strengthening ofrelations between the Office ofthe United
Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator and appropriate voluntary organizations working in the arca of disaster relief,
!XII 0!/1< 1,,/ Record,· o/ 1he c;,•11aa/
(

·, 11>11111rt,·c

hsemNr. lhmv-1.·11?hth Sesmm, Sl'Cond

14th nweting. rara·, 1 -1 ~

General Assembly-Thirty-eighth Session

158

including the Intcrnational Committce of thc Red Cross
and the League of Red Cross and Red Cresccnt Socicties,
and requests the Secretary-General to consider thc establishment of a small consulta ti ve group composed of exccutives of these major relief organizations, in their individual
capacity, to provide advice, upon request, to the United
Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator in the assessment of
relief needs and in the preparation and execution of concerted relief programmes;
9. Authorizes the Secrctary-General to permit thc
Office of the United Nations Disastcr Relief Co-ordinator
to respond to requests for emcrgency disaster assistancc up
to a total of $600,000 in any one year, with a normal ceiling of $50,000 per country in the case of any one disaster,
within existing resources as far as possible:
10. Once again urgently ca/Is upan ali States to
respond positively and expeditiously to the SecretaryGeneral's appeals for contributions to meet natural disasters and other disaster situations;
11. Appeals to Governments for urgent voluntary contributions, channelled through the Trust Fund ofthe Office
of the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator, to
enable the Office to cover, inter afia, unforeseen expenses
in connection with disaster relief operations;
12. Requests the Secretary-Gcneral, in consultation
with the Governments of both donor and recipient countries, as well as with appropriate agencies, to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session, through the
Economic and Social Council at its second regular session
of 1984, specific proposals to follow up the conclusions
and problems identified in his comprehensive report, as
well as in the present resolution.
I04th p/enary meeting
20 Deccmher 1983

38/203.

Assistance to Ghana

The General Assemhly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 1983/
44 of 28 July 1983, in which the Council cxpressed its
deep concern at the adverse economic conditions in
Ghana, exacerbated by the sudden repatriation early in
1983 of over one million Ghanaians,
Having heard the statement made by the Secretary for
Foreign Affairs ofGhana on 11 October 1983, 181 in which
he expressed appreciation for the humanitarian assistance
rendered by Governments, the United Nations system and
other organizations during the difficult period of the influx
ofreturnees and his appreciation ofthe action taken by the
Secretary-General, and described his country's serious economic and financia] situation,
Having considered the report of thc SecretaryGeneral, 182 to which is annexed the report of the multiagency mission which he dispatched to Ghana in May
1983,
Noting from the report the serious economic and financia! problems that confront Ghana and the efforts made by
the Government, and people of Ghana to cope with these
problems and to rehabilitate returnees,
Taking note of the recommended programme of assistance to Ghana, drawn up by the mission in consultation
with the Government, concerning short-term emergencyrelated and medium-term recovery-related assistance, 183
Affirming the urgent need for international action to
assist the Government and the people of Ghana in their
IBI /bid., Plenan• Mcerin1;s. 28th meeting. para,. 67-1()4

l82 A/38/215.

•

•

cfforts towards cconomic rccovcry and rehabilitation of
rcturnecs.
l. Jake.1 note of thc cfforts made by the Government
and peoplc of Ghana to rehabilita te returnees;
2. l:"xprcsscs 11.1 apprcciation to the Secretary-General
for his prompt action and for the report of the multiagcncy mission on thc economic situation of Ghana and
the additional assistance required by that country to cope
with the problems cxacerbated by the influx of returnees;
3. Fxprcsscs 1ts gratitudc to ali States and organizations that ha ve provided emergency humanitarian assistancc to Ghana:
4 l:"ndorscs thc assessment and recommendations of
thc multi-agency mission annexcd to the report of the Secrctary-General pertaining to assistance to Ghana; 182
5. l 'rgently rcilcratcs thc appea/ made by the Economic and Social CounciL in its resolution 1983/44, to ali
Statcs, intcrgovernmental and non-governmental organi1ations and the specialized agencies and programmes of
the United Nations system to support fully the efforts of
the Government ofGhana to mobilize funds for its special
cconomic assistance programme and respond generously
to the short-term and medium-term programmes drawn
up by the multi-agency mission in consultation with the
Government of Ghana;
6. Requcsts thc appropriate organizations and
programmes of the United Nations system-in particular
the lJnited Nations Development Programme, the World
Bank, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, the International Fund for Agricultura!
Development, the World Food Programme, the World
Health Organization, the United Nations Children's Fund
and the United Nations Industrial Development Organization-to maintain and expand their programmes of assistance to Ghana, to co-operate closely with the SecretaryGcncral in bis efforts to organize an effective international
programmc of assistance and to report periodically to him
on the steps they have taken and the resources they have
madc available to hclp that country;
7. Ca/Is upon regional and interregional organizations
and other intergovernmental bodies and nongovcrnmental organizations, as well as international financia! institutions, to give urgent consideration to the establishment of a programme of assistance to Ghana or, where
one is already in cxistence, to the expansion of that programme;
8. Requests the Secretary-Ueneral:
(a) To continue his cfforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of international
assistance to Ghana:
(b) To keep the situation regarding assistance to Ghana
under constant review, to maintain close contact with
Member States, regional and other intergovernmental
organizations, the specialized agencies and international
financia! institutions concerned, and to apprise the Economic and Social Council, at its second regular sessions of
1984 and 1985, of the current status of the special economic assistance programme for Ghana, including contributions to the United Nations Trust Fund for Special Economic Assistance Programmes, in accordance with
Council resolution 1983/ 44;
(e) To report on the progress made in the economic situation of Ghana and in organizing and implementing the
programme of assistance for that country, in time for the
18 '

!!11d.. annc.,, ",L'Ct. \'
