S/PV.7374

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7374th meeting

Friday, 30 January 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Barros Melet/Mr. Llanos/Mr. Olguín Cigarroa .. . . . . . .

(Chile)

Members:

Angola .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Lamek
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Haniff
Mr. McLay
Mr. Sarki
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Letter dated 16 January 2015 from the Permanent Representative of Chile to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2015/32)

15-02652 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1502652*

S/PV.7374

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/32, which contains a letter dated
16 January 2015 from the Permanent Representative of
Chile to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral, transmitting a concept note on the item under
consideration.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Protection of civilians in armed conflict

I now give the floor to Ms. Kang.

Letter dated 16 January 2015 from the
Permanent Representative of Chile to
the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2015/32)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Afghanistan,
Albania, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Belgium, Botswana, Brazil, Burundi, Canada,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Egypt, Germany,
Guatemala, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Luxembourg, Mexico, Morocco, the Netherlands,
Pakistan, Poland, the Republic of Korea, Rwanda,
Senegal, Slovakia, South Africa, the Sudan, Sweden,
Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand,
Turkey, Ukraine, Uruguay and Zimbabwe to participate
in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Kyung-wha
Kang, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator;
Ms. Helen Durham, Director for International Law and
Policy at the International Committee of the Red Cross;
and Ms. Ilwad Elman of the NGO Working Group on
Women, Peace and Security.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Ioannis Vrailas, Deputy Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Chargé
d’affaires ad interim of the Permanent Observer Mission
of the Holy See to the United Nations to participate in
this meeting, in accordance with the provisional rules
of procedure and the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

2/82

begin

30/01/2015

its

Ms. Kang: On behalf of Ms. Valerie Amos, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, I have the honour to
deliver the following statement.
It has been more than 15 years since the Security
Council broke new ground by recognizing the protection
of civilians as central to its mandate. Since then, the
Council has taken important steps to implement its
commitments to protect civilians. The Council has
increasingly identified protection of civilians as a
priority task in many of the peacekeeping operations
it has created. The Secretary-General has launched
the Human Rights Up Front initiative to reinvigorate
system-wide coherence and commitment to preventing
and responding to serious human rights violations that
could lead to mass atrocities. Humanitarian actors have
also strengthened their policies and programmes to
protect civilians in crises, as exemplified in the 2013
Inter-Agency Standing Committee statement on the
centrality of protection.
Despite these positive developments across the
United Nations system, the task of protecting civilians
in armed conflict has become more and more onerous
over the years as the scale and level of brutality and
violence committed against civilians in armed conflict
have continued to rise. From Syria, Iraq, Yemen and
Libya to the Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Nigeria, South Sudan, the
Sudan, Ukraine and many others, civilians caught up
in armed conflict are being killed and maimed, fleeing
their homes and fearing for their lives. Now more than
ever, the protection of civilians needs to be at the top of
our priorities.
The need for protection has increased dramatically
in recent years, mainly as a result of armed conflict.
At the start of 2014, humanitarian organizations
appealed for aid to help 52 million people in urgent
need of assistance and protection. By the end of the
year, the number had gone up by almost 50 per cent to
76 million. The overwhelming majority of these people

15-02652

30/01/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

are civilians affected by conflict, and the majority are
women and girls.
The number of people displaced by conflict has
reached levels not seen since the Second World War. At
the end of 2013, there were more than 33 million people
living in internal displacement caused by conflict
and violence. The majority have been displaced for
several years or even decades. The average length of
displacement is now 17 years. Of course, one of the
worst examples of this is in Syria, where more than half
of the population is currently displaced — 7.6 million
internally, some repeatedly, and 3.8 million as refugees
in neighbouring countries. But the number is growing
elsewhere, too — for example in Darfur, where 450,000
people were displaced last year, adding to the more
than 2 million already in internally displaced persons
camps.
Another area of serious concern is the widespread
use of explosive weapons in populated areas. Figures
from 2013 show that when explosive weapons were
used in populated areas, 93 per cent of the casualties
were civilians. The Secretary-General’s call to avoid
the use of some explosive weapons in populated areas
has obviously remained unheeded.
The Security Council has taken concrete action
in a number of cases to implement its commitments
to protecting civilians in armed conflict, and it has
recognized the particular protection needs of women
and girls. In 2010, the Council adopted resolution 1960
(2010), which requested the Secretary-General to set
up monitoring and reporting arrangements on conflictrelated sexual violence, and called upon parties to
conflict to make clear commitments to combatting
sexual violence. Resolution 2122 (2013) put in place
stronger measures to enable women to participate
in conflict resolution and recovery. In addition, the
Council has adopted sanctions expressly targeting
perpetrators of sexual violence in various conflicts
around the world.
But the scourge of sexual violence in armed conflict
is far from being rooted out. Indeed, in most conflicts,
women and girls continue to be disproportionately
affected by sexual violence, and the brutalization of
women remains a consistent and persistent feature of
conflict. For example, as it has captured territory in
Iraq and Syria, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) has used and punished women to demonstrate its
power. Women have been repeatedly raped, forced into
marriage and sold into slavery. Nigerian women and girls

S/PV.7374

have given harrowing accounts of their experiences at
the hands of Boko Haram. In Afghanistan, the number
of women and girls killed or injured — including
through targeted attacks against women in public roles
and against girls seeking education — has continued to
increase at an alarming rate.
Women and children must also face the increased
vulnerability brought about by displacement, family
separation, the destruction of civilian infrastructure and
restrictions on humanitarian aid. Women and children
make up some 80 per cent of refugees around the world
and the majority of internally displaced persons. Women
and girls who are displaced are particularly at risk of
being targeted for all forms of gender-based violence.
Harmful practices, such as forced and early marriage,
as well as survival sex, are also more common during
displacement.
Simply put, crisis exacerbates gender inequalities.
While entire communities suffer the impact of armed
conflict, women and girls are often the first to lose their
rights to education, to political participation and to
livelihoods, among other rights being bluntly violated.
These are manifestations of deeper, systemic problems.
We need to better understand the social, economic and
power dynamics that result in the continued enslavement
of and use of violence against women, particularly in
conflict situations. We must also make concerted efforts
to expand women’s representation and participation
in rule-of-law processes and protection mechanisms.
Women must be included in the political leadership,
security forces and accountability mechanisms of
countries.
To facilitate these efforts on the ground,
17 women protection advisers have been deployed to
six peacekeeping operations and embedded in the
offices of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGenerals. The United Nations Mission in South Sudan
regularly consults displaced women in the protection
of civilians sites through consultation groups that have
been formed. These consultations help to ensure that
prevention and protection strategies led by the Mission
take into account the perceptions and security needs
of women. Such good practices are being replicated in
other mission and non-mission settings.
The primary responsibility for protecting and
assisting civilians affected by armed conflict lies
with the parties to the conflict. Yet many parties have
demonstrated complete disregard for their obligations
under international humanitarian law and human rights

15-026523/82

S/PV.7374

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

law. In some cases, parties to conflict deliberately
target civilians and use tactics designed to cause them
the greatest possible harm. In Nigeria, Boko Haram
has massacred hundreds of civilians and destroyed
thousands of homes, schools and medical clinics during
the past few weeks. This follows repeated incidents
of kidnapping of hundreds of women and children. In
Syria and Iraq, all parties have been targeting civilians
based on ethnic and religious grounds.
Parties to conflict are also denying people access
to basic assistance such as food and medicines. For
example, in Syria, the routine removal of medical
supplies and equipment from humanitarian convoys has
prevented critical medical aid from reaching those who
desperately need it. Violence, insecurity and movement
restrictions have further hindered access to medical
care, including reproductive health care for women and
girls. It is estimated that nearly 1,500 women give birth
in dire conditions each day in Syria, and that access
to obstetric and neonatal care is virtually non-existent
in some ISIL-controlled areas in Iraq, such as Anbar
province. Even siege is being used as a tactic of warfare
in Syria, where some 212,000 people are in areas that
are totally blocked off. They cannot get out and we
cannot get the required aid in.

30/01/2015

The efforts of humanitarian workers and peacekeepers
are no substitute for timely and resolute political action
to prevent and resolve conflict. And women must be
full participants in the process. On the ground, we need
to be more attuned to the specific threats that civilians
are facing and the risk of escalation of violence and
violations, often manifested through heightened
discrimination and repression of minorities, including
women and girls. When we see early warning signs, we
must be able to act quickly and effectively. That is at
the core of the Secretary-General’s Human Rights Up
Front initiative.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Ms. Kang
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Durham.
Ms. Durham: On behalf of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), let me first thank
you, Mr. President, for inviting the ICRC to address the
Security Council during this crucial and timely debate
on a subject that is at the heart of our humanitarian
mission. The protection of civilians in armed conflict
has been a regular item on the Council’s agenda for
many years — proof that it remains a matter of concern
for the international community.

International law is clear: parties to conflict are
responsible for meeting the basic needs of persons
under their control. Consent for relief operations must
never be withheld on arbitrary grounds. If parties are
unable or unwilling to provide adequate assistance, they
should allow and facilitate rapid, safe and unimpeded
access to people in need, including the immediate free
passage of medical supplies. Yet, time and again, we
see parties to conflict violating those basic obligations
with impunity, with grave consequences for civilians.

Yet I regret to say that, based on our observations
in the field, that I cannot report any significant progress
in the way armed conflicts are being waged, or any
significant alleviation of their impact on civilians
throughout the world. As in the past, civilians are
too often directly targeted by warring parties. Tens
of millions more suffer the indirect effects of armed
conflict. That is most vividly illustrated by the fact
that the number of refugees and internally displaced
persons is higher than it has ever been.

Parties to conflict must be pressed to do more
to comply with their legal obligations and ensure
accountability whenever such obligations are violated.
But the responsibility does not lie solely with the parties
themselves. The Security Council and the international
community must take steps to tackle the impunity
that continues to fuel many conflicts, as well as the
endless flow of weapons and arms. There is nothing
that emboldens violators more than knowing that they
will not be brought to account for the crimes they have
committed.

The single most important measure to improve
this situation is to make sure that State and non-State
parties to armed conflict comply with their legal
obligations under international humanitarian law and
other applicable norms. This is imperative, whatever
parallel efforts are under way, to find political solutions
to a conflict. In that regard, the Security Council
has a significant role to play to ensure that those
directly responsible for protecting civilians meet their
responsibilities in full. Every State party to the Geneva
Conventions also has an obligation in that connection:
Article 1 common to the four Geneva Conventions calls
on States parties to respect and ensure respect for the
Conventions in all circumstances.

We also need to build up our collective capacity to
find political solutions to conflicts at an early stage,
rather than struggling to cope with the consequences.
4/82

15-02652

30/01/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The Council having chosen today to address the
challenges and needs facing women and girls in armed
conflict and post-conflict settings, I would like to
highlight the situation of women during armed conflict,
with a specific focus on the subject of sexual violence.
All that follows is based on the ICRC’s field experience
and activities.
As a group, women are not inherently vulnerable in
armed conflict. They may be victims or perpetrators,
fighters or bystanders; or they may be actors of
influence. Armed conflict changes the circumstances
of all the people it touches. Women are made vulnerable
mainly by the conditions that are imposed on them,
not by their sex. At this point, it is critical to remind
ourselves that fighters are also afforded protection by
international humanitarian law, particularly after they
are hors de combat. That includes protection against
sexual violence. All victims of armed conflict must be
treated humanely, without adverse distinction.
During armed conflicts, displaced women and girls,
as well as female heads of households, are particularly
vulnerable and at risk of certain kinds of violence,
including sexual violence. Because their husbands
are missing, detained or taking part in the fighting,
displaced women and female heads of households often
have to shoulder the burden of being a single parent
in extremely difficult circumstances. That means
providing — by themselves — the family’s income,
deciding — by themselves — about their children’s
education, and guaranteeing — by themselves — the
safety of their families.
While also affecting men and boys during armed
conflict, the impact of sexual violence on women and
girls is disproportionally greater. The consequences of
such violence — for victims, their families and entire
communities — are extremely serious. Sexual violence
causes physical trauma and long-lasting mental health
problems, and can be financially ruinous. It can lead to
social stigmatization and be the cause of reprisals. And
sometimes it kills. Those are only a few consequences
of sexual violence that victims have to deal with every
day.
Sexual violence remains comparatively invisible,
and statistically underestimated. Because of cultural
constraints and the strong feelings of shame and fear
that are often engendered by sexual violence, most
victims do not dare come forward to seek help. Of
course, that only adds to the devastating effects on

S/PV.7374

them, their families and communities. Constraints and
obstacles notwithstanding, immediate and appropriate
action must be taken, on the basis of systematic and
thorough assessments, to respond to the multifaceted
needs of victims of sexual violence.
Sexual violence is a medical emergency. Victims of
sexual violence need to be assisted and given immediate,
unimpeded and free access to health services, including
medical and psychological support, ideally within
72 hours of the assault. They should be treated with
humanity and dignity at all times. Their privacy must be
respected and the strictest confidentiality maintained
while responding to their needs.
Victims need to be protected against all forms
of ostracization or re-victimization and from any
further abuse — by making their environment safer
and by providing guidance on risk awareness and
risk reduction. Those are essential components for
the response. Victims who are willing to seek justice
must also be able to report their allegations safely,
without fear of reprisals or social stigmatization or of
becoming entangled in a lengthy legal process. Victims
should have access to economic support, as well as
to administrative and other legal remedies. For those
who have been detained, detention should not be an
additional barrier for them to access remedies. Such
remedies are extremely important: they enable victims
to survive and rebuild their lives.
Victims also need to see perpetrators brought before
courts of justice that respect fair-trial guarantees. In
armed conflicts, international and non-international
alike, rape and other forms of sexual violence are
serious violations of international humanitarian law
and entail individual criminal responsibility. All States
have the obligation to criminalize these violations in
their domestic legislation. Governments must ensure
accountability for rape and other forms of sexual
violence by investigating such acts and by prosecuting
and punishing the perpetrators.
In 2013, the ICRC undertook a four-year commitment
to intensify its response to the issue of sexual violence.
It has been striving to do that ever since. In Colombia,
the Central African Republic, South Sudan, Lebanon
and various other countries, we are aiming to improve
its delivery of impartial, holistic and effective
humanitarian responses to victims of sexual violence,
while also strengthening activities aimed at preventing
such violence.

15-026525/82

S/PV.7374

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

We believe that the ICRC and other humanitarian
actors have an important role to play in preventing
sexual violence and in providing a holistic response
to its victims. But we are also aware that our efforts
will be for naught if States do not bear their primary
responsibility in addressing the needs of victims and
providing suitable remedies for them and their families,
with full respect for their own obligations under
international humanitarian law.
Domestic laws, regulations, policies, reparation
schemes and processes of restorative justice should
respond to the many different needs of victims and must
fully comply with international law. Strengthening and
building institutional capacities within the judiciary, the
police, the military and among all detaining authorities,
including those dealing with displaced persons, should
be a priority. It is equally important to bolster the ability
of victims to heal and rebuild their lives.
Sexual violence during armed conflict is a violation
of international humanitarian law. It is not inevitable. It
must and can be stopped. What is required is a concerted
effort by everyone concerned to prevent and put an
end to it. The ICRC will continue to encourage States
to pursue action based on their pledges at the thirtyfirst International Conference of the Red Cross and
Red Crescent to enhance protection for women during
armed conflict. It also stands ready to support States,
ahead of the thirty-second International Conference,
which will take place at the end of this year, in their
efforts to draft measures specifically for combating
sexual violence and responding to its consequences.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Durham for her briefing.
I now give the floor to the Ms. Elman.
Ms. Elman: Just days ago, in Mogadishu, the
mother of a 14-year-old girl called me. Her daughter
was raped two years ago by a Ugandan soldier in
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).
The soldier returned to Uganda, where he remains in
detention awaiting trial. The mother often calls me, not
seeking an update on the case, but to help her daughter.
Her daughter has now been labelled the “girl who was
raped by the infidel” and ostracized by her community.
The nature of my work, providing emergency,
life-saving services to survivors of sexual and genderbased violence, is to respond to such calls and provide
any support I can. I am here today, with a heavy heart;

6/82

30/01/2015

as a representative of the NGO Working Group on
Women, Peace and Security; as one of the Directors of
the Elman Peace and Human Rights Centre in Somalia,
an organization founded by my late father, who was
killed advocating for human rights; and in my capacity
as the Youth Ambassador for Somalia on Youth to End
Sexual Violence in Conflict.
I returned from the comforts and safety of Canada to
Somalia five years ago because I believe that we all have
a role to play in the peaceful transition out of conflict.
I have seen first-hand the catastrophic consequences of
violence against civilians and of protection strategies
that are gender-blind and have failed to meaningfully
include women. In many contexts, as in the case of South
Sudan and the Democratic Republic of Congo, women
continuously report feeling unsafe. Food-distribution
sites are set up in areas not easily accessible. Women
and girls must collect food, firewood and water for their
families, often risking rape and abduction when doing
so. Latrines continue to be built without locks and
without regard for the need for sex-segregated facilities
to ensure safety and privacy. Sanitary napkins and
other basic hygiene supplies are still deemed luxuries
and not necessities.
There is a need for more responsive channels for
women to communicate with humanitarian officers
and peacekeepers about their immediate protection
concerns. This communication is often dramatically
enhanced when women themselves are serving in roles
such as peacekeepers and police.
In 2014, however, we witnessed the deliberate
exclusion of women from these processes in Somalia,
when more than 700 women were dismissed
simultaneously from their posts within the Somali
National Security Forces. In addition, women-led civil
society groups who are able to speak to the underlying
drivers of violence and the protection rights and needs of
women, are often undermined, harassed and threatened.
I speak from personal experience, and I have lost too
many friends, colleagues and family members.
In order to advance women’s inclusion in addressing
these challenges, I urge the Security Council to mandate
inclusive, gendered decision-making in the design,
implementation and monitoring of protection-ofcivilian strategies, including those responding to acts of
gender-based violence. This means consulting women
from the beginning, including those displaced and with
disabilities.

15-02652

30/01/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The Council must take the necessary steps to
increase the number of female staff in peacekeeping
operations, including in their military and police
components alike; ensure that all missions with
protection-of-civilian mandates have adequate logistical
support and resources, including the full deployment
of human rights officers, gender experts and women
protection advisors; and address the protection needs
of all of us humanitarian workers and women humanrights defenders, who are increasingly being targeted,
abducted or disappeared.
The Security Council must also simultaneously and
urgently act to prevent the blatant misuse of power and
the sexual exploitation and abuse we are witnessing in
Somalia and in other countries. I speak on behalf of the
14 year-old girl, her mother and the thousands of other
survivors in urging the Security Council to reinforce
the United Nations zero tolerance policy and prevent
those deployed to protect communities from themselves
becoming the violent perpetrators, too often with
impunity.
Mechanisms for reporting human rights abuses,
including sexual and gender-based violence, must be
gender-sensitive, confidential and non-discriminatory,
as the fear of stigma, discrimination and possible
retribution often deters survivors from coming forward
and seeking judicial or other forms of assistance. This
requires engagement with affected women in a safe and
respectful manner as well ongoing consultation.
To protect women from these human rights abuses
and to ensure accountability, I urge the Security Council
as a matter of priority to insist on accountability for
atrocities committed by all armed groups and security
forces, including addressing sexual and genderbased violence and civilian casualties; reinforce
efforts to ensure justice systems are re-established,
with investigations and prosecutions conducted in
accordance to international standards; ensure that
troops are adequately vetted, prepared and trained,
and that they engage in confidence-building measures
with the local populations, including those displaced;
hold troop-contributing countries accountable for these
crimes and call for the investigation and monitoring of
human rights abuses by AMISOM and by peacekeeping
personnel across other missions to be included in all
public reporting on the human rights situations in any
given country; mandate that sex-disaggregated data
be included in peacekeeping mission reporting; and
see to it that United Nations protection focal points

S/PV.7374

provide clear, accessible and confidential complaint
mechanisms to survivors of sexual exploitation and
abuse.
Protecting civilians is also about ensuring that
people can live without fear. In Somalia, as in places
such as Syria, Gaza, Nigeria and Ukraine, we have
witnessed civilians in populated areas being targeted,
injured and killed by explosive weapons. The impact
of explosive weapons in populated areas must be
addressed, and international cooperation is needed
to set stronger standards to protect civilians. The
experience of the African Union Mission in Somalia
has shown that policies to limit the use of mortars or
other indirect-fire explosive weapons can help save
civilian lives.
The implementation of international humanitarian
law in a gender-responsive manner is key to enhancing
the protection of civilians. Women must have equal
access to accountability mechanisms, reparations
and non-discriminatory medical care, including safe
abortion and post-abortion care for survivors of sexual
and gender-based violence. Women must also be
granted equal nationality rights.
Women in Somalia remain largely underrepresented
as political leaders, candidates, civil servants and
elected officials. Ahead of next year’s elections, it is
imperative that the United Nations supports a process
that leverages the political inclusion and participation
of women, strengthens Somalia’s security sector and
promotes respect for human rights. During the past
year’s State formation process in western Somalia,
not a single woman was elected at any level of the new
Administration, despite the overwhelming numbers of
female candidates. I am confident that transformative
and fundamental change with relation to women’s
leadership and participation can happen in Somalia.
This year marks the fifteenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), which calls for
women’s inclusion in all efforts to mitigate and respond
to conflict. Women’s meaningful participation, whether
in high-level political positions or in peace processes,
must be a core component of all peace and security
efforts, including those aimed at addressing protection,
implementation and protection challenges for women
and girls. I call on the Security Council to make the
full and systematic implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda a central priority in all areas
of its work.

15-026527/82

S/PV.7374

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Elman for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
the Chilean delegation for holding this important
debate today. And I thank Assistant Secretary-General
Kang, International Committee of the Red Cross
Director Durham and Ms. Elman for their sobering and
challenging briefings this morning. This is the first
protection-of-civilians debate in which a representative
from a non-governmental organization has briefed the
Council, and I welcome that initiative. It is vital that
we listen to people on the ground, and I hope that this
example will be repeated in future.
The protection of civilians is at the heart of
everything we strive to achieve in the Security Council.
It is our raison d’ȇtre and what the United Nations
system is ultimately judged on. Protecting the lives of
women, men, boys and girls from the ravages of conflict
is vital to our mission. Today, we consider the unique
and devastating impact that conflict has on women
and girls and the challenges that we must overcome to
empower them as equals in our society. Daily we are
reminded of the vast array of human rights violations
that women suffer in conflict, and of extremist groups,
such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
Boko Haram, which attack women’s rights — their
bodies, their education, their choice of religion — as a
central tactic of their terror campaigns.
It is estimated that 1,500 Yazidi and Christian
people were forced into sexual slavery in Iraq last
year. In Nigeria, hundreds of women and girls were
kidnapped from Chibok. In South Sudan and the
Central African Republic, high levels of child forced
marriage and rape persist unabated. It is clear that much
more can be done, and it is vital that we do it. We must
address the underlying causes of gender inequality and
violence against women, not only in conflicts but also
in peacetime.
I think there are four key areas for the Security
Council to consider.
First, we must consider women’s participation and
equality. Queen Boudicea is a symbol of powerful
female leadership in Britain. A tribal warrior, over the
past 2,000 years she has inspired many great women
who have fought for gender equality. But even in my
country there is still a way to go, and we cannot be
8/82

30/01/2015

complacent. The United Kingdom is thirty-fifth on
the United Nations Development Programme Gender
Inequality Index. We continually strive to achieve
equality and to end violence against women in our
society. Our gender pay gap is the lowest on record. We
have allocated almost $60 million to specialist support
services and national helplines for domestic violence.
By 2016, women in our military will be serving in
combat positions alongside men for the first time.
Unsurprisingly, countries in conflict face particular
challenges on this agenda, with underlying inequality
being compounded by a breakdown in society. To
quote a few examples, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo comes one hundred and forty-seventh in the
Inequality Index. Mali is one hundred and forty-eighth,
Afghanistan one hundred and forty-ninth. One woman
is raped every minute in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. In Afghanistan, women face the daily threat
of assassination purely for choosing a role in public
life. These are challenges that we have to address. The
fact that women are not present at every peace table is
as much a rebuke to men as an insult to women. That
so many post-conflict Governments do not include
women in their security and judicial infrastructure is
as damaging to those bodies’ success as it is to women’s
rights. That we struggle to have an appropriate number
of women on a high-level panel considering the future
of peace operations shows that, even here at the United
Nations Headquarters, our own words do not yet match
reality. This must change if we are truly committed to
enhancing women’s protection and to bringing about a
more peaceful society.
Secondly, supporting survivors of gender-based
violence should be incorporated into humanitarian
programming and into the first stage of an emergency
response. Provisions should be put in place for
vulnerable populations, such as the young, the disabled,
the elderly and the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender
and intersex communities. Through the call to action
in 2013, the United Kingdom announced $30 million
in new funding to help protect women and girls in
emergencies. That includes $5 million for the United
Nations Population Fund to establish safe spaces for
women in Syria, and $6 million and $2.5 million in
Lebanon and Jordan, respectively, to prevent vulnerable
families from turning to child labour and survival sex.
Thirdly, the protection of civilians by peacekeepers
must address the needs of women and girls as well as
men and boys. The report of the Global Summit to End

15-02652

30/01/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Sexual Violence in Conflict, held in London in June
2014, will be circulated shortly, with recommendations
including those on peacekeeping. Addressing
sexual violence in conflict should be a mission-wide
objective. Indicators of success for protection-ofcivilian mandates should include the consultation of
women, particularly displaced populations, and how
the concerns identified are being addressed. Scenariobased training on sexual violence should be incorporated
into every predeployment training for contributing
countries, including at the senior-officer level. And
existing reporting and accountability mechanisms
for sexual exploitation and abuse committed by
peacekeeping personnel must be much tighter. We
look forward to examining recommendations from the
high-level discussions on Monday on this topic. It is
critical that the peace operations review reflects these
issues and the broader obligations of Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and Department of Political
Affairs on women and peace and security and women’s
participation.
Finally, engaging with military and security actors
remains a key challenge. The security sector should
be responsive to women’s needs, and gender-sensitive
training should be part of any police, army and justice
sector reform. Concrete measures must be taken to
increase the recruitment, retention and promotion
of women throughout national militaries and police
forces. Greater information-sharing among military
and civilians is crucial to better inform our strategies
to protect women.
The year 2015 is a significant one for women
in conflict environments. As we move towards the
fifteenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), we look
forward to the publication, in October, of the global
study and the high-level review on women and peace
and security. We hope for ambitious, tangible outcomes
and commitments that can really change the lives of
women and girls across the globe. Words are no longer
enough. Now our actions must speak louder.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Chilean presidency for its
proposal to once again take up the issue of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. We are grateful to the
briefers for their assessments and their very useful
information.
The situation in the area of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict continues to leave room to
be desired. Women and girls, as well as other categories

S/PV.7374

of civilians, continue to be victims of various forms
of violence. The Council has repeatedly called upon
parties to conflict to fully comply with the provisions
of international humanitarian law with respect to the
protection of civilians. Nevertheless, we continue
to receive alarming reports from victims in Syria,
Afghanistan, South Sudan, Libya and other areas of
armed conflict. Despite the statements of the parties
to armed conflict concerning measures they have
undertaken, there is no end to the indiscriminate and
disproportionate use of force, leading to the death of
thousands of people, a great many of whom are women
and children, who are customarily considered to be the
most vulnerable parts of the populace.
In addressing protection of civilians, we cannot
overlook their situation in Ukraine. We are deeply
concerned by the dramatic deterioration of the situation
in the south-eastern part of that country and the
resumption of shelling of residential neighbourhoods in
cities of the region. We firmly condemn such actions
against civilians and call for careful, objective inquiry
into the tragedies that have occurred. Since early
January, the armed forces of Ukraine have been firing
almost continuously on the major city of Donetsk in
Donbas. Today, there have been further tragic reports
of people killed by artillery fire on the city. There has
also been rocket and artillery fire against Luhansk and
other cities of the region.
The number of victims in the conflict has already
exceeded 5,000 people and continues to grow. As in
other regions of the conflict in Ukraine, it is women and
children who suffer the most. Behind the dry numbers
and statistics of the victims among civilians lie their
ruined lives. The growth of these numbers must be
immediately ended. Clearly, this cannot be achieved
militarily but only via an inclusive, direct political
dialogue.
The Ukrainian authorities not only continue to
carry out a de facto blockade of the south-eastern part
of the country, but are essentially ratcheting it up.
Social entitlements are not being paid, and impediments
are being created to the delivery of humanitarian
assistance, medicine and food. The destruction of
infrastructure, hospitals, and water and electricity
sites continues. Restrictions are being tightened on the
movement of people, even in those cases where there
is a need for urgent medical assistance. Last week, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees expressed concern over recent decisions of

15-026529/82

S/PV.7374

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

the Ukrainian authorities in that regard, noting that
they undermine the possibility for humanitarian agents
to help those in need. Doctors Without Borders and
other non-governmental organizations are sounding the
alarm, warning of the onset of humanitarian disaster.
In all armed conflicts, the belligerents bear primary
responsibility for full compliance with the standards of
international law and for taking all possible measures to
ensure protection of civilians. International institutions
and mechanisms are meant above all to assist national
efforts. The primary reference points here must continue
to be the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
and the basic principles of United Nations peacekeeping:
consent of the host, neutrality and the use of force
only in accordance with the mandate. The efforts of
the international community must be comprehensive
and, above all, aimed at eradicating the root causes of
violence through a settlement of the conflict and the
restoration of law and order.
Peacekeepers plays an important role in protecting
women in armed conflict. Their mandates increasingly
include the functions relevant to that end. Clearly,
gender issues must continue to be taken into account
when forming peacekeeping contingents. This must
be done not generically but by taking into account the
particularities of each specific situation. A similar
approach should be applied with respect to instructions
to United Nations system entities to take into account
gender issues in their activities. It is important to recall
that each one has its own authorities, while ensuring
the protection of women is one component within the
framework of activities to prevent and settle armed
conflict and in post-conflict situations. It is necessary
to avoid redundancies of efforts in this area with bodies
in the United Nations system that have the relevant
remit, such as the General Assembly, the Human Rights
Council, the Commission on the Status of Women and
others.
Protecting the interests of women and children
in armed conflict has been a constant focus of the
Security Council in recent years. Resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent documents on the issue of
women and peace and security are aimed, inter alia, at
enhancing the capacities for the participation of women
in varying aspects of settlement of armed conflict and
in post-conflict recovery. Resolution 1612 (2005) is
also crucial. It lays out the basis for the protection of
women in armed conflict. Actions to protect civilians,
including women and children, must be based on a clear

10/82

30/01/2015

Security Council mandate and on full compliance with
it.
We support the activities of the Security Council
and the entire United Nations system aimed at fully
taking into account the needs of women and children
in policies and efforts in the area of peacekeeping
and recovery, including in education, health care and
the broadening of economic rights and opportunities.
Particular attention should be paid to the needs of
women and children refugees and internally displaced
persons and persons with disabilities, not to mention
the situation of elderly women. In general, women
and girls, for varying reasons, are more vulnerable in
armed conflict. It is therefore particularly important to
protect them within the overall activities to protect all
categories of civilians.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important debate,
which is all the more timely given the approaching
fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000). I also thank the three briefers who have informed
us so eloquently this morning: the Assistant SecretaryGeneral, the observer of the International Committee
of the Red Cross, and Ms. Elman. I particularly join
the United Kingdom in welcoming a briefing from a
non-governmental organization.
The protection of civilians has become an
increasingly important feature of effective peacekeeping
mandates, and an equally important feature of the
successful execution of those mandates. However, that
same effectiveness and success have also exposed some
significant shortcomings, some of which have already
been related, and New Zealand believes that the Council
must frankly address those shortcomings.
Indeed, we must have, I think, first a very frank
conversation about our understanding and expectations
with respect to the protection of civilians. Having
done that, then we can bring in troop-contributing
countries, police-contributing countries, hosts, donors,
the Secretariat and other stakeholders — all part of a
very open and free conversation. What we have got
to do is to probe beneath what might appear to be a
successful surface, and ask about the impediments to
the implementation of protection mandates, which will
then enable us to explore constructive solutions.
Today’s debate is rightly focused on the protection
challenges and needs of women and girls. But while
women and girls must be protected, they cannot be

15-02652

30/01/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

viewed solely as in need of protection. Women and girls
are also important agents for achieving the protection of
civilians. It is widely acknowledged that women have an
important role to play as leaders and decision-makers in
the prevention and resolution of conflict, but while that
is recognized, it is not consistently applied in practice.
For example, women should also be visible in roles
within post-conflict accountability and transitional
justice structures — something that, as well as making
a significant post-conflict contribution, also helps
to encourage women and girls, particularly victims
of sexual violence, to report offences and to follow
through on that complaint.
But there are others whose vulnerability is often
even less acknowledged. Persons with disabilities
and older persons often suffer most in conflict
situations, and yet older women and women and girls
with disabilities are given very little consideration in
terms of their protection needs; nor is there sufficient
recognition of their ability to contribute to protection
efforts, to contribute to conflict settlement, and to
contribute to peacebuilding.
Armed conflict can both lead to disability and
can disproportionately affect persons with existing
disabilities. Persons with disabilities are particularly
vulnerable in conflict. They face compounded
challenges because of physical, communication and
attitudinal barriers. Sudden attacks pose particular
problems and challenges. The deaf cannot always hear
when attackers approach. The blind may not know
the way to safety. Those with intellectual or social
disabilities may not understand what is happening. All
of them are especially vulnerable. In many conflict
situations, older persons and persons with disabilities
are often the first to be forgotten or neglected. Too
often, they are quite simply left behind. They also face
difficulties escaping conflict. With the disintegration
of families and communities, they can become isolated,
destitute and without support systems. They are at
greater risk of exploitation and sexual violence. That is
especially true of women and girls, as was so eloquently
related to us by Ms. Elman. When conflict ends, their
experience and potential for peacebuilding and social
reconstruction — the role they can play — can often be
overlooked and, quite simply, dismissed.
As the representative of the International
Committee of the Red Cross pointed out to us,
recognition of the special respect and protection due to
the elderly and persons with disabilities is found in the

S/PV.7374

Third and Fourth Geneva Conventions, relating to the
evacuation and treatment of persons deprived of their
liberty. The Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities obliges States to take measures to protect
people. States must honour those obligations. When
implementing mandates, particular attention must be
given to the protection challenges and the needs of older
persons with disabilities. Measures that might better
protect these groups should be considered, including
improved monitoring data collection and reporting
on the impact of conflict on these groups, including
improved civilian harm and casualty support. Secondly,
peacekeeper training should focus on the specific needs
and challenges of persons with disabilities and on older
persons. Thirdly, we should specifically address the
situation of persons with disabilities and older persons
in protection-of-civilian strategies and humanitarian
responses. Finally, we should address the inclusion in
peacebuilding efforts of older persons and persons with
disabilities. We need their knowledge, and we need
their experience. It is only with such measures that an
often neglected and highly vulnerable group can be
protected from conflict.
If we address the protection challenges and needs
of women and girls and if we protect older persons and
those with disabilities, we will have gone a long way to
more effective protection-of-civilian mandates overall.
Moreover, we can use the frank conversation I called
for at the beginning of this statement to achieve that
objective.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the initiative of Chile in holding today’s
public debate. I would like to thank Assitant SecretaryGeneral Kyung-wha Kang for her briefing. China
also listened attentively to the briefings made by the
representatives of the International Committee of the
Red Cross and the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security.
At present, the traditional security threats faced
by the international community intertwine and
interact with non-traditional security threats. Regional
conflicts, violence and terrorist attacks flare up
frequently. Trans-national organized crime has become
more problematic. Many women and girls suffer the
most and have become the most vulnerable groups to
attacks and harm. The international community should
attach great importance to strengthening the protection
of their rights and interests and work together to

15-0265211/82

S/PV.7374

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

strengthen synergy and coordination in this area. I
would like to emphasize the following points.
First, we must address the root causes while also
addressing the symptoms. It is essential to promote
peace and development, which are fundamental to
the protection of women and girls and their rights and
interests. The international community should take
practical and effective measures to promote the political
process of achieving national reconciliation in order to
create a favourable environment that prevents women
and girls from suffering the scourge of wars. At the
same time, the parties concerned should join efforts to
comprehensively promote national economic and social
development and gender equality and the empowerment
of women, effectively paving the way for the protection
of women and girls and their rights and interests.
Secondly, it is essential to respect the principle
of national leadership of the countries concerned and
their capacity-building. The countries concerned bear
the primary responsibility for protecting women and
girls in conflicts. The international community must
respect the leading role of the countries concerned
and coordinate with them in their efforts to protect
women and children and ensure their rights and
interests. In accordance with the needs of the countries
concerned, the international community should provide
constructive assistance and play a greater constructive
role in promoting the efforts of the countries concerned
to protect women’s rights and security. Most important,
it is essential to address the real difficulties faced by
the countries concerned in terms of financial, technical
and human resources, and comprehensively strengthen
their capacity-building in the relevant areas.
Thirdly, it is essential to facilitate women’s
full participation in decision-making and their full
development. In certain countries and conflict regions,
women have an important role to play in peace and
development, and their role should be brought into
full play in the prevention and resolution of conflicts.
Moreover, they should play an active role in good
offices, mediation and negotiation. In seeking solutions
to conflict, it is important to fully consider the special
needs of women. At the same time, it is necessary to
provide women with the means that allow them to
fully participate in political, economic and social
development, and to enjoy equal rights regarding
education, health and employment in order to ensure
their full development.

12/82

30/01/2015

Fourthly, coordination, cooperation and synergy
in protecting the rights and interests of women and
girls is a cross-cutting issue. The relevant agencies
of the United Nations. The relevant agencies should
strengthen their coordination and form synergies.
As the main body responsible for the maintenance
of international peace and security, the Security
Council should effectively fulfil its responsibilities in
the context of conflict prevention, peacekeeping and
post-conflict reconstruction. The General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council, the Human Rights
Council, UN-Women and UNICEF should leverage
their comparative advantages and closely cooperate
with the Council to generat synergy. At the same time,
regional and subregional organizations should increase
their cooperation with the United Nations in order to
promote the rights and interests of women and girls.
This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption by the Fourth World Conference on Women
of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action,
as well as the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security. That provides important opportunities for the
international community to protect women and girls’
security and their rights and interests, and fully realize
gender equality and women’s empowerment. We hope
that the United Nations will build on past important
experiences, pay greater attention to empowering
women, seek more effective ways to strengthen the
protection of the rights and interests of women and
girls and address the full implementaion of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action. China is prepared
to work together with the international community to
achieve those goals.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this debate. I would also like to thank the three briefers
for their outstanding presentations. I join the other
delegations in commending the participation of civil
society in this meeting.
When I read the excellent concept note (S/2015/32,
annex) prepared by the Chilean presidency, I remembered
the tragic images of 16- and 17-year-old Yazidi girls
who had been raped, abducted and abandoned. One
of them who survived that tragedy decided to take
her own life. Indeed, the situation could not be more
disturbing. At the same time as these girls were being
born in the late 1990s and the negotiations on the Rome
Statute were coming to an end, the Council was, for

15-02652

30/01/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

the first time, adopting resolutions that specifically
addressed the protection of civilians and peacekeeping
resolutions that contained very specific mandates on the
protection of civilians. Since then, important steps have
been taken. Unfortunately, however, current conflicts
highlight the fact that violence in general, and genderbased violence in particular, are increasing day by day
and that we are lagging behind those events.
The protection of civilians will be the focus of
Spain’s contribution to the review of peacekeeping
operations being led by Mr. Ramos-Horta. However, to
ensure that the protection of civilians is truly effective,
not only must we assess peacekeeping operations, but
another four crucial aspects, as mentioned by Ms. Kang,
should be addressed. I share her opinion of the great
importance of humanitarian law, humanitarian access,
accountability and the role of non-State actors.
Resolution 1325 (2000) highlighted the tremendous
impact of conflict on women. Women face a wide
variety of threats, and for that reason we must seek
equally varied measures. As some speakers have noted,
we will encounter a series of crucial events this year.
First is the twentieth anniversary of the Fourth Beijing
Conference on Women. At the end of the year, we will
agree on the post-2015 development agenda. We must
review peacekeeping, resolution 1325 (2000) and the
Peacebuilding Commission. Spain, which will preside
over the Security Council in October, will devote all of
its efforts to ensuring a successful review of resolution
1325 (2000). To the extent possible, given the fact that
all these important events are occurring at the same
time, we will try to achieve new gender architecture on
behalf of the United Nations.
The Security Council has focused its attention
on women, and in particular on sexual violence in
conflict. But I think it is also important, as noted by
the Ambassador of the United Kingdom, that this organ
become involved in other important aspects, such as
accountability in relation to the role of women in peace
talks, mediation processes, ceasefire agreements and
post-conflict situations in general, because women’s
empowerment is absolutely crucial if we desire greater
success.
I wish to point out the eloquence of our briefer
from civil society, Ms. Elman, who provided some
truly disturbing figures on the poor or non-existent
participation of Somali women in the administration of
Somalia. Training can play a critical role in that regard.
Without proper training, we cannot successfully

S/PV.7374

address that situation, which, as I have said, deeply
concerns Spain. We will do our best to contribute to
a solution, or at least to an improvement of the tragic
situation. There is a major imbalance between our legal
framework and the situation on the ground. We must do
everything possible to eliminate that vacuum.
I conclude simply by recalling the terrible statistics
we have heard today, indicating that each minute
a woman is raped in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Clearly we are not doing our job very well.
Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I commend
you, Mr. President, for convening this debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, with a focus
on the specific needs of women and girls. Let me also
thank Ms. Kang Kyung-wha, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs, for her important
briefing, and Ms. Helen Durham and Ms. Ilwad Elman
for their statements.
Civilians, particularly women and children, in
countries in conflict or post-conflict situations, suffer
unspeakable atrocities. Statistics published by United
Nations agencies on Syria, Iraq, the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Sudan and South Sudan, among others, are highly
informative. Given such atrocities, the international
community must forge a consensus on the need to
find urgent and appropriate solutions. That consensus
is reflected in resolution 1325 (2000), which is the
foundation of the architecture for the protection of
women and girls in armed conflict. On that basis, the
Secretary-General and various partners have established
a series of technical and institutional arrangements.
The aide-memoire of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, endorsed by the Security
Council, is a practical guide that could contribute
effectively to improving the protection of civilians. It
contains important measures that could be implemented
in conflict situations. In particular, it stresses the
responsibility of the parties to protect women and their
accountability for violations of law, taking into account
the specific needs of women and their involvement in
the prevention and settlement of conflict. In that vein,
resolution 2122 (2013) complements and strengthens
those initiatives by categorizing various violations and
abuse targeting women in conflict and post-conflict
situations. It also addresses forced displacement and
provides important technical elements to identify
violence against such persons.

15-0265213/82

S/PV.7374

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

For its part, the Security Council has demonstrated
a clear desire to end the violence against women and
civilians, particularly through its recent debates
and decisions. In 2014, the Council made a point of
recalling, in presidential statement S/PRST/2014/3, the
important role played by peacekeeping operations in
the protection of civilians, and reaffirming their need
of a protection mandate to implement. Furthermore, it
called for improved coordination between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations to
that end.
The Security Council also underscored in its
presidential statement S/PRST/2014/21, of 28 October
2014, the important role of the United Nations in
conflict prevention and the protection of women and girl
refugees and internally displaced persons, particularly
with regard to sexual and gender-based violence. It
underscored that the fight against impunity can be
strengthened through the work of the international
tribunals, and encouraged Member States to involve
women’s organizations in the crafting of strategies to
counter violent extremism and to strengthen women’s
role.
For their part, regional and subregional organizations
are working to protect civilians in conflict areas, as has
been the case in Somalia, Mali and the Central African
Republic. A code of conduct for missions on the ground
is being finalized by the African Union, with the
establishment of a zero-tolerance policy.
Despite all of these initiatives, the situation of
civilians in countries in conflict or post-conflict has
unfortunately not improved. Violence against women
and girls continues to increase and is therefore in
urgent need of solutions, particularly in Syria, Iraq,
Nigeria, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Central African Republic, South Sudan and Somalia.
In South Sudan, for instance, some sources indicate
that sexual violence in displaced persons camps and
local communities is pervasive and persistent. Such
practices are used as a weapon of war in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, where women and girls have
been publicly raped in the presence of their fathers,
brothers or husbands. Violence against women and
girls has recently increased, owing in particular to the
resurgence of many armed and terrorist groups, which
have targeted them directly in a number of cases, such
as the girls abducted by Boko Haram in Nigeria under
unacceptable conditions.

14/82

30/01/2015

The various reasons for this continuing violence
against women in conflict or post-conflict situations
are mostly well known. They include, for example,
ignorance, fear of retaliation for denunciation, cultural
values and practices and discrimination. We also
believe that impunity, an absence of coordinated
action in implementing Council decisions, both at the
institutional level and in peacekeeping operations, and a
lack of technical and financial resources constitute real
reasons. Furthermore, the States that bear the primary
responsibility for protecting their citizens show no
genuine willingness to take steps to do that. In that
regard, it is vital that sanctions regimes be strengthened
and applied and, for instance, that countries harbouring
armed and terrorist groups be blacklisted, similar to the
list of countries where children are recruited into armed
conflict. The implementation of all such actions by the
international community and peacekeeping operations
designed to protect civilians must be carried out without
infringing on States’ sovereignty and, of course, in the
interests of the women and children concerned.
In conclusion, we believe that we should stop
thinking about the issue in terms of the decisions to
be made and start thinking about how to implement
those decisions effectively. In that regard, the Council
should work to efficiently integrate a specific gender
perspective into every mandate renewal and resolution,
ensure women’s full, effective participation in efforts
aimed at settling and preventing conflicts, investigate
and follow up attacks that target women, integrate
a gender perspective into all efforts against violent
extremism and terrorism and, lastly, ensure that
peacekeeping operations shoulder their responsibility
to protect civilians. The involvement of regional and
subregional organizations, as well as communities
and opinion makers, could certainly help to produce
convincing results in the protection of civilians,
particularly women and girls.
Finally, we hope that the events scheduled for
this year such as the review of resolution 1325 (2000),
the fifty-ninth session of the Commission on the
Status of Women and the establishment of the post2015 development agenda will provide opportunities
for achieving the effective implementation of the
protection of women and girls in conflict and postconflict situations.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this

15-02652

30/01/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

debate on the eve of a number of deadlines for crucial
upcoming efforts such as the strategic reviews of peace
operations, the women and peace and security agenda
and the United Nations peacebuilding architecture. I
would also like to acknowledge the commitment of the
agencies of the United Nations and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the non-governmental
organizations working in difficult conditions, whose
experience in the field, as we just heard in the briefings,
is clearly essential.
The numbers of all the countries and all the violent
acts committed in them against civilians, including
thousands of women and girls, are unfortunately too
many to list. Those facts are not just statistics, they are
a reality that we must work to change through better
protection of civilians. How can that be done? There are
four types of action that can be taken, particularly in
areas where peacekeeping operations are deployed. The
first is by protecting the people living within conflict
zones. That sounds obvious, but too often the Blue
Helmets’ attitude lacks the dynamism and mobility
needed to ensure a successful mission. We expect
the review of peace operations to take that reality
into account. The United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali has a robust
mandate for the protection of civilians that it is fulfilling
in difficult conditions. It is vital to ensure that the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic reaches its full
operational capability by April, as planned, and that it
adopts a robust posture in implementing its mandate.
Secondly, we must guarantee that protection within
peace operations themselves. Unfortunately, 10 years
after the publication of Prince Zeid’s report on sexual
abuse and exploitation in peacekeeping operations
(A/59/710), crimes continue to be committed by those
charged with protecting civilians, including, by the
way, in regional operations such as the African Union
Mission in Somalia, which has been denounced by
Human Rights Watch. In order to prevent such abuses,
we must act on two levels — first, by strictly enforcing
zero tolerance and filtering policies designed to prevent
troops, soldiers and officers who commit such acts from
participating in peacekeeping operations, and secondly,
by punishing and prosecuting those responsible. The
United Nations cannot afford to be impugned for its
actions; its missions and operations must serve as
examples.

S/PV.7374

Thirdly, I would like to emphasize the importance of
preventive and complementary actions for the protection
of civilians. To begin with, the participation of women
makes operations on the ground more effective to the
degree that they are involved in devising strategies
for protecting civilians. For example, they can help to
design camps and protection sites so as to better meet
their needs in terms of secure access to services and
basic infrastructure. Women’s participation in peace
operations is also a way for peacekeepers to have a
closer relationship to local communities and thus win
their trust, which is clearly essential to protection. The
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for example,
works closely with local stakeholders to support victims
of sexual violence and recruitment by armed groups,
and such practices should be followed throughout the
Organization.
Then there is prevention. It is vital that within
human-rights sections, teams of human rights, gender
and protection counsellors should be effective and well
coordinated, in order to enable them to assess whatever
threats are present through accurate analysis of the data
on women and children’s human rights and then to sound
the alarm and avoid any deterioration of the situation.
Regarding sexual violence, training is essential and
must be carried out to benefit both those involved in
peacekeeping operations and the local populations, in
order to reduce the social stigma for the victims.
Fourthly and finally, there can be no protection
without justice. The confirmation on 1 December 2014
of the International Criminal Court’s indictment of the
warlord Thomas Lubanga for war crimes and, more
recently, the transfer to the Court in January of Dominic
Ongwen, a commander in the Lord’s Resistance Army,
are important steps in combating impunity for violence
against civilians, most of them women and girls. But
most acts of violence, particularly sexual violence, go
unpunished, often because women refuse to complain
for fear of repercussions. That is why we must also
ensure that victims are protected when they bring legal
action against the perpetrators of such crimes. We must
break the chain of silence through protection.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I thank
you, Mr. President, for presiding over this important
meeting. I would also like to thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Kang, Ms. Durham of the International
Committee of the Red Cross and Ms. Elman of the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security

15-0265215/82

S/PV.7374

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

for their informative and moving briefings and tireless
work on this important subject.
Shortly after the Secretary-General released his
report (S/2014/693) on women and peace and security
last year, the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria released
a document of its own — a pamphlet of rules about
how jihadists should handle trafficked women and
girls, including those sold into sexual slavery. In recent
weeks, the Al-Qaida affiliate the Al-Nusra Front
released a video that appears to depict a woman, arms
seemingly bound behind her back, kneeling, while a
man declares that she has been convicted of adultery
by an Islamic court. The video then shows this woman
being summarily shot in the head by a man who himself
is clad in body armour.
Last year, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) released its own video that appears to depict a
young woman being stoned to death in the presence of
her father. In the final moments of the video, she is seen
begging her father for forgiveness. She is then led to a
hole dug in the earth surrounded by men who throw
stones at her. The young woman, in what would be
some of her final words, offers this advice to women:
“Protect your honour more than your lives.”
The unique horror confronted by women and girls
in conflict is as chilling as it is urgent. While conflict
does not discriminate on the basis of gender, it does
disproportionately affect those who are marginalized,
vulnerable or oppressed. In too many societies around
the world, for too long, women and girls have been
marginalized, vulnerable or oppressed. If we care about
addressing the problems encountered by women and
girls in wartime, we must be prepared to address the
enduring problems of discrimination and inequality of
women in peacetime.
As the Secretary-General documented in his 2014
report on women and peace and security, the threats
facing women and children in conflict are worsening,
not improving, in many parts of the world. We can and
we must work together to turn this tide.
Defenders of women’s human rights are increasingly
targeted. Efforts to silence people like Razan Zeitouneh
in Syria and Salwa Bugaighis in Libya are efforts to
silence hope, curtail progress, impede justice and
infringe upon the dignity of women, not just in Syria
and in Libya, but around the world.
We know that refugees and displaced persons are
mostly women and children. And we know that they
16/82

30/01/2015

suffer disproportionately from sexual and gender-based
violence. In eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the continued presence of armed groups amid an
increasing number of displaced persons and refugees
has led to shocking cruelty and rampant sexual violence.
In one of the most devastating incidents, at least 387
people — including 300 women and 55 girls — were
raped by armed groups in 13 villages in eastern Congo
between 30 July and 2 August 2010, that is 387 rape
victims in three days.
In the face of this kind of destabilizing cruelty
and grotesque violence, the Council has mandated
peacekeeping missions in places like the Democratic
Republic of the Congo with the very difficult and very
important work of protecting civilians. Indeed, 98 per
cent of United Nations troops now serve in missions
with mandates to protect civilians.
Yet, again and again, there is a gap between what
we say must happen and what actually does. We
have seen peacekeeping missions fail to implement
their mandates to protect civilians, thereby creating
a substantial gap between principle and practice,
between mandates and implementation. A report of the
Office of Internal Oversight Services found that in 507
attacks against civilians, from 2010 to 2013, United
Nations peacekeepers virtually never used force to
protect civilians under attack. Thousands of civilians,
countless women and children among them, may have
lost their lives as a result.
United Nations peacekeeping missions must
do better when they are given a mandate to protect
civilians in desperate need of protection. That means,
at a minimum, that we must work to improve earlywarning systems, especially for sexual violence, to
help peacekeepers identify potential threats and take
preventative action. Continued shortfalls in staffing
critical peacekeeping missions in South Sudan, Mali
and the Central African Republic have left civilians,
particularly women and girls, vulnerable.
When peacekeepers themselves become a part
of the problem of sexual and gender-based violence,
rather than a solution to it, it is our fundamental
responsibility — indeed, it is a moral imperative — that
we collectively ensure they are held accountable in a
transparent and swift manner.
The Security Council also must do more. It is easy
enough for us to agree in an open debate in the Chamber
that protecting women and girls in conflict is important.

15-02652

30/01/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV.7374

I mean, can anyone really disagree? But when called
upon to act, too often we are too slow or too silent.
When reports emerge of an alleged mass rape in Darfur
and active obstruction by the host Government of the
peacekeeping mission’s ability to investigate becomes
clear, the Council has an obligation to act. And yet, too
often we do not. This must change, as our credibility
depends on it, victims need it and justice demands it.

respected and have equal access to justice, educational
opportunities and health-care services — societies
where women enjoy equal protection under the law and
equal access to political space. The best protection, to
borrow the final words of the woman slaughtered in
ISIL’s gruesome video, is the difficult and imperative
work of building societies that value women’s lives and
minds and potential as much as their honour.

We are making modest progress and there have been
some developments in our collective efforts. Of nine
United Nations peacekeeping operations cited in the last
Secretary-General report on this topic, nearly 70 per
cent of their military strategic concepts of operations
include specific measures to protect the human rights
of women and girls. More and more missions are
providing more robust gender and conflict analysis in
their reporting, but much remains to be done to link
analysis and reporting to actionable recommendations,
and actionable recommendations to actual action.

Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): First of all, let me thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate and
for the excellent concept note (S/2015/32, annex) that
you, Sir, circulated. We have listened carefully to our
briefers: Ms. Kang Kyung-wha, Ms. Helen Durham
and Ms. Ilwad Elman. I thank them for sharing their
insights on the important topic that is the subject of this
debate.

Largely due to the work of organizations like
those present here today, considerations on the risks
confronted by women and girls are now being integrated
into peace agreements. In 2013, more than half of all
peace agreements signed included references to women
and peace and security. The number of ceasefire
agreements that include sexual violence as a prohibited
act has tripled, as compared to only three agreements
with such provisions having been signed prior to 2012.
Here, too, at the United Nations, there is work to
be done. Women should not only be participating in
peacekeeping operations, they should be leading them.
While three women lead peace operations as Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General — one as
Force Commander and one as Acting Head — women
head only 19 per cent of all United Nations field
missions. While we welcome the deployment of three
all-female United Nations police units in Liberia,
Haiti and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we
recognize that 97 per cent of military troops and 90 per
cent of police personnel in United Nations missions are
men. If we are serious about expanding opportunity for
women everywhere, we must expand opportunity for
women right here.
Expanding opportunity and empowering women in
peacetime is essential to tackling the unique problems
women confront in wartime. After all, the best protection
from sexual violence in conflict that targets women and
girls is building societies where women and girls are

Situations of conflict affect civilians in a
disproportionate manner. For reasons linked to their
gender and other social factors, they affect women and
girls even more. In these situations, women and girls
face sexual violence, sexual enslavement, trafficking
and other forms of exploitation. The relatively high
occurrence of female-headed households, where
women are forced to take on non-traditional roles, is
another dimension of the problem faced by women in
conflict situations.
Therefore, while protecting civilians in conflict
situations poses a great challenge, protecting women
and girls is an even greater challenge. For this reason,
it is vital that the protection of women and girls in
conflict situations receive special attention, and we
thank you, Mr. President, for taking the initiative to
organize today’s debate.
The Security Council, through its women and peace
and security agenda, has shown a firm commitment
to the protection of women and girls in conflict and
post-conflict situations. Resolutions 1325 (2000), 1960
(2010) and 2122 (2013) are a clear demonstration of
this commitment. With these frameworks in place, the
Security Council now has the tools to promote greater
protection for women in conflict and post-conflict
situations.
We cannot fail to notice the nexus between the
ready availability and proliferation of small arms and
light weapons and conflict, which must be effectively
addressed by the Security Council. The ratification and
faithful implementation of the Arms Trade Treaty must
be a step in that direction.

15-0265217/82

S/PV.7374

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Regional organizations have an important role to
play in preventing and responding to conflict-related
violence. In this regard, we acknowledge the efforts
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
in appointing a Special Envoy for Women, Peace and
Security, whose mandate includes the protection of
women and children in conflict situations and facilitating
the participation of women in peace processes. The
African Union (AU) also has cooperation framework
with the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict. The
framework aims to develop a joint strategy to eradicate
conflict-related sexual violence through various
measures, including the enhancement of the capacity
of peacekeepers deployed in Africa to prevent and
respond to sexual violence. We would like to see this
cooperation between the United Nations and the AU
further strengthened.
Nigeria is pleased with the AU declaration of 2015 as
the Year of Women’s Empowerment and Development.
While much has been achieved in Africa in terms of
promoting gender-equality and women’s empowerment,
considerable challenges remain. It is our hope that the
AU declaration will encourage AU member States, civil
society, international partners and other stakeholders to
work together to promote the cause of women and girls.
Nigeria would like to acknowledge the vital role
of civil society and non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) in drawing attention to the gender dimensions of
armed conflict and in promoting women’s participation
in peacemaking. The involvement of NGOs, especially
those run by women, in policy advocacy, seminars,
workshops, training programmes and other activities
undertaken on behalf of women, has gone a long way in
raising the profile of the women and peace and security
agenda. We commend in particular the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security for its leadership
role in promoting the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and for its close engagement with the United
Nations on matters pertaining to women and peace and
security.
While we acknowledge that States bear the primary
responsibility for the protection of their citizens, the
reality is that most conflicts occur in an atmosphere
of lawlessness where the activities of non-State actors,
including extremist groups, terrorists and criminal
networks, present a major challenge in the protection of
civilians. Such groups usually act with total disregard
for human rights and international humanitarian law.

18/82

30/01/2015

In some situations, the complexity of the conflict has
forced aid agencies to negotiate with multiple warring
factions for safe passage for humanitarian personnel
and relief materials. That invariably makes it hard to
reach refugees and internally displaced persons in need
of assistance. In such situations, women and girls are
often the ones who suffer the most. Nigeria demands that
parties to conflict respect international humanitarian
law and stop impeding humanitarian assistance.
Finally, the protection of women and girls in conflict
and post-conflict situations is a multidimensional
challenge that requires concerted action by multiple
stakeholders on several fronts. Nigeria believes that the
United Nations, through the Security Council and other
relevant entities, is well positioned to take the lead in
meeting the challenge.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): Mr. President, I
thank you for organizing today’s open debate. I would
also like to thank our three briefers for their sobering
contributions to our discussion today. My delegation
aligns itself with the statement to be made on behalf of
the European Union.
As others before me have said, women and
girls are usually the first victims of conflict. They
are disproportionately affected by conflict-related
displacement, rights deprivation, marginalization
and abuse. They are also the prime targets of sexual
violence and rape and of forced and child marriages.
In 1999, the Security Council took a unanimous
decision to systematically address the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. Since then, a considerable
normative base has been created and progress achieved.
The adoption of landmark resolution 1325 (2000) has
contributed significantly to furthering the protection of
women agenda.
The primary responsibility to protect civilian
populations, as we all know, rests with national
Governments. The international community has to
step in, however, when that responsibility is neglected,
whether it be for lack of capacity or political will, or
breakdown of the State. As discussed in previous debates
on the protection of civilians, effective protection
requires clear and well-designed protection mandates
that are supported by adequate means, resources and
training, among other things. Gender-disaggregated
data is essential to informed decisions on the protection
of civilians.

15-02652

30/01/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

To ensure adequate protection of women and girls,
implementation of relevant mandates must take into
account local specificities, conditions and prevailing
customs and practices. For protection purposes, it does
matter how far women have to go to get water or food
or collect cooking wood, how they can take care of their
basic sanitation needs, what kind of terrain they have to
cross to safety, whether they can trust their own local
officials and police to report their attackers, whether
the patrolling patterns of peacekeepers support their
movement patterns, and so many other things that
women themselves can only best know. Therefore, in
all respects, consulting women on the ground to make
sure that protection mandates respond to their real
protection needs is essential.
The presence of and adequate support for women’s
protection advisers on the ground, personal commitment
of a mission’s leadership to gender-sensitive protection,
predeployment guidance and training of the military,
police and civilian personnel not simply on the basics of
civilian protection but on gender-sensitive protection of
civilians, and the sharing among missions of effective
gender-sensitive protection practices and lessons
learned are also important. As others before me have
said, more women peacekeepers and police officers in
United Nations missions and more women in leadership
positions in peacekeeping are equally important.
The strict implementation of a zero-tolerance
policy vis-à-vis sexual abuse among peacekeepers is yet
another necessary element of the protection of women
and girls in a conflict situation. Our briefer, Ms. Ilwad
Elman, has eloquently spoken on that topic.
Protection also requires addressing the problem of
widespread availability of illicit small arms and light
weapons and the impact of the illicit trade in arms on
the lives of women and girls in conflict zones, as our
Nigerian colleague has described. The Arms Trade
Treaty, which came into effect last December, requires
transfers to be assessed against the risk of gender-based
violence or serious acts of violence against women and,
if duly implemented, would make a real difference to
the protection of women agenda.
While physical protection measures in the field
are a vital and most immediate form of protection
response, promoting an environment supportive of
women’s participation is key. To this end, all United
Nations efforts and presence on the ground have to be
synchronized to produce that enabling environment
where women and girls will be safe and free to

S/PV.7374

engage in the processes that affect their lives. Nothing
enhances the protection of women better that their full
involvement and participation in all decision-making
processes at all stages of conflict resolution, national
reconciliation and post-conflict reconstruction.
Let me stress in particular the importance of
strengthening the rule of law and pursuit of accountability
for violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law, including gender-based violence
and rape. Today’s briefers have stressed that tackling
impunity is paramount in such situations. Relevant
work by national justice and prosecution mechanisms
is essential, and the international community must
invest in strengthening national judicial, prosecution
and corrections capacities. Building such capacities in
a country emerging from conflict, however, does take
time.
It is therefore important that the Security Council
act, continue to support accountability and use the full
range of means at its disposal to support that end, inter
alia by making more systematic use of referrals to the
International Criminal Court, mandating commissions
of inquiry, acting on the reports of such commissions and
reinforcing the application of gender parameters among
the designation criteria in all of the sanctions regimes.
The greater involvement of the Special Representatives
of the Secretary-General on sexual violence in
conflict and children and armed conflict in the work
of the sanctions committees and their interaction and
exchanges of information with respective panels of
experts would strengthen sanctions committees’ focus
on violence against women and allow for perpetrators to
be pursued and sanctioned with greater determination.
That in itself would strengthen the deterrence element
vis-à-vis the perpetrators and support the protection
work carried out on the ground.
I did not intend to speak today on specific country
situations. However, I would like to conclude my
remarks by responding to the comments made by the
Russian delegation. We appreciate its concern regarding
the growing number of civilian casualties and women
suffering in eastern Ukraine. However, as we know, the
best protection for the women of eastern Ukraine is in
Russia’s hands. It is up to Russia to put an end to those
horrors by cutting off all supplies — military, financial
and personnel-related — to its proxies, the illegal
militants, whose abysmal lawlessness has been amply
documented by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights reports presented here

15-0265219/82

S/PV.7374

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

in the Council, and whose impunity has contributed in
the most direct of ways to the suffering that women in
eastern Ukraine are enduring.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important open debate. I would
also like to thank all the briefers for their statements
and to welcome the participation of non-governmental
organizations in this Council meeting.
Malaysia reiterates the importance it attaches
to general principles on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, and in particular to the protection of
women and girls in such situations. As a member of
the Council, Malaysia is keenly aware of the significant
responsibility shouldered in that regard and reiterates
its commitment to continue to contribute to efforts
further implementing such principles.
We continue to note with deep concern that in
many violent crises around the world, non-combatant
women, girls and children comprise the vast majority of
those in desperate need of protection and humanitarian
assistance. Malaysia shares the assessment that women
and girls are particularly vulnerable and face specific
risks in conflict situations. We are deeply disturbed
by the increasing trend of the deliberate targeting of
women and girls by belligerents in violent conflicts.
While great strides have been made in recognizing
the differentiated impact of armed conflict on women
and girls and in the corresponding efforts to respond
to their needs since the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), Malaysia is of the view that more could be
done. In that regard, one key aspect that could benefit
from more focused attention relates to the tendency of
policymakers to view women and girls as victims and
to design protection measures based on that perception.
Malaysia holds the view that much more could be done
to recognize the role of women as agents for action.
Such recognition could further empower them to play
an active role in creating a protection environment that
comprehensively addresses their immediate and longterm needs.
We all agree that the protection of civilians is one
of the most visible and key functions of a significant
number of existing peacekeeping operations. In
that context, Malaysia reaffirms its support for
prioritizing the protection of civilians mandates of
those peacekeeping missions. Given the unique and
disproportionate impact of armed conflict on women
and girls, Malaysia also believes it is relevant to

20/82

30/01/2015

assess whether current protection of civilians efforts
adequately address their concerns and needs. In that
regard, we note that the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations has developed a three-tiered approach to the
protection of civilians and believe that such approach
provides a useful way to frame the discussions on the
protection of civilians in general and the protection of
women and girls in particular.
Additionally, we support the Gender Forward
Looking Strategy 2014-2018 and hope that it will be
fully implemented in the context of fulfilling protection
of civilians mandates, including by ensuring that an
appropriate number of gender advisers and women
protection advisers are deployed to peacekeeping
missions where mandated. Malaysia also wishes to
underscore that Blue Helmets mandated to protect
women and girls must be held to the highest standards.
Therefore, we call for the strict implementation of the
zero-tolerance policy for sexual exploitation and abuse
by United Nations personnel.
Peacekeeping mandates have evolved over time to
become more complex and multidimensional. In that
regard, Malaysia shares the view that peacekeepers
and civilian personnel deployed in the field must be
equipped with the necessary skills and knowledge so
that they may navigate complex environments involving
multiple actors fulfilling diverse roles and mandates.
Therefore, it is important that peacekeeping missions
mandated to carry out protection of civilians tasks are
also supported with adequate means to do so, including
through the provision of resources and training for that
purpose. In that connection, Malaysia believes that
standardized training is especially important to ensure
a clear understanding of the general peacekeeping
mandate, including the protection of civilians
component where applicable, and to take into account
gender considerations and sensitivity.
Mindful of the need for such multidimensional
training, the Malaysian Peacekeeping Centre has
and continues to collaborate with the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations to provide training on
various aspects of peacekeeping for countries in Asia
and beyond. To date, the Centre has provided training
to roughly 2,000 peacekeepers from over 50 countries.
Most recently, the Centre, with the assistance of the
United Nations Development Programme and several
donor Governments, including Japan and Norway,
has embarked on a new training programme to cater
to the complex and multidimensional nature of new

15-02652

30/01/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

peacekeeping mandates. The current phase of the
project, which runs from March 2014 to December 2015,
involves developing training manuals and modules on
gender, cultural diversity in peacekeeping operations
and the protection of civilians.
Malaysia believes that creating an environment
conducive to the long-term protection of women
and girls is as important as addressing immediate
concerns in conflict situations. In the context of postconflict peacebuilding, the establishment of a secure
environment that would allow for development and
growth and for the building of domestic institutions and
capacities must be prioritized. Properly implemented,
such initiatives would contribute positively to
preventing a relapse into conflict.
The active participation of women and girls must
be encouraged so as to ensure that they can contribute
to ensuring that adequate strategies are developed in
post-conflict settings. For example, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes must
be able to address the needs of former women and girl
combatants, who often face stigmatization for their
non-traditional involvement in conflict.
Given that women are often thrust into positions of
responsibility in times of conflict and in post-conflict
scenarios, Malaysia believes that women and girls must
be given the tools and the opportunity to rebuild their
lives through education and economic opportunities.
On a related note, ensuring accountability and justice
for serious violations is also a crucial means of
guaranteeing long-term protection for women and girls.
We believe that tackling impunity through strengthened
justice mechanisms should be made a priority.
We hope that the discussion today provides
valuable perspectives that will be taken into account
in the various review processes that are ongoing this
year, including the global study and high-level review
of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
The intersection of the reviews on peace operations,
peacebuilding and women and peace and security
provides a unique opportunity to ensure that the rights
of women and girls are threaded throughout the efforts
to maintain international peace and security.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to thank you, Sir, for your work as
President of the Council for this month. I wish you
every success in your work. I also thank all speakers
for their very interesting contributions.

S/PV.7374

I wish to begin by stressing the importance of
today’s debate concerning the protection challenges
and needs faced by women and girls in armed conflict
and post-conflict settings. Significant progress has
been made since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000)
and subsequent relevant resolutions in establishing
standards and legal frameworks to protect women
and girls in armed conflict. Those resolutions are all
considered to be turning points in the way in which the
international community views the humanitarian needs
of women in conflict and post-conflicts situations.
Despite all this, we have seen an unprecedented
increase in the number of victims, especially in the
Middle East and Africa. Indeed, thousands of women
and girls in Syria have been victims of sexual violence,
including rape. In the Central African Republic, the
rape of women and girls has facilitated the widespread
transmission of the HIV virus. In South Sudan, the
latest report of the Secretary-General on conflictrelated sexual violence (S/2014/181) also cites incidents
of abduction and forced marriage.
The fight against impunity for the perpetrators of
such crimes against women and girls in armed conflict
is one of the greatest challenges that we face on the
ground. In that context, we stress the importance of
United Nations assistance to help the countries
concerned in strengthening their legal and judicial
institutions. Those countries must be able to prosecute
the guilty and ensure justice in order to guarantee the
protection of civilians, especially women and girls. In
some cases, and to that end the international community
must establish commissions of inquiry and fact-finding
missions to investigate these crimes.
We also invite the Security Council to consider
strengthening its cooperation with the International
Criminal Court in referring the most odious crimes.
In that context, peacekeeping operations must also
cooperate with national institutions to heighten
awareness and exert pressure to provide greater
protection and ensure that the perpetrators are brought
to justice. United Nations entities must also assist
countries in building a culture of respect and equality
and in establishing legal frameworks for women.
Another major challenge is the difficulty of
compelling non-State actors to respect international
humanitarian law. We must adopt sustainable strategies,
based on cooperation between the international
community and United Nations authorities, for
prosecuting the perpetrators of crimes against women

15-0265221/82

S/PV.7374

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

and girls. We must also ensure that peace agreements
do not undermine that responsibility.
To the best of its abilities, Jordan is seeking to
provide the best possible protection to Syrian refugees,
in particular women and girls. All refugees receive a
human rights handbook when they arrive in Jordan
to inform them of their rights and prevent their
exploitation. Refugees are welcome in public schools;
there are today some 100,000 Syrian girls studying in
our schools within and outside the camps. Jordanian
organizations also organize health-care training for
Syrian women and girls.
We have taken significant measures to protect
women and girls in conflict situations. We have
strengthened the participation of women in peacekeeping
operations and in decision-making processes. The
Jordanian armed forces have enhanced the role of
women in the military by increasing their participation
in peacekeeping operations and humanitarian missions,
and in the medical services by increasing their presence
in field hospitals in conflict zones. Jordanian military
women have played an important role in providing care
for Syrian refugees. We believe that the participation of
women in United Nations missions must be a priority,
and stress the importance of organizing training in that
area.
In conclusion, we believe that the protection of
civilians, in particular women and girls, should be
addressed independently of other issues related to
women. As we celebrate the twentieth anniversary of
the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the
fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), we must strengthen our activities in this field in
order to build a better future for women and girls.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): I should like to thank and
congratulate the Chilean presidency on convening this
open debate on the important issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, with particular emphasis on
protection challenges and needs faced by women and
girls in armed conflict and post-conflict settings.
I thank Assistant Secretary-General Kang and
Ms. Helen Durham, Director for International Law
and Policy of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, for their briefings. I extend special greetings to
Ms. Ilwad Elman, representing the non-governmental
organization community, whose important advocacy
role we acknowledge. We were particularly touched by
Ms. Elman’s eloquent plea.

22/82

30/01/2015

On this occasion, I would like to express our
recognition to the Secretary-General for his longstanding commitment to the defence and protection of
victims of armed conflict, particularly women, girls
and children.
As a matter of principle, and based on our own
experience, Angola supports the peaceful resolution
of conflicts through dialogue and negotiations, in the
conviction that addressing the root causes of conflicts
contributes to sustainable solutions. We strongly
believe that prevention is still the best way to address
potential conflicts situations; that States bear the
primary responsibility for the protection of their civilian
population, in situations both of peace and conflict;
and that the international community has a subsidiary
responsibility in addressing that very serious problem.
The latest report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2013/689)
underlines the fact that women are the main victims
of all kinds of violence, including murder, mutilation,
rape, sexual abuse, arbitrary arrest, abduction and
forced marriage. Women and girls are the main
victims of attacks on hospitals and schools, thereby
exacerbating their vulnerability in conflict and postconflicts situations.
We welcome the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral on women and peace and security of
23 September 2014 (S/2014/693), as well as the
adoption on 28 October 2014 of presidential statement
S/PRST/2014/21, on the special needs of internally
displaced and refugee girls and women. We share the
recognition that significant progress has been made
at the normative level with the adoption of resolutions
2106 (2013) and 2122 (2013), establishing the greater
involvement of the Security Council in issues relating
to women and peace and security.
In addition, the two high-level commitments
related to combating sexual violence — namely, the
declaration on the economic empowerment of women
for peacebuilding and the inclusion of criteria based
on gender in the Arms Trade Treaty — supplement the
framework I outlined earlier. However, great challenges
lie in the implementation and maintenance of the
progress achieved so far.
The year 2015 marks the fifteenth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), which, inter alia,
recognizes the importance of strengthening women’s
leadership in conflict prevention, conflict resolution

15-02652

30/01/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

and peacebuilding. We are confident that the highlevel review of this seminal resolution will provide an
important boost for the achievements of the objectives
it outlines. In a crucial year for strengthening the status
of women and the national and international levels,
strong political will and commitment to resolution
1325 (2000) will leverage women’s role in national,
regional and international institutions, thus promoting
their participation in conflict prevention and conflict
resolution. In that connection, we are convinced that the
expanded involvement of women in conflict prevention
and peacebuilding can make a crucial difference in the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Angola attaches great importance to the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, with particular emphasis
on the protection of women and children in accordance
with international law, international humanitarian law
and standards set out in international legal instruments
on human rights and the rights of refugees. The
empowerment of women contributes to the stability
of societies emerging from armed conflict, while the
promotion of their rights reduces their vulnerability and
strengthens their ability for self-advocacy, especially
by satisfying their basic needs to education, training,
employment, legal and psychological assistance and
access to health services, including reproductive
control in cases of pregnancy resulting from rape and
sexual abuse.
Angola’s experience has been quite positive,
with gender promotion at the forefront of the
Government’s programmes, as well as recognition of
women’s importance in political, economic and social
development, including their vital contribution to the
consolidation of peace and the reconstruction of the
country. We have adopted a strong legal and operational
position on the prevention of sexual violence. We
consider attacks against the rights of women to be
totally unacceptable and condemnable, and we deplore
the fact that sexual violence continues to be used as a
weapon and as a tactic of war.
The Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy in
relation to sexual abuse and exploitation by members of
peacekeeping missions and by humanitarian personnel,
including their strict adherence to the code of conduct,
is a welcome development in the fight against such
detrimental conduct. It is our understanding that greater
coordination and interaction between the Security
Council and regional and subregional organizations can
result in the development of more effective strategies

S/PV.7374

for the protection of women in conflict and postconflict situations and ensure greater opportunities for
the exercise of their rights, as well as the satisfaction of
their needs.
Moreover, we support the inclusion of additional
women military and police personnel in peacekeeping
operations. We are also of the view that special
attention should be given to the issue of sexual violence
in the formulation of United Nations mission mandates
and to mission engagement with communities as
a fundamental element for the establishment of
confidence with communities where missions are
mandated to protect. However, engagement with local
communities, including with women, should be carried
out in a safe and respectful manner, so that it does not
put women at further risk when they share information,
which is always very precious given the essential role
played by women in their communities.
Finally, Angola looks forward to the forthcoming
high-level review of the progress made and the obstacles
encountered in the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) at the global, regional and national levels. We will
continue to support the efforts of the United Nations to
ensure the protection of civilians in conflict and postconflict areas, while paying particular attention to the
protection needs of women and girls, thereby renewing
our commitment to respect international humanitarian
law.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, allow me thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict on the theme
“Protection challenges and needs faced by women and
girls in armed conflict and post-conflict settings”. We
welcome the concept note (S/2015/32, annex) prepared
to guide our deliberations. We also welcome Ms. Kyungwha Kang, Ms. Helen Durham and Ms. Ilwad Elman
and we thank them for their valuable briefings.
Armed conflicts and the recurrence of violence
in
post-conflict
situations
specifically
and
disproportionately affect women and children. We
often receive alarming reports of unacceptable acts of
violence that have been perpetrated against them. The
inequality, lack of access to justice, restricted or no
participation and representation at all levels and areas
of society that women face daily are exacerbated in
situations of armed conflict, thereby increasing their
vulnerability.

15-0265223/82

S/PV.7374

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The Government of the Bolivarian Repubublic of
Venezuela has established a development model focused
on the human being, in which equality between men
and women and human rights for all are guaranteed.
The Bolivarian Constitution of 1999, considered one
of the most progressive in world, incorporates and
institutionalizes gender equality in our society. It also
enshrines gender equality and non-discrimination on
the basis of race, ethnicity or religion. And it ensures
the promotion and protection of the human rights of
women. The inalienable rights of children are also
protected by our Constitution.
Venezuelan women have a leading role in the
political, economic, social and cultural life of our
country, as well as in the decision-making process,
thereby contributing directly to the building of a new
social order based on justice and the law. Equality
and gender equality are State policies in Venezuela.
Implementing the gender perspective in public policies,
defending the rights of women and promoting women’s
empowerment and leadership form a substantial part of
our social policies.
Violence against women is the most repugnant
aspect of religious intolerance and violence in society.
For that reason, Venezuela strongly condemns
discrimination, exclusion and violence against women.
We therefore address promoting women’s rights as
a priority of our agenda at the United Nations and
throughout the world, especially with an emphasis on
those places where armed conflict has destroyed a part
or all of the social fabric.
While women’s participation, representation and
leadership in the national life of countries have a crucial
role in protecting the rights of women and children, it is
equally important that women be involved in all areas
and at all levels of United Nations peacekeeping and
peacebuilding missions. It is inconsistent to pretend to
properly care for half of the civilian population affected
by armed conflict — women and children — without
understanding the human characteristics and historical
legacy of their social and political vulnerability.
Neglecting the vision, needs, interests, experiences and
capabilities of this population serves to undermine any
initiative that aims to effectively and comprehensively
address efforts at maintaining and consolidating peace.
Resolution 1325 (2000), adopted 15 years ago, has
among its goals fostering the participation of women
in the police, military and civilian components of
the peacekeeping operations of the United Nations.
24/82

30/01/2015

However, the results were not as expected: women’s
representation does not yet exceed 10 per cent. That
commitment remains unfinished business for the
United Nations.
We firmly believe that the participation of women in
all levels and areas related to the protection of civilians
greatly enhances the management of peacekeeping
operations, making it more appropriate, assertive and
comprehensive. We also believe that the participation of
women in peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations
facilitates and enhances access, support and follow-up
for women and children affected by armed conflict;
broadens information-gathering capacity, including
for reporting and preventing sexual violence; and has a
positive effect on the promotion of gender equality and
security of the local populations.
In short, we believe that the participation of women
in United Nations missions is crucial to prevent the
discrimination, marginalization and exclusion of and
violence against women and girls, and to protect and
meet the needs of local populations. We therefore call on
the Organization tirelessly to ensure strict compliance
with the provisions of resolution 1325 (2000). Reports to
the Secretary-General on violence against women and
children in ongoing armed conflicts and peacekeeping
missions are unacceptable and must be investigated,
and those responsible severely punished. We cannot
allow inaction to persist. We must ensure that all
peacekeeping operations incorporate broad women’s
participation and that their main mandates always
include the protection of children and women. We must
do better as an Organization to go beyond mere words
and achieve results in alleviating the human tragedy
facing these people.
Our delegation agrees with the Secretary General’s
statement in his report on the work of the Organization,
that
“humankind will not enjoy the peace and prosperity
that it seeks as long as half the population faces
violence and discrimination and mindsets that see
women and girls as second-class citizens.” (A/69/1,
para. 7)
Venezuela reaffirms the distinction between
protecting civilians and the concept of the responsibility
to protect. The protection of civilians has gradually been
accepted, universalized and codified in international
law over the course of decades. The Fourth Geneva
Convention and its Additional Protocols represent the

15-02652

30/01/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

highest international legal expression thereof. The
concept of the responsibility to protect, however, is
nothing more than a political statement on which there
is no consensus within the Organization.
A fundamental distinction between the two approaches
concerns the use of force. The responsibility to protect
implies military action against the sovereignty of a State
without its consent to bring an end to alleged violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law
falling within the definition of four specific crimes that
are often not verified in a transparent and independent
way. The protection of civilians, on the other hand, does
not address the strategic use of force and is applied in
the context of full respect for the Charter of the United
Nations and the guiding principles of peacekeeping
operations, including the consent of a host State or
parties to a conflict.
It is important always to recall that distinction, as
the protection of civilians must never be used as an
excuse for military intervention violating a country’s
sovereignty against its will, fomenting regime change,
destroying its infrastructure, dismantling its institutions
and leaving its citizens in chaos. We have all witnessed
such examples in recent history, in which the Security
Council has played a leading role.
In conclusion, we wish to reaffirm our absolute
commitment to the empowerment and protection of
women, and to thank you, Sir, for having convened this
important debate. However, given the importance of the
topic, in our view, our discussion should transcend this
setting and be held in the General Assembly, which is
the universal democratic forum par excellence.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Chile.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Austria on behalf of
the Human Security Network.
Chile proposed this open debate on the challenges
of protecting women and girls in armed conflict and
post-conflict situations because the protection of
civilians in armed conflict is one of the most pressing
issues before the Security Council. Promoting respect
for humanitarian principles is among our shared actions
and responsibilities to protect civilians — obligations
that the United Nations assumes when a State is unable
or unwilling to apply these principles.

S/PV.7374

The challenges of protecting women and girls in
armed conflicts and their aftermath call for us to help
promote and ensure the equality of women before the law
and justice. In that context, all discriminatory provisions
against women that increase their vulnerability in
conflict situations, such as those relating to citizenship
and access to land, must be repealed.
It is crucial to address threats to women’s safety
by promoting and protecting their rights and by
empowering them to fully enjoy those rights, taking
account of the particular needs. Likewise, we must
eradicate practices that are unacceptable regardless of
sociocultural or religious context, such as the use of
sexual violence as a weapon of war.
During 2014, the Council addressed humanitarian
situations affecting millions of women and girls, many
of them displaced or refugees. Serious violations and
abuses of human rights and international humanitarian
law, such as those committed by Boko Haram,
in particular against women and girls, including
abductions, are abhorrent acts and must cease. We
reiterate the call for the immediate and unconditional
release of all hostages, including the school-age girls
abducted in April 2014.
We welcome the contributions of the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to make available
to those providing assistance concrete programmes and
measures to ensure the protection of women and girls
such as promoting the equal protection of women before
the law and their access to justice; integrating women in
all peace processes and peace agreements; and ensuring
their participation in the planning and implementation
of recovery and reconstruction programmes in postconflict rehabilitation.
The United Nations and the Security Council
must take a rights-based approach in addressing the
multidimensional character of gender issues, thus
rejecting relativism and disregard for universal rights.
This should be part of a broader set of measures to
prevent violence against women in armed conflict or
post-conflict situations, guaranteeing reparations for
and the reintegration of victims, as well as fighting
against impunity. These concerns must not be left out
as we build a comprehensive post-2015 development
agenda.
Resolution 1325 (2000), together with its related
resolutions, constitutes a turning point for addressing

15-0265225/82

S/PV.7374

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

the major impact of armed conflict on women and girls,
who are victims of violence and surrounded by barriers,
discrimination and inequality. The document also
provides solutions in terms of participation, protection,
prevention and post-conflict recovery — the so-called
“four Ps” — which must be supported with sustainable
budgets for their implementation.
Gender must be mainstreamed throughout
international peace and security decision-making
bodies, mechanisms and processes, and integrated into
the formulation and implementation of the mission
mandates and the work of the Council. That should
include briefings from the relevant organizations and
Special Envoys as a preventive and early-warning
mechanism.
The Council’s upcoming 2015 high-level review to
measure progress on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) and the global study on its implementation
provide an opportunity to take advantage of the
experience we have gained and to improve the
capabilities of States and of the United Nations
system in this area. We are convinced of the need for
synergy between this review and those related to the
peacebuilding architecture, peacekeeping operations
and the special political missions of the SecretaryGeneral.
It would also be useful to conduct a working
meeting to analyse and recommend practical measures
that would complement the incorporation of the
protection of women and girls and a gender perspective
into the architecture to protect civilians within the
United Nations. As part of the agenda for the World
Humanitarian Summit in 2016, a fourth topic, focused
on addressing the needs of persons in conflict, could be
an interesting vehicle to consider these issues.
We trust that this debate will strengthen political
support to achieve the effective protection of civilians in
the terms enshrined in international law, international
human rights law and international humanitarian law.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to be able to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements
are kindly requested to circulate their texts in writing
and to deliver a condensed version when speaking in
the Chamber. I would also like to appeal to speakers
26/82

30/01/2015

to deliver their statements at a normal speed so that
interpretation may be provided properly. I wish to
inform all concerned that we will be carrying this open
debate right through the lunch hour, as we have a very
large number of speakers.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Sweden. I would also like to extend our
sincere condolences on the passing away of our friend,
Mr. Mårten Grunditz.
Ms. Wallström (Sweden): I thank you, Mr. President,
for your kind words about Mårten.
I am honoured to be back at the United Nations and
to speak on the same topic but in a different capacity. I
am now today in one person Danish, Finnish, Icelandic,
Norwegian and Swedish, so I speak on behalf of all the
Nordic countries.
I wish to thank the International Committee of the
Red Cross and the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security. The role and influence of civil
society in preventing conflict and building peace are
essential and must be supported.
For more than 150 years, the international community
has been in agreement that warfare should be made
less inhumane through the rules and principles of
international humanitarian law. Civilians should be
protected in armed conflict, and we need to prevent
and to respond to mass atrocity crimes in accordance
with the responsibility to protect. But those rules and
principles are challenged and sometimes even ignored.
Civilians are particularly exposed in today’s complex
and often protracted conflicts, as we have seen in the
Middle East and in West and Central Africa. That is
also the case in Syria and Iraq, for instance, where
hospitals and schools are being made the actual targets
of warfare. That must stop. The laws of war were
written during a time when only men were defined
as combatants and the responsibilities of women were
seen as far distant from the battlefield. A stronger
gender perspective needs to be applied to international
humanitarian law.
Women, and especially girls, are particularly
exposed to violence in conflict. Violence against women
affects one third of all women globally. The violence
is often amplified in areas affected by conflict. As we
see in many parts of the world today, extremism and
terrorism are prominent features of conflict situations,
constituting new kinds of threats to women’s rights and
lives and causing flight and displacement. We need to
15-02652

30/01/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV.7374

prevent and combat such violations of women’s and
girls’ fundamental human rights.

and in humanitarian and peace-building efforts to bring
in new angles, solutions and perspectives to problems.

Gender inequalities lie at the heart of the issue.
Progress on gender equality and women’s rights is
a goal in its own right, but it also remains a critical
factor in achieving poverty reduction and sustainable
development. Gender equality helps to prevent armed
conflicts and sexual violence in armed conflicts. We
must therefore firmly address the root causes of gender
inequality. That can be done by changing laws, norms,
practices and attitudes in societies that are denying
women’s and girls’ human rights. It can also be done by
enacting laws, including on equal rights to inheritance,
and by adopting policies that ensure women’s political
and economic empowerment and secure sexual and
reproductive health and rights and improve women’s
security and guarantee the right to quality education
for all women and girls.

This year provides an unique opportunity to assess
and accelerate the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda. Several critical reviews
are under way — the review of peace operations, the
review of the peacebuilding architecture, the review
of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and
the 2015 high-level review of resolution 1325 (2000).
In order to ensure coherence, all those reviews, and
especially their recommendations and outcomes, should
take into account the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) objectives in a more coordinated manner. To
promote the women and peace and security agenda is
not an isolated issue, it is a major part of the peace and
security agenda.

The fight against impunity for sexual and genderbased violence is also crucial, as I know from a
previous position I held. Each State has a duty and a
responsibility to investigate and prosecute such crimes.
It is primarily at the domestic level that solutions to
the impunity gap must be found. The role of the
International Criminal Court is complementary, but
nevertheless crucial in ensuring that accountability
is achieved. We therefore welcome and support the
undertakings, and in particular the special policy, of the
Chief Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
in order to more efficiently investigate and prosecute
sexual and gender-based violence crimes within the
jurisdiction of the Court. We recall the unique capacity
of Justice Rapid Response, in close cooperation with
UN-Women, to address situations where expertise is
needed for investigating such crimes.
Women are not only victims, but first and foremost
actors and agents of change. Sustainable peace and
security can never be achieved if half the population is
excluded. In excluding women, we are also excluding
the contribution of those sectors of society that are
considered as feminine or to be women’s duties. Those
often include raising children, education, health care
and taking care of the elderly. When those sectors,
which are vital to the long-term success of nations,
are not adequately represented in decision-making, it
is to the detriment of peace and security. We need the
participation of both women and men in formal and
informal processes, in mediation, peace negotiations

There has been an increase in the number of
mandates of United Nations missions that include
references to women and peace and security, but that is
not enough. All mandates should be based on a gendersensitive conflict analysis in order to also be tailored
to the security needs and to ensuring the participation
of women and girls. Gender issues should be part
of reporting requirements, and all United Nations
missions should have a gender adviser at the strategic
level, supplied with resources relevant to his or her
tasks. Leadership is critical in ensuring progress on
this agenda, at the highest levels of the United Nations
as in Member States, and I am glad to hear that come
out of this discussion.
Lastly, to underline the importance of the post2015 development agenda, the Nordic countries support
goal 5, on gender equality, and goal 16, on freedom
from violence and peaceful societies, proposed by the
Open Working Group on Sustainable Development.
These goals together include targets concerning the
prevention of all kinds of violence, including violence
against women and girls. We believe that the post-2015
development agenda represents a unique opportunity
to address violence against women, including sexual
violence, on a fundamental level. It is a chance to make
real progress.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Mukerji (India): I would like to join others
before me in thanking our briefers for this open debate.
I would also like to thank the delegation of Chile for

15-0265227/82

S/PV.7374

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

having circulated the concept note to guide our debate
(S/2015/32, annex).
As a country whose representative, Hansa Mehta,
introduced the focus on women in the text of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights in 1948, India
is strongly committed to the rights of women globally.
My delegation speaks on the subject of our debate
today on the basis of extensive experience in United
Nations peacekeeping operations over the past six
decades. India, as the single largest contributor to these
operations, having sent over 180,000 troops to 43 of
the 68 peacekeeping operations mandated so far by the
Council, is deeply conscious of the significance of the
topic of this open debate today.
We are committed to a zero-tolerance policy
on violence against women. When the first United
Nations peacekeeping operations were mandated by the
Council, we contributed our troops to ensure that these
operations were successful and that they would result in
keeping the peace. This objective of keeping the peace
was the best guarantor of the protection of civilians,
especially women, caught up in armed conflicts.
Until a few years ago, our experience was that the
traditional mandate of United Nations peacekeeping,
anchored in the three principles of consent of parties
to the dispute, impartiality and the non-use of force
except in self-defence and defence of the mandate, were
sufficient to keep the peace and ensure the protection of
civilians in the area where United Nations peacekeepers
were deployed.
However, the threat faced by civilians in armed
conflict situations has undergone a significant
change in recent years, especially due to the change
in the nature of armed conflicts. Whereas earlier, our
peacekeepers were deployed to keep the peace between
States, we are now witnessing a steady increase in
the deployment of United Nations peacekeepers in
situations of internal conflict within Member States.
It is a matter of concern that most of these situations
appear to be open-ended, often due to the breakdown
of national governance structures within the country,
as well as to the evident inability of the Council to
address and nurture sustainable political solutions to
such conflict situations. The impact of this instability
and violence has been felt by the most vulnerable of the
civilian populations, especially women and girls.
As the concept note points out, the increased
participation of women in redressing such situations

28/82

30/01/2015

could make a significant difference in finding a
solution to this problem. The participation of women in
all aspects of the prevention and resolution of conflicts
is an important policy measure that the Council should
encourage when mandating peace operations.
India was the first State Member of the United
Nations to implement such a policy when we contributed
an all-female formed police unit to the United Nations
Mission in Liberia in 2007. As former United States
Secretary of State Hilary Clinton told the Council in
2009, we have set an example that must be repeated
in United Nations peacekeeping missions all over the
world. The Council should make an assessment of
whether this has actually happened since then, or not.
Our experience in Liberia showed that the actual
requirements for addressing issues confronting women
in armed conflict were related to the concept of
peacebuilding, rather than peacekeeping. We believe
that the time has come for the Council to disaggregate the
complex multidimensional nature of its peacekeeping
mandates and focus on addressing issues confronting
women in armed conflict situations through focused
peacebuilding activities, so that the transition to a
post-conflict society can be sustainable. Such an
approach would give greater scope to humanitarian
and development actors to take appropriate action
against the exploitation and abuse of women caught
in situations of armed conflict. The concept note
stresses the importance of women’s empowerment in
this context. We would underscore the inherent linkage
between women’s empowerment and development in
order to sustain the peace.
In conclusion, we would like to refer to the recent
establishment of the High-Level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations by the Secretary-General, who has
made a conscious effort to enable the Panel to focus on
women’s issues. We would recommend that the Council
forward the conclusions of this open debate, including
the views expressed by Member States not members of
the Council, like us, to the Panel for its consideration.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Patriota (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): Mr. President,
I congratulate you and the Mission of Chile for having
organized this meeting and for having drawn up a very
informative concept note (S/2015/32, annex).

15-02652

30/01/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

(spoke in English)
I would also like to thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Kyung-wha Kang, as well as Ms. Helen
Durham and Ms. Ilwad Elman, for their enlightening
presentations.
Today’s meeting can be seen as the starting point
of a vital year for gender issues at the United Nations.
While the Security Council prepares for its high-level
review on women and peace and security, we expect
both the report of the Independent High-Level Panel on
Peace Operations and the results of the 10-year review
of the peacebuilding architecture to be informed by
a progressive gender perspective, and we associate
ourselves with the words of the Foreign Minister of
Sweden in highlighting the importance of coordination
in that respect. Brazil looks forward to cooperating
constructively with these interrelated endeavours.
Women play a vital role in all societies and cultures.
Unfortunately, however, they continue to find many
obstacles in terms of equality of opportunity, access to
justice, economic and social rights, and participation
in decision-making systems. Their protection,
advancement and empowerment should be at the heart
of all activities fostered by the Organization.
Any debate on the protection of civilians must
consider, first and foremost, that preventing armed
conflict from arising is the most effective way to shield
the civilian population, including women and girls,
from the dangers of war. In this regard, we cannot
stress enough the importance of using all political
and diplomatic instruments available, including
good offices and mediation, to promote the peaceful
settlement of disputes. The spiral of violence that leads
to war, displacement and abuses against vulnerable
groups such as women and girls is not unavoidable.
It is often the consequence of misguided judgment,
questionable concepts of morality, and an inability to
learn from experience.
The use of force carries the risk of causing
unintended casualties and disseminating violence and
instability. Even when force is employed with the aim
of protecting civilians, it does not make collateral
damage or unintended destabilization less tragic. In this
sense, full compliance with international human rights
law, international humanitarian law and international
refugee law is required of those attempting to safeguard
the well-being and integrity of women and girls.

S/PV.7374

Bending the rules weakens the multilateral system and
has brought much misery to civilians.
In this regard, it is crucial that the Council employ a
non-selective approach when discussing the protection
of civilians. One cannot condemn the horrid attacks in
Syria, Afghanistan and Nigeria while remaining silent
before blatant violations against civilians in Gaza. All
violations must be condemned with equal vigour. Every
civilian casualty is a tragedy and every life should be
equally valued by the Council.
As the report on the strategic review of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2014/956)
recently stressed, the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts may also be carried out through political
and civilian processes, reconciliation efforts at the
community level, and the establishment of a protective
environment. None of this can be accomplished without
including women in a meaningful way.
The presence of women among negotiators
substantially increases the effectiveness and legitimacy
of peacekeeping and peacemaking initiatives, from
mediation efforts to power-sharing agreements. The
same logic applies to the long-term processes of
reconstruction, recovery and peacebuilding in the
aftermath of conflicts. The greater participation of
women in the civilian and military leadership of
peacekeeping missions, as seen in the United Nations
Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus, would be a positive step
in that regard.
The Brazilian Government is translating these
calls into concrete action: in 2014, both the Ministry
of External Relations and the Ministry of Defense put
in place mechanisms to foster gender equality and
recommended women-oriented policies within the
Foreign Service and the Armed Forces of Brazil. We
have also sought to enhance protection mechanisms for
vulnerable groups in regional and multilateral forums.
For instance, the differentiated protection needs of
women refugees were given special emphasis in the
Cartagena+30 Brazil Declaration, adopted by Latin
American and Caribbean countries in Brasilia last
December.
Physical protection, while clearly vital, is merely
part of the range of gender-oriented measures that the
United Nations and its Members should promote. We
must also strive to advance the position of women in
society at all times, not only during conflicts and in

15-0265229/82

S/PV.7374

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

their aftermath. Empowering and emancipating women
requires concrete and specific policies to foster their
social inclusion and economic self-determination, while
tackling all forms of descrimination and impunity.
Men must be mobilized, as in the He-For-She solidarity
campaign for gender equality, which we fully endorse.
The benefits of mustering the support of women
in war-torn societies have also been observed in many
of the situations being followed by the Peacebuilding
Commission.
Social development is the ultimate form of
protection for vulnerable groups, particularly women
and girls. Gender equality and the protection of women
should be everyday concerns. The whole range of
political, humanitarian and development-related bodies
of the Organization, including the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council, the Peacebuilding
Commission and UN-Women, should be part and parcel
of our joint efforts towards a world where women and
girls are not only protected from violence, but also fully
empowered in every way.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Ioannis Vrailas, Deputy
Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations.
Mr. Vrailas: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with this
statement.
We welcome the focus of today’s debate on the
needs faced by women and girls in armed conflict
and post-conflict settings. Women and girls face
discrimination and violations during all phases of
conflict The use of sexual and gender-based violence
as a tactic of war is just one of such violations. Conflict
often increases women’s responsibilities as care-givers
and breadwinners for extended families, and does so
under difficult circumstances. A vast majority of the
displaced population is made up of women and girls.
Almost 15 years after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), we can see an important level of political
commitment and activity in the field of women and
peace and security. However, at the same time, we have
30/82

30/01/2015

been witnessing a series of troubling developments
linked to conflict leading to mass displacements,
humanitarian catastrophes and serious violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law.
Women and girls are often the main victims. We should
therefore strengthen our resolve to implement, in a
systematic and sustainable way at national, regional and
global levels, the commitments that we have made. We
have the policies and mechanisms in place, but we need
to make more efficient and better use of them. We need
to make sure that civilians, including women and girls,
are protected during conflict, and that humanitarian aid
reaches those most in need. Given the changing nature
of conflicts, we need to develop innovative ways to
communicate principles of international humanitarian
law and to ensure humanitarian access. The rotection
and relief provided must correspond to the needs of the
whole civilian population.
We need to systematically tailor humanitarian
responses so that they address the specific needs faced
by women and girls during armed conflict. That can
include conducting gender-sensitive needs assessments
and collecting sex- and age-disaggregated data, as well
as making progress in linking relief, rehabilitation
and development. The EU continues to address the
specific needs of women and girls through genderand age-sensitive programming, using a three-track
approach that combines mainstreaming, targeted
actions and capacity-building. The European Union
has also introduced a gender-age marker, a tool to
assess how strongly EU-funded humanitarian actions
integrate gender and age considerations.
We note with concern the continued sexual violence,
rape, forced marriage, forced prostitution, trafficking
and sexual slavery that characterize an increasing
number of conflicts, as well as the continuing use of
sexual and gender-based violence as a tactic of war.
We welcome the clear global, regional and national
commitments taken to tackle this issue, including those
made at the Global Summit to End Sexual Violence
in Conflict, held in June 2014, the call to action
on protecting girls and women in emergencies, the
framework for cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union and the joint communiqués
between Special Representatives of the SecretaryGeneral and an increasing number of Governments.
We must end impunity for crimes of sexual
violence, which must be properly investigated and
prosecuted. In that regard, we emphasize the significant

15-02652

30/01/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

advancement in international law made by the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court, as well as
by non-permanent international criminal tribunals, in
combating sexual violence in conflict. We commend
UN-Women and Justice Rapid Response for their roster
of experts specifically trained in investigating sexual
and gender-based crimes. We also welcome the increased
use of the human rights- and sexual violence-related
criteria in the Security Council sanctions regimes. We
welcome the Secretary-General’s guidance note on
reparations for sexual violence, published in June 2014.
Attention to the protection of women and girls
and their participation in conflict resolution and postconflict peacebuilding must be transformed from an
exception to a standard practice, through systematic
inclusion in policy guidelines, codes of conduct and
training. It should also receive the attention of senior
management in missions and other conflict resolution
and peacebuilding mechanisms. Seventy per cent of
the EU’s own missions deployed in 2013, including
all military operations, had at least one gender
adviser-trainer. The EU continues its work on specific
training modules on human rights and gender in crisis
management, ensuring a focus on sexual violence in
armed conflicts. Gender advisers must be deployed
in all United Nations peacekeeping operations and
special political missions. We also call for the further
deployment of UN-Women protection advisers.
To improve the situation of women and girls, we
need to make better use of the international legal and
policy instruments. The Convention on Elimination
of
Discrimination
against
Women’s
general
recommendation No. 30, on tackling challenges to
gender equality in situations of conflict, is a landmark
achievement. The EU welcomes the development of
a guidebook to support more effective reporting by
States parties to the Committee. We also underline
the importance of reviewing our progress on women
and peace and security in the context of the twentieth
anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for
Action.
The resilience of women and girls in situations of
conflict and displacement must be acknowledged, and
their capacity to be active agents in conflict resolution
and in building lasting peace harnessed. The principles
of protection and participation go hand in hand. We
continue to implement an EU systematic plan on women
and peace and security: the comprehensive approach to
the implementation of these resolutions. The second

S/PV.7374

report on the implementation of the comprehensive
approach, from February 2014, also sets the EU priority
areas for the next reporting period of 2013-2015,
which include transitional justice, women’s political
participation and economic empowerment, women’s
involvement in peace processes and preventing sexual
violence in conflict. Seventeen European Union
member States have adopted national action plans with
the aim of strengthening their action on resolution 1325
(2000).
We look forward to the global Review of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) this year.
We hope that it provides an additional push to make all
our commitments on women and peace and security a
reality. Preparations for the review will be conducted in
parallel with the peacebuilding review and the review of
peace operations. That provides us with an opportunity
that we must not miss in order to embed a strong gender
dimension in the United Nations peace and security
architecture. The upcoming review of peace operations
should aim at achieving a model of peacekeeping
that puts a strong focus on the protection of civilians.
Tackling sexual violence should be a priority. United
Nations peace operations should play a critical role in
the implementation of the responsibility to protect, as
they are often in the front line when a State is unable or
unwilling to protect civilians from the risk of atrocity
crimes. In this context, United Nations operations need
to be staffed and equipped in a way that allows staff
to better interact with the local population and civil
society organizations, with the overarching aim of
responding to warning signals and reducing the risk of
atrocity crimes.
This is a year of reviews at the United Nations,
including the reviews of resolution 1325 (2000),
peacebuilding and peace operations. We need
to work together to ensure that these parallel
processes — which are to shape the way we deal with
peace and security — are ambitious and strategic.
We have a great opportunity to advance the cause of
the protection of civilians and to redouble our efforts
to alleviate the suffering of women and girls who are
trapped in the dynamics of violent conflict.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Schieb (Germany): At the outset, let me thank
all the briefers for their insightful presentations, as well
as Chile for having organized this open debate. I also

15-0265231/82

S/PV.7374

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

thank Ms. Elman for her statement on behalf of civil
society.
Mr. Llanos took the Chair.
Germany aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union and by the
representative of Switzerland on behalf of the Group of
Friends of the Protection of Civilians.
Women and girls face special challenges and needs
in armed conflict and post-conflict settings. They are
particularly vulnerable and affected, since they face
an increased risk of sexual violence. Rape, forced
pregnancy, sexual trafficking or enslavement, and
many other forms of brutal abuse have become vicious
tactics of warfare for many parties to conflict. As we
speak, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
Boko Haram — just to name two of the many vicious
perpetrators — are killing, raping and abducting
women and girls, and leaving thousands behind forever
traumatized. In Syria, indiscriminate aerial bombings,
including the use of barrel bombs, and indiscriminate
shelling continue to result in deaths, injuries and
the displacement of civilians, including women and
children. In December alone, at least 107 civilians
including 27 children, were reportedly killed in Aleppo
as a result of aerial attacks and shelling.
This has further devastating effects. Many women
and girls in conflict areas, as well as boys, no longer
leave their homes out of fear. As a consequence, they
have no access to medical care or education. In such
a situation, we face the risk of a generation of lost
children without an education who bear the trauma of
war. And they are the ones who are supposed to rebuild
their society after the end of a conflict.

30/01/2015

are particularly important for the better protection and
strengthening of women and girls in armed conflict and
in post-conflict situations.
First, for peacekeeping or peacebuilding missions,
gender-sensitive predeployment training is essential.
Germany believes that standardized gender-sensitive
training for participants in United Nations-led peace
missions should be made a prerequisite for deployment.
Nationally, our Federal Ministry of Defence attaches
particular importance to gender-related issues in
intercultural and regionally specific preparations
for international operations. Moreover, it regularly
conducts courses to train women for peace and security,
together with police and other agencies.
The second element is accountability. If perpetrators
can expect to go unpunished, parties to conflict are
more likely to use sexual violence as a tactic of warfare.
Nowhere is this more evident than in Syria, where the
regime and the foreign militias it has invited, as well as
some extremist groups, are killing and abusing women
daily without any fear of punishment. Accountability is
also crucial for reconciliation. If hatred and fear prevail
in a society, peace will not be possible. Obviously,
accountability is first and foremost the responsibility
of each State. Therefore, national capacities need to
be built and supported. It is crucial that victims not be
afraid to speak up. Justice and security sector reforms
are essential. When effective prosecution in a State
concerned is not possible, then the only way to achieve
justice for victims and survivors is to transfer these
cases to international jurisdiction, including to the
International Criminal Court.

Women play an equally key role in post-conflict
situations. Armed conflicts often lead to fundamental
changes to the social fabric. Many children grow up
without a father, and women have to assume more
responsibility if society wants to advance. Therefore,
resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent related
resolutions focus on the two aspects of strengthening the
participation of women in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts, and incorporating policies and procedures
that protect women from gender-based crimes, such as
rape and sexual assault.

Thirdly, victims of sexual violence need as much
assistance as possible to find their way back to a normal
life. We have to set up the necessary capacities in the
given region. Countries that participated in the Berlin
Conference on the Syrian refugee situation last October
committed themselves in the Berlin declaration to
taking action against sexual violence. Germany funds a
number of relevant projects in that respect. To name but
a few, in Iraq we have helped to set up six centres for
psychological trauma treatment and a social forum for
victims of the Anfal campaign. In Syria’s neighbouring
countries, we are building centres for treatment, support
and counselling for Syrian victims of sexual violence.

From the outset, Germany has been a strong
supporter of resolution 1325 (2000) within the United
Nations framework, as well as in terms of activities
and project support. Let me mention some aspects that

Fourthly, monitoring and reporting on conflictrelated sexual violence is central to all protection. Data
collection is essential to our ability to prevent, protect
and respond, and the precondition for any justice

32/82

15-02652

30/01/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

and accountability mechanism at the national and
international levels. In addition, casualty recording is
crucial. Sex- and age-disaggregated casualty data can
reveal the tactics and patterns of determination of the
perpetrators that cause particular harm to women and
girls. Women protection advisers therefore need to be
deployed, and monitoring and reporting arrangements
should be established in all relevant peacekeeping
and special political missions. A good example is the
mandating of women protection advisers in the Mission
in the Central African Republic.
As in the past, Germany will maintain its strong
support for UN-Women, UNICEF and all other relevant
actors, including civil society organizations, to ensure
that women and girls are protected in armed conflicts
and can play a strong role in post-conflict societies.
Before closing, let me touch upon the conflict in
Ukraine, where civilians — among them, many women
and girls — are being killed on a daily basis in the heart
of Europe. On 24 January, a horrific attack on residential
areas occured in Mariupol, killing at least 30 civilians
and injuring many more. The Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission
confirmed that the rockets were launched from rebelheld territory. In his recent briefings to the Council,
Under-Secretary-General Feltman expressed the view
of the United Nations that the indiscriminate shelling of
civilian areas of Mariupol could constitute a war crime.
How many more reminders does it take to make sure
that all sides to that conflict push more vigorously for a
peaceful solution?
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): I want to thank you, Sir, for
hosting this important meeting and today’s speakers
for their briefings to the Security Council and, more
importantly, for the work they do to protect civilians.
One of the founding fathers of this institution,
President Franklin Roosevelt, envisioned a world
committed to four freedoms: freedom of speech,
freedom of worship, freedom from want, and freedom
from fear. As the United Nations prepares to celebrate
its seventieth anniversary, this vision should guide our
efforts, particularly when it comes to women. Far too
many women, from Syria and the Sudan to the Central
African Republic, are living without freedoms and in
great danger. They are often intentionally targeted by
extremist groups, caught in the crossfire between rival

S/PV.7374

factions, and driven from their homes, where they face
new threats such as being sold into slavery, raped or
killed.
Extremist groups like the Taliban, Boko Haram,
Al-Qaida and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS) deny women their most basic rights: the rights
to get an education, to earn a living, to choose a
marriage partner, and even to walk down the street
unaccompanied. It is not just extremist groups
subjugating women. In the most repressive nations,
there is no sympathetic police force to investigate
crimes against a woman, no honest judiciary to hear her
case, no independent media to give voice to her plight,
and no free and fair elections to give her hope.
Growing up in Iran, Reyhaneh Jabbari faced every
one of these injustices. Reyhaneh was just 19 when she
was arrested for killing a man whom she said was trying
to drug and rape her. Reyhaneh was placed in solitary
confinement, denied access to a lawyer and tortured
mercilessly. There was no proper investigation, no due
process and no fair trial. Reyhaneh became another
victim of an unjust system. She was sentenced to death
and hanged in Tehran.
Reyhaneh’s story is a familiar one in the Middle
East. Tyrants and extremists believe that by silencing
women they can silence modernization and civilization.
We must do everything in our power to oppose the
extremists who want to drag us back to the Dark Ages.
Every time they try to take away a woman’s voice, we
must give that woman a voice. We must be the voice
of Arwa, a 15-year-old Yazidi girl who was captured
and raped by ISIS fighters and whose sisters are still
in the hands of the Islamic State. We must be the voice
of Laila, a woman from Myanmar who was dragged
through the streets and then beheaded in Saudi Arabia.
And we must be the voice of Noora from Yemen, who
was just 11 when she was forced to marry a much
older man, who raped and abused her. Those women
need our attention, and they need the attention of our
Governments and the United Nations — not tomorrow,
but today. We must send the message that we will no
longer tolerate such barbaric crimes, not now or ever.
As a father who raised his daughter, Oren, in Israel,
I can say that I cannot imagine raising my daughter in
any other Middle Eastern country. Israel understands
that, when women participate as equal partners in the
decision-making process, society benefits as a whole.
Gender equality is enshrined in our 1948 Declaration
of Independence. Golda Meir was elected Prime

15-0265233/82

S/PV.7374

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Minister more than 40 years ago. Israel was the third
country in the world to elect a woman to its highest
office. Today, Israel is the only country in the Middle
East where women have presided over each of the
three branches of Government. The opportunities and
freedoms afforded to Israeli women transcend religion
and ethnicity. An Arab woman living in Israel enjoys
more rights and freedoms than a woman anywhere else
in the Middle East. They are elected to our Parliament;
they are leading physicians, respected academics,
renowned lawyers, successful chief executive officers
and esteemed scientists. They have not merely broken
the glass ceiling; they have shattered it.
The protection of women is an issue that is close
to my heart. I have a mother and a wife and a daughter
and a sister, and I am expecting my first granddaughter
to arrive in a few weeks. I want them all to live in a
world where every nation and every person respects
their intelligence and abilities. I want to live in a world
where there is zero tolerance for the oppression and
persecution of women. I want to live in a world where
the perpetrators of violence against women are brought
to justice. And I want to live in a world where women
are afforded the dignity and respect they deserve.
We are the ones who can create that world. President
Franklin Roosevelt said, “We have always held to the
hope, the belief, the conviction that there is a better life,
a better world, beyond the horizon.” I know that there is
a better world beyond the horizon, and together we can
make it a reality.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Seger (Switzerland): I am pleased to speak
today on behalf of the members of the Group of
Friends of the Protection of Civilians in Armed
Conflict — Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada,
France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein, Norway,
Portugal, the United Kingdom, Uruguay and my own
country, Switzerland. The Group of Friends is grateful
to the Chilean presidency of the Security Council for
organizing today’s open debate so as to ensure that the
issues of the protection of civilians and women and
peace and security remain high on the agenda.
I run the risk of echoing much of what has already
been said by previous speakers, but certain messages
cannot be repeated enough. The Group of Friends
strongly condemns all violations of international
humanitarian law, international human-rights law and
refugee law committed against civilians, including
34/82

30/01/2015

women and girls. Those responsible for atrocities such
as crimes involving rape and other forms of sexual
and gender-based violence; killing and maiming;
wilfully impeding relief supplies, in contravention
of international humanitarian law; and mass forced
displacement too often go unpunished. In that regard,
we would like to draw the Council’s attention to the
policy paper on sexual and gender-based crimes
issued in 2014 by the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court. Recent trends point to an increase in
the deliberate targeting of women and girls in conflict,
in blatant disregard of international human-rights law.
The abduction of girls, which has been mentioned, and
the specific targeting of women by violent extremists
are two striking examples. Attacks on schools and
on health-care facilities and their personnel are
particularly despicable. As has been said, we cannot
tolerate impunity, and we must ensure that all the
perpetrators of such atrocities are held accountable
for their actions. In that respect, we underline the
importance of strengthening inter-State cooperation
and States’ cooperation with international jurisdictions
in fighting impunity.
Women and girls face a wide range of threats and
human-rights violations and abuses in armed-conflict
and post-conflict situations. More must be done to
ensure that our response takes into account the full
range of violations and the differences in the impact
that they can have on women and girls. Certain groups
of women and girls who are particularly vulnerable
or disadvantaged, such as displaced persons, may be
specifically targeted or find themselves at an increased
risk of violence. Women and girls face a greater risk
of forced displacement, enforced disappearance and
disproportionate impacts as a result of the destruction
of civilian infrastructure, particularly education
and health-care facilities. The forced displacement
of women and girls is often the result of inequality
in citizenship rights and in their involvement in
decision-making processes, of discriminatory land and
property rights, of the gender-biased application of
asylum laws, of obstacles to registering and accessing
identity documents and of the breakdown of protection
systems in conflict situations. In that connection, the
Group notes the importance of ensuring that the United
Nations reports sex-disaggregated data and casualty
records, and of recognizing the different needs of
women, men, girls and boys.
Women’s participation in the formulation and
implementation of responses to protection challenges
15-02652

30/01/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

is essential, and humanitarian assistance must take
into account gender-specific needs and reduce the
risks faced by women and girls, including in the early
phases of response. However, improving the protection
of women and girls should also be done through their
empowerment in society, not merely during conflicts
and their aftermath. Indeed, the disproportionate
impact of conflict on women and girls is often related
to underlying inequalities, which must be addressed in
any effort to end impunity with regard to sexual violence
and other serious crimes, in order to provide victimcentred support and create mechanisms to ensure that
women are empowered and supported through social,
economic and political inclusion and opportunities. In
that regard, we would like to recall here the importance
of implementing resolution 1325 (2000) and other
related resolutions.
The Group of Friends also stresses the importance
of prevention and the need to prioritize the use of
peaceful and diplomatic tools, including good offices
and mediation, in the protection of women and girls in
conflict and post-conflict environments. In that regard,
we have taken note of recent initiatives that emphasize
the role of the United Nations in prevention, such as the
recently released Framework of Analysis for Atrocity
Crimes and, of course, the Rights Up Front Action Plan.
In conclusion, we encourage the Security Council
to strengthen the protection of civilians across its
agenda, including in the mandates of peacekeeping
operations and special political missions. Looking
ahead, the parallel reviews in 2015 of the peacebuilding
architecture of the United Nations, the women and
peace and security agenda and peace operations will
be an important opportunity to examine how we can
reinforce the effectiveness and consistency of our
common action in protecting civilians and ensure that
it is gender sensitive and reflective of women’s voices
on the ground.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.
Mr. Ruiz (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I would
first like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this debate and for this morning’s briefings by the
representatives of the Secretariat, the International
Committee of the Red Cross and civil society.
The relevance of today’s debate is clear when we
look at the news of humanitarian crises that dominate
the international media. The numbers show that 2014

S/PV.7374

has the dishonourable distinction of having been the
year that produced the greatest number of displaced
persons and refugees globally since the Second World
War, with approximately 51 million people having
been pushed far from their homes, uprooted from
their surroundings, stripped of everything and pushed
to foreign lands, in which women, facing the sadness
of having lost everything, represent, together with
children, the greatest number of victims. That situation
of course presents countless challenges at all levels,
both to the emergency organizations and the response
system of the United Nations and other agencies and to
the capacity of the affected Governments to respond, in
terms of both human and economic resources.
Furthermore, the factors that create situations
of vulnerability for women and girls in situations of
armed conflict are not the same as in the past, where
risks derived from international conflicts or foreign
interventions. In fact, the number of those types of
conflicts has declined by about 80 per cent over the
past 20 years. From an average of seven international
conflicts each year, between 1946 and 1967, we have
gone to less than one per year on average since the start
of the millennium. It is for that reason that Member
States and the Security Council must confront instances
of such violence with measures that are adapted to the
specific nature of the new perpetrators, who in many
cases are groups that are outside the law, that show a
total disregard for international norms and legislation
and that, in any case, do not respond in the same way
as States.
Colombia has experienced that at first hand. Having
traversed for five decades the bloody path of the selfdegradation of internal armed conflict, it became clear,
in seeking solutions to such phenomena, that our focus
should be comprehensive and that support for victims
should be constant. Therefore, the political commitment
of the Government of President Santos Calderón from
the beginning, and even before the start of the peace
talks in Havana, included prioritizing victims through
the victims and land restitution law. In that broad legal
framework, there began the development of public
policies that prioritized Colombian women, children
and adolescent victims of the conflict. Colombia has
understood that need as a fundamental element for
achieving sustainable and lasting peace. To that end,
our country has been implementing policies throughout
the national territory aimed at bringing the presence of
State institutions where they have been lacking.

15-0265235/82

S/PV.7374

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The establishment of security in all corners of the
country was essential, accompanied by institutional
strengthening and the establishment and implementation
of multiple programmes with a gender focus to meet
the specific needs of the women and children who
were victims of the conflict. Concrete examples of
that commitment at the highest level in our country are
the national public policy for gender equality and our
comprehensive plan to ensure that women can live free
from violence, enacted in 2013, along with the public
policy guidelines on risk prevention, protection and
the guarantee of the rights of women victims of armed
conflict.
However, those examples of the legislation that
we have developed and the policies that we have
implemented do not speak as tangibly to the impact on
the people as their own stories, such as that of Cielo
Fernández, a woman from a rural area on the Colombian
Atlantic coast called Tierralta, where her husband,
Óscar Darío Hurtado, was murdered by a paramilitary
squad in 2007. The violence took the lives of a great
many other people as well that year, and Cielo simply
could not run away. Her daughter Ariana needed her.
Cielo, for example, says “I do everything for my love
of Ariana.” “Everything” meant not leaving her land.
Cielo was linked to the national plan for assistance
and comprehensive reparation to victims. She received
compensation, which contributed to her acquiring decent
housing, including support from the Victims United
programme to finish her studies as an administrative
assistant and get a better job. For her, reparation is not
the money itself, but what can be recovered with it. I
quote Cielo:
“For example, it allowed me to dream of having a
home and to study and get ahead, and through my
example of overcoming challenges, to encourage
my daughter to see that this is good. Before that,
it was clear that nothing happened for the victims,
and now the Government is present. People are not
so helpless, and that allows one to see the world
from another perspective.”
To arrive at a consistent and comprehensive
undertaking, such as that just mentioned, Colombia has
developed and put in place tools to make it possible to
find solutions to those kinds of problems and have an
impact on cultural transformation, which is needed so
as to change paradigms in which the use of force against
women and girls is accepted. Only in that way will we
be able to achieve success and reconciliation and create
36/82

30/01/2015

new opportunities to build a new peaceful country. All
this has been confirmed by the most recent stage of the
peace negotiations in Havana, which we hope will soon
reach a conclusion.
In their various roles in times of crisis, women have
demonstrated courage as drivers of the reconstruction of
the social fabric and of forgiveness and reconciliation,
and have played an important role in achieving economic
and political inclusion. When one sees courageous
women who have the unlimited and committed support
of the Government, as in my country, the democracy
existing in States is strengthened and it sends a clear
signal that it is possible, in the darkest night, to find
effective solutions.
Allow me to conclude by referring to the way in
which my Government has managed to understand,
after many attempts to achieve peace, that peace is also
built by healing society, allowing ourselves to mourn
after all the barbarity of more than five decades of
conflict. To do that, the Government has been working
in rural areas especially affected by such phenomena,
seeking to help victims overcome the fear, mistrust and
traumatic experiences that they have suffered as a result
of the atrocities of the conflict, as well as to strengthen
their capacity to demand their rights and their active
participation in local democratic institutions, based on
the conviction that it is necessary to transform society,
disarm people’s minds and heal the wounds of our
national soul.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belgium.
Mr. Buffin (Belgium) (spoke in French): Belgium
fully associates itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union, as well as with the
statement delivered by the representative of Switzerland
on behalf of the Group of Friends of the Protection of
Civilians.
We also thank the Chilean presidency of the
Security Council for having convened this open debate
today, and the various speakers for their contributions.
Current events once again make this debate even
more relevant. The situation in Syria and Iraq continues
to deteriorate, and every day children are the first to
suffer the effects of conflict. In Nigeria, the cynicism
of the Boko Haram terrorists seems to have no limits.
After kidnapping several hundreds of young students,
who are still being held, Boko Haram recently used
young girls wearing suicide vests to commit attacks. In
15-02652

30/01/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

those three countries in conflict, women and girls are
being targeted by Boko Haram, in Nigeria, and by the
psuedo Islamic State, in Iraq and Syria, precisely owing
to their gender. It is the responsibility of all of us to
ensure that the horrific crimes that are being committed
do not go unpunished. We need to help the States in
question to prosecute the perpetrators of such acts
and, on the basis of the principle of complementarity,
to allow international justice to be administered, in
particular by the International Criminal Court.
We can guarantee the protection of civilians
in conflict only if we involve women more in the
design of strategies, policies and specific missions
for that purpose, as well as in their comprehensive
implementation. We encourage the Security Council
and the contingent-contributing countries to ensure
greater involvement by women. Furthermore, beyond
conflicts and the protection of the civilians affected,
greater involvement by women in social life — whether
through equal access to justice, education, the means to
earn their subsistence, the right to vote or the effective
right to have access to the highest political and economic
offices — would facilitate the reduction of community,
religious and social tensions. Every one of us must rise
to meet that goal and that challenge.
For its part, in 2013, Belgium put in place its
second national action plan on women and peace
and security for the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). Consistent with the fundamental goals
of the resolution, the plan sets up concrete policies
that allow Belgium — at home or abroad, through
participation in the activities of the United Nations and
other international organizations — to better promote
and protect the rights of women and increase their
participation in the decision-making process.
Better protection of civilians in armed conflict
requires better anticipation of the occurrence of
conflicts. Similarly, in an armed conflict, every
United Nations official should know exactly what his
or her responsibilities and obligations are, as well as
those of the Organization as a whole. Good internal
and external coordination of United Nations action is
also required for that purpose. Through the objectives
designed to meet those needs, the Secretary-General’s
Human Rights Up Front initiative makes a significant
contribution to the protection of civilians. The same
can be said about the recommendation made by the
Secretary-General in his 2013 report on the protection
of civilians, which called for

S/PV.7374

“work[ing] together to establish a common United
Nations system to systematically record civilian
casualties as part of broader efforts to monitor and
report on violations of international humanitarian
and human rights law, drawing on good practice and
expertise from within the United Nations, Member
States and civil society.” (S/2013/689, para. 71)
The fight against all forms of violence against
women, especially sexual violence, and the
condemnation thereof has been a foreign policy and
development-cooperation priority in Belgium for nearly
20 years. Therefore, under the Belgian presidency of the
Donor Support Group of the International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC) and the Red Crescent, Belgium
has decided to work on that issue. The approach of
the ICRC in that area is particularly interesting and
worthy of note. As part of its action, the ICRC shifts
the burden of proof of the existence of sexual violence
in situations of armed conflict and other situations of
violence. Acts of sexual violence are now presumed to
have taken place in such cases unless proven otherwise,
which enables the ICRC programmes to mainstream
that presumption in its response.
Belgium also wishes to emphasize the need to
provide peacekeeping missions with clear mandates to
protect civilians. The protection of civilians is one of
the core missions of the United Nations. However, in a
2014 report, the Office of Internal Oversight Services
highlighted the tendency in peacekeeping missions not
to use force to defend civilians under attack, despite
the fact that the use of force is legal and in accordance
with the Security Council’s intentions. One explanation
for that state of affairs would be a lack of clarity in
mandates. By contrast, resolution 2098 (2013), on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which creates
a special Intervention Brigade and authorizes it to use
force to protect civilians, shows that with a clear and
specific mandate, a peacekeeping mission can truly
ensure the protection of civilians in armed conflicts.
The clarity of mandates is therefore fundamental
but not sufficient. There must be three other elements
in place — strong operational control of activities of
the contingents, clarity among the troop contingents on
the tactical approach, and a good working relationship
between the peacekeeping operations and the
humanitarian actors on the ground.
Finally, let me take this opportunity to reiterate
the support of my country for France’s initiative in

15-0265237/82

S/PV.7374

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

favour of a voluntary limitation on the use of the veto
in cases of mass crimes and on the implementation of
the concept of responsibility to protect. This year is
the tenth anniversary of the official acceptance, during
the United Nations World Summit, by all Member
States of the responsibility of each State to protect
its population from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity. In that context,
we welcome the launch by the Secretary-General of
the Framework of Analysis for Atrocity Crimes. Like
the rigorous application of principles of international
humanitarian law at the heart of the legal obligation
to protect civilians in armed conflict, the effective
implementation of the responsibility to protect allows us
to ensure that children, women and men do not fall prey
to unnecessary suffering. Again, it is the responsibility
of each of us, of each State, to ensure that that goal does
not fall by the wayside.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.
Mrs. Colín Ortega (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico welcomes the briefers’ statements and thanks
the delegation of Chile for convening today’s debate on
an issue that presents a challenge to the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Civilians remain the primary victims in situations
of armed conflict, largely because of the use of weapons
in heavily populated areas. It is not only a question
of collateral damage — civilians are increasingly
becoming targets of groups or factions in conflict.
It is estimated that over 80 per cent of the victims of
armed conflict are civilians. And among them, the
majority are women and girls displaced from their
places of origin and subject to sexual violence and
inhuman treatment. Mexico reaffirms its condemnation
of any attack — deliberate or not — against civilian
populations, whether or not it is part of a widespread
pattern in armed conflict.
The effective protection of civilians requires
respect for international humanitarian law and human
rights law, as well as measures to guarantee compliance.
Civilian populations should not be the object of the
conflict, nor should they be used directly as part
of a military tactic. International humanitarian law
provides for special protection for women and girls in
armed conflict, protection against sexual violence and
protection for pregnant women as well as mothers and
children, prisoners of war and women detained during

38/82

30/01/2015

armed conflict. It is our responsibility to ensure that
such protection is provided.
Mexico reiterates its commitment to the United
Kingdom initiative to prevent sexual violence in
conflict, which seeks to strengthen the response to such
violence and to promote the efficacy of the International
Protocol on the Documentation and Investigation of
Sexual Violence in Conflict, adopted in June 2014. We
hope that that initiative will facilitate investigations
that allow for the prosecution of those responsible and
for the provision of care to victims.
The calls that the Security Council has made over
the past 15 years in the area of women and peace and
security provide an international perspective on the
very transformation of armed conflicts and new threats
to international peace and security. From the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000) to the presidential statement
adopted last October (S/PRST/2014/21), which calls on
Member States to protect their populations, particularly
women and girls affected by violent extremism, the
Council, often criticized for inaction, has contributed
significantly to highlighting the way in which our
societies have lagged behind on gender issues and has
shown the way towards putting the measures adopted
to close the gap into practice. Facing new challenges in
the agendas of the protection of civilians and women
and peace and security requires prevention strategies
that include the strengthening of economic and social
rights and the promotion of opportunities to ensure the
full participation and inclusion of women.
Mexico hopes that the review processes on
peacekeeping operations, the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and the comprehensive study
on the implementation of that resolution will serve to
provide us with a road map for integrating our concerns
on the protection of civilians and women, especially in
conflict and post-conflict situations.
Lastly, I wish to stress the central element of the
protection of civilians in peacekeeping operations, a
theme that will also be discussed during the next session
of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.
In that regard, my delegation calls on the Security
Council to take into account the recommendations
and policies that the Special Committee will produce
with regard to setting up or renewing peacekeeping
mandates. We also call on all other Member States to
effectively participate in that debate.

15-02652

30/01/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): I commend
the presidency of Chile for convening this open debate
on an issue that needs special attention and requires
immediate measures on the part of the international
community. I would also like to take this opportunity
to congratulate Chile for its very active and successful
presidency of the Security Council. We also thank the
briefers for sharing their insights on the issue before us,
in particular the representative of the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security.
The need to uphold the rights of women and
girls should be clearly specified in the mandates and
operations of United Nations peacekeepers and country
teams, host Governments, regional organizations and
all other stakeholders, with the rules and responsibilities
explicitly demarcated and effectively coordinated,
including in cases requiring the use of force.
The make-up of peacekeeping operations, with
political, military, human rights and humanitarian
components and a gender focal point within a single
United Nations mission, has recently demonstrated
significant results. Given the widespread gender
inequality in post-conflict countries, gender units
in peacekeeping missions will require additional
personnel, more funds and technical assistance to
accomplish their tasks. In addition, the gender unit
must lobby for a gender-sensitive outlook and public
awareness among country leaders at all levels and at all
phases of a conflict, and facilitate greater contacts for
women with Government officials.
We envisage the following steps, among others:
the recruitment of more women from civilian, military
and police ranks in peacekeeping operations, including
through increased engagement on the part of troop- and
police-contributing countries; the further training of
Department of Peacekeeping Operations gender teams;
regular reviews of the policies that serve to guide and
assist field missions aimed at better implementing
resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions;
the broader representation of women from the outset
and throughout all stages of the peace process; the
conclusion of peace agreements that are be compatible
with international standards and instruments with
regard to women’s rights; support to women, including
victims, and the training of women aimed at promoting
their participation in political and social life in their

S/PV.7374

countries, including in electoral processes, both as
candidates and voters; and special attention to women
in conflict zones affected by climate change.
My country, Kazakhstan, accords the utmost
importance to the security of women and girls during
conflicts and in post-conflict phases, as is evident in
its engagement in the United Nations peacekeeping
operations in Western Sahara and Côte d’Ivoire.
Likewise, civilian protection has been a priority for my
country. We have supported Governments in the region
and beyond with humanitarian assistance, and we have
and contributed significantly to regional peace and
security.
My country is among the 27 member States of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
to have developed a national action plan on women and
peace and security, which focuses on early warning and
actions, dialogue, facilitation, mediation support and
post-conflict resolution. Key international instruments
related to women and peace and security are also
reflected in our national legislation relating to gender
equality and freedom from gender-based violence.
Kazakhstan, which is bidding for a non-permanent
seat on the Security Council for the 2017-2018 term, has
assigned high priority to its commitment to protecting
women and girls, and pledges to be a strong voice on
their behalf.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Thailand.
Mr. Bamrungphong (Thailand): At the outset,
Thailand wishes to commend Chile for organizing this
important debate and for the comprehensive concept
note outlining key elements for the discussion today
(S/2015/32, annex). My delegation would also like to
express its appreciation to the briefers for their useful
information and insights.
Thailand aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the representative of Austria on
behalf of the Human Security Network.
The stakes are high at today’s debate because we
continue to witness civilians, particularly women and
girls, bearing the brunt of armed conflicts and of postconflict settings. They still fall victims to deliberate and
indiscriminate attacks, sexual exploitation and abuse,
brutal violence and systematic human-rights violations.
The protection of civilians, particularly women and
girls, is multidimensional and needs a holistic approach

15-0265239/82

S/PV.7374

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

in order to address the whole spectrum of issues. Please
allow me to address some key points in that respect.
A universal guiding principle states that the
protection of civilians is the primary responsibility
of the host Government. However, the effective
protection of civilians requires the collective efforts
of all parties concerned. All parties to a conflict must
honour and strictly comply with their obligations under
international laws, international humanitarian law and
human-rights law. Those who breach those laws and
violate human rights must be held accountable. The
protection of civilians is one of the core mandates of
the Council. When civilians are at risk, the Security
Council must act decisively and in a timely manner,
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations
and international law. Thailand supports the Council’s
authorization of the 10 peacekeeping missions with
protection mandates.
We are also pleased to learn that the United
Nations attaches importance to the development of an
overarching strategy on the protection of civilians and
an action plan for 2015-2016 that encompasses activities
across the entire spectrum of the protection of civilians.
Thailand stands ready to cooperate with the United
Nations for the success of that important undertaking.
However, Thailand emphasizes the need to ensure that
the resources and capacities allocated to those missions
match their mandates and activities.
Let me turn to another important aspect of the
protection of women and girls in armed conflict and
post-conflict settings. Thailand attaches importance to
increasing the number of female peacekeepers and to the
proportion of women holding senior positions in United
Nations field missions, as reflected in the SecretaryGeneral report on women and peace and security
(S/2014/693). Those goals need to be achieved. We also
support the mainstreaming of a gender perspective in
peacekeeping operations and the provision of training
on gender sensitivity before deployment in order to
better address the specific needs of women and girls in a
conflict environment. Thailand envisages contributing
more female peacekeepers and gender experts to the
Security Council’s roster of experts in the very near
future. At the same time, we must fully enforce the
zero-tolerance policy in order to ensure that women
and girls are not sexually abused or exploited by their
protectors under their protection mandates.
Thailand is an advocate of the women and peace
and security agenda. We cannot emphasize enough the
40/82

30/01/2015

significance of the role and participation of women
in peace processes. We strongly believe that women
and girls are not, and must not be, victims. They are,
in fact, agents of change and agents of peace. Against
that backdrop, Thailand, in partnership with the
International Peace Institute, will conduct a series of
events focusing on women’s participation in peace
processes and peacekeeping operations. It is our fervent
hope that the findings, analyses and recommendations
from that project will greatly contribute to the Security
Council’s high-level review on women and peace and
security.
In conclusion, we must not fail to protect civilians.
The international community has to do its utmost.
Thailand is committed in that regard: it will continue
to work closely with the United Nations and the
international community on that task, which allows no
compromise.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mrs. Gatto (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union (EU) and with the statement delivered by the
representative of Switzerland on behalf of the Group
of Friends of the Protection of Civilians in Armed
Conflict, and wishes to add a few remarks in its national
capacity.
In these times, civilians have become victims of
senseless violence in an increasing number of conflicts
all over the world. Neither women, girls, children
nor other vulnerable groups have been spared in this
most urgent crisis, which the Security Council has
been discussing over the past year. All of the genderbased forms of human-rights violations and abuses
experienced by women and girls, such as killings, sexual
violence, forced marriages, attacks on schoolgirls and
restricted access to education and health facilities, need
to be addressed by the Council urgently and resolutely.
This is not a matter of applying normative
tools — not any more. In fact, since its adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, the Security Council has recognized women’s
vulnerability in armed conflict, as well as the vital
importance of increasing women’s participation in
the prevention and resolution of conflicts, including
peacekeeping and humanitarian operations. Moreover,
in accordance with resolution 2122 (2013), the Council
has committed itself to promoting gender equality

15-02652

30/01/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

and the empowerment of women in conflict and postconflict situations. In addition, the operationalization
of the United Nations monitoring and reporting
mechanism has been established and further developed
in recent years. However, as pointed out in the
Secretary-General’s latest report on women and peace
and security (S/2014/693) and the 2014 International
Criminal Court Prosecutor’s policy paper on sexual and
gender-based crimes, the global landscape for women’s
and girls’ rights in armed conflict and post-conflict
settings remains dire. That is why it is time to take
common action, led by the strongest possible political
will of the Council.
In that respect, Italy underlines the importance
of strengthening cooperation among Member States
and with international jurisdictions in order to fight
impunity. The effective protection of civilians depends
on a culture of accountability in all conflict scenarios.
Even States that are not parties to the International
Criminal Court nor a party to the Rome Statute
can cooperate with the Court and contribute to the
discharge of its mandate, thereby assisting in reaching
a fundamental goal of the international community as
a whole.
In strengthening the protection of civilians,
women and girls in particular, we must ensure that the
perpetrators of crimes realize that the Security Council
will effectively follow through in enforcing individual
responsibility for crimes under international law.
Prevention and the response to gender-based
violence were a priority during our recently concluded
presidency of the Council of the European Union, in
line with our long-term commitment to that issue.
The Italian Government has implemented specific
programmes targeting women and girls and the
survivors of violence in Africa, Asia and the Middle
East that aim to bridge the gap between humanitarian
and development assistance. Consistent with our work
on the ground, we have made the issue a priority in
the EU humanitarian affairs working group in Brussels,
and we organized the European Union round table on
gender-based violence in emergencies, which called for
renewed action at all levels.
Prevention is key. Let me conclude by stressing the
importance of disseminating early-warning mechanisms
to prevent gender crimes in conflict-related situations.
To counter the scourge of violence against women and
girls, due priority should be given to the peacekeeper
policy units that are providing training in the protection

S/PV.7374

of women’s rights, as well as to strengthening United
Nations monitoring and assessment capabilities. To that
end, Italy warmly welcomes the launch of the Human
Rights Up Front initiative by the Secretary-General
some months ago, and the recent adoption of analytical
tools for preventing such heinous acts, such as the
Framework of Analysis for Atrocity Crimes.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Vencel (Slovakia): Slovakia thanks the
presidency of Chile for initiating this important open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
We think that it is important that this issue remain under
the periodic consideration and review of the Security
Council and all United Nations agencies.
Slovakia fully aligns itself with the statement made
by the observer of the European Union. In addition
I would like to raise a few points that we consider
important when addressing this topic, namely, the
significance of adapting to the new emerging threats,
accountability and the contribution of security-sector
reform.
First of all, we share the concern of the SecretaryGeneral that, despite the progress achieved with respect
to increased resources, structures and more robust
and complex mandates for peacekeeping missions, we
are still seeing inconsistent results with regard to the
effective protection of civilians in challenging conflict
environments. In fact, we are seeing a continued rise
in the number of civilians who are victims of armed
conflicts. Part of the challenge is that new and emerging
conflicts are themselves becoming more complex, and
our traditional responses and approaches are therefore
becoming less effective.
In that regard, we can see from the recent conflicts
involving Boko Haram in Nigeria and the Lake Chad
Basin region, as well as the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant in Iraq and Syria, that the new security
challenges are increasingly transnational in nature,
yet our strategies for the protection of civilians still
remain constrained by traditional national approaches.
We need to continue to adapt and strengthen our tools
and approaches to deal with such new emerging threats,
and to become more proactive in identifying them. We
also need to ensure our ability to respond quickly and
effectively, as well as to develop more coherent and
coordinated approaches to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.

15-0265241/82

S/PV.7374

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Although it is the primary responsibility of each
State to protect its own citizens, we must admit that
host States quite often fail to fulfil their obligations,
owing either to a lack of resources or, unfortunately,
to a lack of political will. In that regard, we urge the
Security Council to be mindful of all violations of
international humanitarian law and to make sure that all
of the relevant resolutions dealing with the protection
of civilians are fully implemented. Most important,
we need to promote the continued development of both
international and national accountability mechanisms
that could better deter such violence against civilians,
end impunity and ensure that all victims have effective
and timely access to justice. That also includes
more consistent application of the United Nations
due-diligence policy, so that we can ensure that we
develop the proper vetting mechanisms for the partners
and actors whom we support and so we do not end up
reinforcing actors who are responsible for violations of
human rights and violence against civilians.
Over the past decade, the United Nations has made
significant progress in enhancing its capacities to
provide protection to civilians whose lives are in danger,
as the Council has shifted peacekeeping well beyond
its traditional role of monitoring the implementation of
peace agreements. Today’s peacekeeping missions are
multidimensional and are more often mandated to play
an active role in the physical protection of civilians.
Although that United Nations function is critical in the
early phases of United Nations interventions, we need
to ensure, in parallel, that we build more sustainable and
durable preventive measures in the longer term. In that
regard, we need to develop more effective approaches
to building State institutions, which will gradually
decrease dependence on international support aimed at
ensuring basic protection for civilians. Going forward,
in order to ensure that national security institutions
become more responsive, effective and proactive in
protecting civilians, we must ensure that we build
efficient, professional, responsive and accountable
State institutions through a national security-sector
reform process.
Slovakia strongly supports the full implementation
of resolution 2151 (2014), on security-sector reform. We
have to revisit the effectiveness of the security-sector
reform processes that we are supporting and gauge
whether we are in fact applying good practice in the
area of security-sector reform.

42/82

30/01/2015

First, the foundation of any security-sector reform
process should be an inclusive approach and local
ownership. Too often, we see that the most vulnerable
groups, which are also the most susceptible to
violence, and the most affected by insecurity are also
marginalized in the process of shaping, managing and
overseeing security-sector reform. Representative and
inclusive security institutions in which there is balanced
staffing at the operational level, but also in management
and in oversight capacities, should be promoted. That
should include full consideration for strengthening the
involvement of women in all aspects of the securitysector reform process, especially in management and
oversight capacities.
Secondly, we cannot simply focus on training and
equipping activities, but we must also focus on building
effective oversight, management and accountability
mechanisms. We are seeing, in places such as Iraq,
Libya and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where
the international community has provided substantial
support to building the capacity of State or even
non-State institutions, that such capacity has been used
to harm the civilian populations because there is no
system of accountability or oversight in place to deter
such institutions from abusing their power. Similarly,
better trained and equipped military or police services
have also sometimes proven to be ineffective, or without
any noticeable impact on security, simply because the
growth in capacity is not matched by a similar ability to
manage and direct that capacity.
Thirdly, we need to review the skills and training
that are to be expected from security personnel. In that
regard, in addition to basic training, we need to ensure
that we sensitize all security personnel, both national
actors whom we help to train and peacekeepers whom
we deploy, on the key concepts of human security. Such
training also needs to integrate and mainstream the
issues of human rights, child protection and gender.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the
importance of ending impunity for violations of
applicable international humanitarian law and human
rights law as part of a comprehensive approach to seeking
sustainable peace, truth and national reconciliation. We
believe that ending impunity is also an instrumental
part of preventing future violations. In that regard,
we would like to stress the need for a comprehensive,
independent and impartial investigation of all
abuses and massive attacks against civilians and the
indiscriminate destruction of civilian infrastructure, in

15-02652

30/01/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

accordance with internationally recognized standards
and procedures.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Austria.
Mr. Sajdik (Austria): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the members of the Human Security
Network, a cross-regional network composed of Chile,
Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland, Jordan, Mali, Norway,
Panama, Slovenia, Switzerland, Thailand, South
Africa as an observer and my own country, Austria.
The Human Security Network is an informal group
of States that advocates for greater use of the humansecurity approach in policies and programmes at the
international, regional and national levels.
Let me first of all thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Kyung-wha Kang, Director Durham and
Ms. Elman for their comprehensive statements. On
behalf of the members of the Network, I would also
like to thank the presidency of Chile for convening this
open debate, which focuses for the first time on the
protection of women and children and the challenges
and needs that they face.
The Network was created in the context of the
Ottawa Convention, which bans landmines, and the
protection of civilians in conflict has always been
central to our concerns. We cannot overemphasize
the importance of discussions such as today’s on how
best to ensure the security, protection and dignity of
civilians affected by armed conflict.
This year, the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action will celebrate its twentieth anniversary,
and 15 years will have passed since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security. Those documents recognized for the first
time the disproportionate impact of armed conflict on
women and girls, and in particular the important role
of women as active agents of change in the promotion
and maintenance of peace and security in all phases of
conflict resolution and peacebuilding. Moreover, in view
of this year’s review of United Nations peacekeeping
and peacebuilding operations, it is particularly timely
to focus on the protection of civilians, especially the
challenges faced by women and girls.
Despite the unrelenting efforts of the international
community, civilians continue to account for the
majority of casualties in armed conflicts, which have
a huge impact on women and girls. Grave abuses and
violence against women and girls, including sexual

S/PV.7374

violence and rape, continue to be a common occurrence
in conflict and post-conflict settings all around the
world. We unequivocally condemn sexual and genderbased violence, and we are determined to address and
fight those heinous crimes.
Likewise, the Network remains particularly
concerned by the difficulties in taking action to ensure
the protection of civilians, including women and girls.
Preventive measures and early warning and monitoring
mechanisms to counter violence against women and
girls must be strengthened. States themselves bear the
duty to protect civilians and to ensure and respect their
rights.
We stress the importance of fighting impunity and
ensuring accountability under national or international
jurisdictions. The perpetrators of such crimes must be
brought to justice. Commissions of inquiry and factfinding missions are useful tools for substantiating
alleged violations, thus opening the way for successful
prosecution and conviction. When States are unwilling
or unable to bring perpetrators to justice, a referral to
the International Criminal Court is a complementary
means for preventing impunity and restoring dignity
and hope to the survivors of atrocities, their families
and communities.
Moreover, parties to armed conflicts must allow
the rapid and unimpeded access of humanitarian
relief for civilians in need. The effective protection
of civilians requires that humanitarian assistance,
especially in terms of medical personnel and relief, is
respected, protected from attacks and enjoys freedom
of movement. That is essential to the exercise of
humanitarian personnel’s functions.
The economic, political and social empowerment
of women and girls reduces their vulnerability and
enhances their ability to protect themselves and
exercise their rights. In that regard, we need to ensure
that women and girls’ interests are fully respected and
systematically integrated into the framework of peace
processes. We need to increase the number of women
in peace talks, peacekeeping missions and in senior
positions at the United Nations, as well as in other
international, regional and subregional organizations.
In order to achieve this, further investments in female
skills development are necessary and measures to
promote women have to be taken. That includes
changing mindsets. Ultimately, the media should avoid
labelling women as victims of armed conflicts. Rather,
the perception of women and girls as positive agents

15-0265243/82

S/PV.7374

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

of change who play diverse roles in building, securing
and maintaining peace must be reinforced. In that
regard, the stories of women who have contributed to
the resolution of conflicts and peace agreements must
be told and heard in order to dispel such stereotypes.
Please allow me now to add some observations in
my national capacity.
Austria has been a strong supporter of the Council’s
increased attention to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, based on the conviction that all parties
must comply with international human rights as well
as humanitarian and refugee law. Since the adoption of
resolution 1894 (2009) under Austria’s presidency of
the Security Council in 2009, considerable progress has
been made. Austria has developed an interdisciplinary
training course on the protection of civilians that is open
to national and international participants. The course
recently received a certificate from the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and is now recognized as a
centre of excellence for training in the protection of
civilians.
Explosive weapons are a sphere of particular concern
to Austria. We commend the Secretariat’s efforts,
including the expert seminars organized by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs over the
last two years in London and Oslo to raise awareness
about the devastating humanitarian consequences of
explosive weapons for civilians, including for women,
and to restrict their use in populated areas, where they
cause indiscriminate harm. Austria will itself host an
expert meeting in Vienna in September.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s recommendation
to avoid the use of explosive weapons in populated areas,
as well as the Secretariat’s efforts to develop practical
measures and guidance to reduce their humanitarian
impact. Austria hosted an international symposium
on women and peace and security at the beginning of
November 2014 in Vienna. By focusing on neglected
aspects, such as the issue of gender-sensitive conflict
analysis or the role of the media, we intended to provide
useful input to the global study on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). We hope that the ongoing
reviews of the United Nations peacekeeping operations,
the peacebuilding architecture and the 2015 high-level
review and global study on women and peace and
security will provide evidence of what can be achieved
by effectively integrating a gender perspective in
conflict prevention and management.

44/82

30/01/2015

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Senegal.
Mr. Cisse (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the outset,
allow me to commend Chile for holding this debate. I
also wish to commend the President for his outstanding
leadership of the work of the Security Council, which
follows in the wake of the recent laudable Chadian
presidency last month.
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa took the Chair.
This important debate on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict is taking place 15 years after the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) and on the eve of the
twentieth anniversary of the holding of the 1995 Fourth
World Conference on Women, as well as on the threshold
of the adoption of a new generation of development
goals. Those events remind the international community
of its responsibility for women’s empowerment, which
has been hindered by the many acute crises of which
they are unfortunately the biggest victims.
Today’s meeting gives us an opportunity to closely
look at the progress made as well as at the challenges
that remain, especially in the light of the developments
set out in the recent report of Secretary General Ban
Ki-moon (S/2014/693), which supports the briefings
of Ms. Kyung-wha Kang, Assistant Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Helen Durham of the
International Committee of the Red Cross and Ms. Ilwad
Elman of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace
and Security. We express our heartfelt thanks for their
briefings.
Armed conflicts, in so far as they encourage
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, such as sexual and gender-based
violence, undermine the foundations of peace and
obliterate development efforts. In that regard, the
delegation of Senegal is pleased at the strengthening of
the normative framework that followed the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), which is evidence of the interest
attached to the protection and leadership of women in
armed conflicts.
We take note in that regard, besides resolutions
2106 (2013) and 2122 (2013), of the adoption of two
important texts — the declaration of commitment
to eliminate sexual violence adopted by 150 States,
including Senegal, on the sidelines of work of the
General Assembly at its sixty-eighth session, as well

15-02652

30/01/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

as the statement of the Peacebuilding Commission on
women’s economic empowerment for peacebuilding.
Likewise, it is appropriate to welcome both the
increase in the number of peacekeeping operations with
a mandate to protect civilians, including those currently
deployed in Mali and Central Africa, and the inclusion,
in 2013, of the issue of women and peace and security
in a significant number of agreements and resolutions,
including those creating or extending the mandate of
a peacekeeping mission. In addition, the participation
of women took place in all official peace mediations
undertaken by the United Nations in 2013, while their
corresponding participation stood at 86 per cent in
2011. Despite those very encouraging statistics, women
and girls continue to be mistreated in different theatres
of conflicts or as displaced persons, as numerous cases
of rape attest to, as well as exploitation, sexual slavery,
pregnancies, forced abortions and prostitution, attacks
against schools or, still yet, threats against families.
This serious state of affairs is unworthy of a world
that makes the protection of civilians one of its priority
concerns. That is why it is urgent to increase our
efforts to protect women and girls in these moments
of tragedy and horror fuelled by an uncontrolled
circulation of weapons. It therefore seems important
to us — continuing in the footsteps of resolution 1894
(2009) and taking the opportunity afforded us by the
review of peacekeeping operations — to make the
protection of civilians a priority when defining the
mandates of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
We also need to ensure that peacekeeping troops that
are to be deployed in a conflict receive heightened
training in the protection of civilians, as well as be
provided with holistic protection strategies.
Beyond the prevention of sexual violence, there
is an urgent need to impose targeted sanctions and
to ensure accountability for the perpetrators of these
acts, which international criminal law has qualified as
crimes against the humanity and as genocide.
I should also like to welcome here the tireless efforts
of Ms. Zeinab Hawa Bangura, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
to bring parties to conflict to assume their share of
responsibility in the protection of women, particularly
in the context of the United Nations campaign relating
thereto.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the interest
that Senegal has as a troop-contributing country in

S/PV.7374

the issue of women and peace and security, especially
during this decisive year, which will bring the question
of women to the top of the world’s priorities.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the observer of the Holy See.
Monsignor Urbańczyk (Holy See): My delegation
wishes to congratulate Chile on its presidency of the
Security Council and for convening this important
debate. Today’s discussion provides a much-needed
opportunity to focus on the impact of violence on
women and girls in conflict settings and to identify
the initiatives that must be undertaken to eradicate this
scourge that continues to escalate.
The Holy See firmly opposes recourse to armed
conflict as a means of solving disputes and recognizes
that women and girls suffer disproportionately from the
ravages of conflict. In conflict settings women and girls
are more vulnerable as a result of inequality and are
directly targeted as part of fear tactics and deliberate
assaults on their rights.
The belief in the sanctity of human life and the
inherent dignity of the human person is the foundation
of the principles of Catholic social teaching. All
persons, women and men, girls and boys, by virtue of
their human dignity are free and equal. Violence in all
its forms is an affront to human dignity and, moreover,
sexual violence against women tears at the very fabric
of society.
That was pointed out by His Holiness Pope Francis
when he emphasized that we must not overlook the
fact that wars involve another horrendous crime, the
crime of rape. That is a most grave offence against the
dignity of women, who are not only violated in body
but also in spirit, resulting in a trauma hard to erase and
with effects on society as well. Sadly, even apart from
situations of war, even today all too many women are
victims of violence.
My delegation remains concerned about the
continued lack of attention and priority to the protection
of women and girls who are targeted and attacked
purely because of the faith they profess. The lack of
focus and priority for protecting them is troubling
when Christians face extinction in some regions of the
world and in other regions Christian schools for girls
are targeted and attacked. That is a shared reality of
members of all faiths, and therefore requires the shared
commitment of members of all faiths and Governments
strongly to condemn and confront such violence.

15-0265245/82

S/PV.7374

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The Catholic Church, through its institutions and
agencies throughout the world, is providing assistance,
care and support to thousands of survivors of sexual
violence in situations of armed conflict. Those
institutions and their courageous individuals sacrifice
themselves on a daily basis, and many of them have
paid dearly for their endeavours. Because of that
permanent local presence in the world’s most disasterprone areas, this network of Catholic institutions and
agencies responds rapidly and effectively to address the
consequences of violence in armed conflict.
In conclusion, as Pope Francis recently noted in
his address to the diplomatic corps accredited to the
Holy See, we must reject the culture of enslavement,
which is incapable of doing good or pursuing peace and
accepts as inevitable the spread of war and violence. We
must redouble our efforts to replace this culture with
a culture of life and peace in which Governments and
the international community fulfil their fundamental
responsibility to protect all people.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Rivas (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to commend the President for
organizing this debate and for his excellent concept note
(S/2014/32, annex), as well as to express our gratitude to
all those, especially women, who work on a daily basis
to promote peace and security and to protect civilians. I
should also like to thank those who delivered briefings
at the beginning of this meeting.
Uruguay associates itself with the statement made
by the representative Switzerland on behalf of the
Group of Friends on the Protection of Civilians in
Armed Conflict.
I must begin by thanking the President for allowing
us to address in this open debate a topic that is so
important. Uruguay is strongly committed to the agenda
for the protection of civilians in armed conflicts and
acknowledges its inherent link to the agenda of women
and peace and security and children in armed conflict.
These are part of the priorities of our foreign policy.
Unfortunately, in spite of the legal and normative
strides forward recorded in the past few years, we as
a troop-contributing country can testify to the fact
that civilians, in particular children, women and girls,
continue to be the main victims in situations of armed
conflict and post-conflict situations. They also account
for the greatest number of victims, as is witnessed by
46/82

30/01/2015

the sad situation in Syria and in what recently occurred
in the Gaza Strip. In particular, we observe with deep
concern the violence against specific population groups
and against the human rights of women and children by
terrorist groups such as Boko Haram and others.
The use of sexual violence as a weapon of war for
terror and revenge in order to obtain the subjugation or
support of entire communities, or to cause humiliation
or used to destroy the culture of a group or community
that is considered an enemy, is clearly a constant
feature of a certain type of armed conflict. That is
why it is essential to create the conditions that provide
an opportunity for women who have been expelled to
be reintegrated into their communities and to be able
to bring up the children that are the products of rape
without any impediments. The horrors witnessed by
girls and boys against their mothers and sisters will
continue to affect them throughout their lives, almost
certainly to be manifested in a brutal way sooner
or later unless they are adequately addressed. It is
therefore necessary that we halt the cycle of violence
wherein the immediate consequences of violence often
become causes that generate more violence in the next
generation.
My country attaches particular importance to
the prevention of sexual violence in conflict. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, where Uruguay
has approximately 1,000 soldiers who fulfil many
tasks for the protection of civilians, joint protection
and vigilance teams are operating in order to monitor
violations and to ensure the protection of human rights
in remote areas. In that regard, we are aware of the fact
that it is essential to identify emerging signals from the
field, as well as to send appropriate early signals to the
stakeholders concerned as to the obligation to respect
the moral and physical integrity of people. That is why
it is also crucial to strengthen the role of communities in
ensuring their own protection, not only for immediate
physical protection but also for preventing, alerting
and acting against attempts at aggression, as well as
for establishing cultural criteria at the level of the
family and the community that ensures that the rights
of women and girls are respected.
In line with that goal, Uruguay has undertaken
various timely initiatives to seek to create spaces for
integration in various communities, such as in Pinga,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, where Uruguayan
personnel established a football school where both
boys and girls of different ethnic groups who found

15-02652

30/01/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

themselves in areas of armed conflict could share
activities together that allowed them to overcome
differences and barriers and thereby contribute to
building a peaceful environment.
Refugees, asylum seekers, the repatriated, stateless
persons and persons displaced during conflict face
enormous vulnerability to sexual and gender-based
violence. The Government of Uruguay has sought to
provide a humanitarian response in the face of the
refugee crisis in Syria, having committed to receive
120 Syrian refugees. To date, five families have arrived
in our country, including 33 boys and girls.
The obvious mutual connection between
participation and protection is a concept that is
central to resolution 1325 (2000). In the resolution,
the Council reiterates the important role played by
women in preventing and resolving conflicts and in
peacebuilding. The number of women deployed in
Uruguayan contingents to peacekeeping operations
demonstrates our commitment in that regard.
Promoting accountability is another fundamental
element to prevent the most serious violations of
human rights, in particular of women and girls. It is
also important to support concrete activities to combat
impunity, including designating experts to investigate
sexual and gender-based violence. By the same token,
special attention should be focused on the need faithfully
to comply with the code of conduct by all those who are
members of United Nations peacekeeping contingents
deployed on the ground, based on the zero-tolerance
policy.
In conclusion, in the course of its upcoming
substantive session, the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations will hold negotiations on the
issue of the protection of civilians, which I believe will
be an opportunity for all of us to work constructively in
order to strengthen our commitment to this noble goal.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Grant (Canada): Civilians suffer disproportionately
in times of war and conflict, and Canada condemns the
appalling rise in acts specifically targeting women and
children that have become such a grim feature of many
of today’s armed conflicts.
Mr. Barros Melet took the Chair.
There is an urgent need for the Security Council
and for all Member States to address the crises in Iraq

S/PV.7374

and Syria, in Nigeria, South Sudan, the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
elsewhere that are brutalizing civilians and tragically
targeting the most vulnerable: women and girls. It is
imperative that both State and non-State armed groups
fully respect their obligations under international law,
and that violators be held accountable.
Canada has strongly condemned the campaign of
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) of sexual
violence, which has included staggering levels of forced
marriage, abduction, trafficking, torturing, raping and
killing of women and children. We have also spoken out
in the strongest terms against the terrorist group Boko
Haram’s vile crimes against civilian populations. These
have included the calculated targeting of schoolchildren,
the kidnapping, rape and forced marriage of young
women and girls, and the forced recruitment of young
girls to carry out suicide bomb attacks.
(spoke in French)
It is clear that the rise of violent extremism in these
and other instances has had a particularly grave impact
on the rights and well-being of women and children.
We remain concerned that humanitarian agencies have
been facing increasing challenges in gaining access to
civilians affected by armed conflict. In times of armed
conflict and displacement, the protection needs of the
most vulnerable, including women and children, too
often go unmet.
Canada fully supports the women and peace
and security agenda. Women’s empowerment and
the protection of their rights not only enhances their
ability to protect themselves, it affects the fate of
entire communities, as women are undeniably agents
of resilience and positive change. We must strengthen
the quality of casualty tracking and the collection of
disaggregated data. We must get better at ensuring
that the work of the international community reflects
what our gender analyses and data collection tells us.
Furthermore, we must ensure that the priorities and
recommendations of the United Nations consistently
reflect the specific needs of women and girls.
It is for those reasons that Canada supports the
United Nations Human Rights Up Front initiative. The
use of the Framework of Analysis for Atrocity Crimes
serves as an important early-warning system that
supports human rights by providing valuable guidance
on implementing specific prevention measures.

15-0265247/82

S/PV.7374

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

(spoke in English)
We believe that efforts to address protection
challenges in armed conflict and post-conflict settings
will be incomplete, even impossible, without the full
participation and empowerment of women and girls.
This year alone, we have tremendous opportunities
in which we must incorporate a rigorous focus on the
protection of women and girls in ongoing initiatives,
including the high-level reviews on women and peace
and security and on peace operations and the post-2015
development agenda.
Equality between men and women, the
empowerment of women and girls, respect for, and
the promotion of, their dignity and human rights, and
the prevention of, and response to, sexual violence are
fundamental Canadian values. That is why Canada is
so committed to the elimination of all forms of violence
against women and girls, ending child, early and forced
marriage, and the promotion of maternal, newborn and
child health.
We must all do more. We urge the Security
Council and fellow Member States to incorporate the
empowerment of women and girls into all of their work.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Burundi.
Mr. Shingiro (Burundi) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to thank the President personally,
and his country of Chile, for having organized this very
interesting open debate on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. Allow me also to thank those who have
spoken before me for the quality of their statements,
which shed light on the ongoing challenges despite the
progress made since 1999.
Civilians have always been the main victims of
conflicts. In most contemporary conflicts, protagonists
regularly flout the various resolutions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly as well as the
reports of the Secretary-General and other studies that
explicitly recommend that warring parties should spare
civilians. They also violate the Geneva Conventions
of 1949 and their Additional Protocols of 1977 and all
international treaties on the subject.
Today the responsibility to protect, which was
launched at the 2005 World Summit of Heads of State,
compels States to protect civilian populations from
genocide, ethnic cleansing, mass killings and other
cruel and inhumane treatment. If a State fails to do so,

48/82

30/01/2015

then the international community must take its place.
Obviously, any intervention of that kind must take
place in strict respect for the principles enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations.
Since the nineteenth century, as I mentioned
previously, many conventions and resolutions
recommend the protection of civilian populations in
times of conflict. But it must be noted that civilians are
still being massacred, mutilated, raped or deprived of
humanitarian assistance by various parties to conflicts,
all of this with disregard for the rules and conventions.
Among those attacking civilian populations there
are first the fighters of negative forces in several regions
of the world, especially those striking in our region of
the Great Lakes of Africa. They terrorize the civilian
populations to force them to provide unconditional
support. They thus blatantly violate the Additional
Protocol to the Geneva Conventions which, in article
13 prohibits acts or threats of violence with the main
objective of terrorizing the civilian population. Then
there are the illegal actors, especially armed gangs
and organized crime, which also sow terror in civilian
populations by seizing goods and property and/or by
practising various kinds of trafficking. In this category
it is difficult to distinguish among those involved in
conflict, which are a mixed bag of evil-doers, including
fighters, traffickers, mercenaries and even the general
population in some areas.
All civilians need protection against deliberate
acts of abuse and violence. We must act collectively to
defend the rights of vulnerable religious communities,
which are persecuted in situations of armed conflict
because of their religious convictions.
Women and girls throughout the world continue to
fall victim to sexual violence in armed conflicts. That
is why we must continue to work to prevent sexual
violence, especially rape as a weapon of war and sexual
slavery. In that connection, I am of course thinking in
particular of the young Nigerian girls kidnapped by
Boko Haram terrorist sect, a heinous act that we firmly
condemn.
Attacks against civilians are unacceptable wherever
they are committed. We denounce the strategies of
using populations as human shields or weapons of
war, as well as the threat created by mines and other
explosive devices, which lead to heightened civilian
casualties and a broader displacement of populations.

15-02652

30/01/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

We see a bitter result, even a very bitter one. The
situation of civilians is deteriorating in many areas of
conflict. In Africa the situations in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in Mali, in the
Central African Republic, in Somalia, in South Sudan
in areas where the Lord’s Resistance Army has been
striking, and in Côte d’Ivoire during the latest postelectoral crisis in 2011, have all revealed the degree
of violence and atrocities to which combatants subject
populations. Those who are most vulnerable — women,
children, older people and handicapped people — pay
the price of this senseless violence.
We stress that the protection of civilians in
armed conflicts should not be a simple concern for
the international community. To that end, we call on
the Security Council to commit itself further, both
at the political and the legal levels, to put an end to
these atrocities, especially by applying targeted
sanctions — that are non-discriminatory — against the
authors of these acts of violence against civilians, in
order to put an end to impunity.
We recall that the prevention of conflicts is the
best way to protect civilian populations from armed
violence. Preventive diplomacy should therefore play a
leading role, as it has several advantages. Not only does
it make it possible to save human lives, but it is also
less expensive when it comes to those paying dues as
Members of the United Nations.
It is true that the Security Council has seen some
progress in terms of efforts to reduce the effects of
conflicts on civilians, especially with the establishment
of peacekeeping missions with mandates containing
provisions and strategies to protect civilians. However,
it is essential to recall that efforts to protect civilians
must be inclusive. We must also ensure that such efforts
are not used towards adverse ends, by avoiding as far as
possible the use of selective focuses or double standards
to the detriment of some civilian populations in distress
in some highly politicized conflict areas.
We would point out that any use of force to defend
civilians must take place with total respect for the
Charter of the United Nations. Any unilateral action
taken in the name of any kind of theory of protection
of civilians with disregard for the Charter of the United
Nations should be discouraged.
Burundi highlights the need for a reaction by the
international community that is always proportionate
to the situation to which we are responding on the

S/PV.7374

ground when it comes to protecting civilians. For
example, the protection of civilians should not be an
excuse for regime change, and no body of the United
Nations should serve as a tool for such a change. That,
as is very well known, is a prerogative for the people of
the country concerned.
My delegation would like to make some brief
proposals with regard to our common efforts to protect
civilians during armed conflicts.
First, parties to a conflict must respect international
humanitarian law and human rights law. Any violation
of those rights calls for the attention and action of
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations.
Secondly, there is an urgent need for more frequent
interactions with non-State groups to ensure that
they respect standards for the protection of civilians.
However, that does not mean that these groups are
being recognized. It simply means that those groups
must be made aware of the need to respect international
humanitarian law, without, however, legitimizing their
position.
Thirdly, peacekeeping missions mandated to
protect civilians must be able to call on the resources
and the necessary forces to carry out their tasks. And
we must heighten the percentage of representation of
women in all peacekeeping operations and special
political missions after conflicts.
Fourthly, we must work much harder to facilitate
the provision of humanitarian assistance to ensure the
survival of populations that are trapped in conflicts,
because those who do not die from gunfire can certainly
die of hunger in areas that are made inaccessible
because of fighting.
Fifthly, and lastly, when national authorities do
not protect their own civilians nor take the necessary
measures to bring those who commit war crimes
and violate human rights to justice, the Security
Council must exercise leadership for a response at the
international level, while respecting the standards of
the Charter of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Minami (Japan): At the outset, I should like
to express my appreciation for the holding of this open
debate.

15-0265249/82

S/PV.7374

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Japan concurs and associates itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of Switzerland
on behalf of the Group of Friends on the Protection of
Civilians in Armed Conflict. I should like to focus on
the aspect of women’s empowerment under conflict and
post-conflict settings.
Everyone caught living under the conditions of
armed conflict suffers, but that suffering is spread
unevenly. The fact is, in general, that women and girls
suffer significantly more. They suffer more because
women and girls are too often targeted directly as
pawns in some of the more insidious tactics of war.
They suffer more because they are more susceptible
to rape, forced marriage, forced prostitution and other
sexual and gender-based violence. Therefore, there
are inherent needs and challenges to the protection of
women and girls that require special consideration in
the process of conflict prevention, conflict resolution
and peacebuilding. That is precisely why women must
participate in decision-making in such processes.
In that regard, it is absolutely crucial to implement
resolution 1325 (2000). As we explained in the open
debate of the Security Council on women and peace and
security in October (see S/PV.7289), the Government
of Japan and Japanese civil society have been working
together earnestly to develop our national action plan
on women and peace and security. It is expected that we
will be able to launch our plan very soon.
I should like to emphasize the aspect of women
as active agents in society, especially in post-conflict
settings, rather than women as objects of protection. Too
often women are seen simply as vulnerable beings who
are passively dependent upon the protection of others.
However, the fact is that women play many positive
and active roles in society, and their contributions are
absolutely indispensable. It is often the very structure
of society, especially in conflict and post-conflict
settings, that hinders women’s capability to flourish.
However, under suitable conditions women can shine.
Policy implementation with sufficient budgeting
is crucial for removing obstacles that hinder women
from flourishing. Two years ago before the General
Assembly (see A/68/PV.12), the Prime Minister of
Japan, Mr. Shinzo Abe, pledged the implementation
of official development assistance (ODA) in excess
of $3 billion over the three years from 2013 to 2015,
towards women’s empowerment and gender equality.
We have already implemented approximately

50/82

30/01/2015

$1.8 billion of that pledge. Let me mention some of the
projects implemented through that assistance.
In November 2014, Japan began contributing
to a project, implemented by the United Nations
Development Programme in cooperation with NATO
and the Government of Turkey, that is training
approximately 200 female Afghan police officers at
the Sivas Police Training Centre in Turkey. As part
of that project, in December of last year the Japan
International Cooperation Agency sent three experts
to hold a three-day workshop on empowering those
officers to improve their ability to tackle gender-based
violence.
Japan has been assisting female internally displaced
persons and refugees from the Syrian conflict, mainly
in Jordan, in achieving economic self-reliance through
a project implemented by UN-Women in response to
that crisis. We employ the cash-for-work method, which
involves hiring internally displaced and refugee women
for reconstruction projects in order to foster economic
recovery and self-reliance. The project has already
provided short-term employment for 950 female
refugees, and will further provide skills-training to 300
women towards their greater economic self-reliance.
In conclusion, both the special needs and the
empowerment of women in conflict and post-conflict
settings are the two main pillars in the field of women and
peace and security. In order to address this issue more
effectively, I believe that the implementation of policy
should be guided by the principle of human security,
which focuses on the well-being of every individual
and seeks to build societies in which everyone can live
with dignity by protecting and empowering individuals
and communities. Japan implements its ODA projects
in the spirit of human security, and I believe that this
approach will help us a lot.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Anshor (Indonesia): Allow me to begin by
expressing our appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
convening this open debate on an important issue, as
well as to thank the briefers for their presentations.
Indonesia wishes to reaffirm its support for
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, and for the subsequent follow-up resolutions.
We fully support the inclusion of a gender perspective
within the protection-of-civilians agenda.

15-02652

30/01/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Over the past decade, there has been growing public
attention on the issue of the protection of civilians in
armed conflicts. Yet the deplorable fact remains that
civilians continue to fall victim to violence. Persistent
violations occur, including the deliberate targeting of
civilians, the indiscriminate and excessive use of force,
and sexual and gender-based violence — in violation of
international humanitarian law, human rights law and
refugee law. Women and girls are particularly exploited
as part of combat tactics, too many times becoming
casualties with impunity.
Armed conflicts, with their manifold health, social,
cultural and economic impacts, not only affect victims;
they also affect victims’ families, communities and
societies, with long-lasting disruption. Indonesia
strongly believes that the first step should be to build
a culture of peace and to prevent armed conflicts
from happening in the first place. That means that the
international community should put a greater premium
on conflict prevention, including the peaceful resolution
of disputes. In our view, however, if a conflict does
erupt, there are ways by which civilians, in particular
women and girls, are best protected.
First, full adherence to international humanitarian
and human right law by all parties to a conflict is the
most important element. Parties should do everything
feasible to protect civilians, in particular all vulnerable
groups, including women and children.
Secondly, since the primary responsibility for
the protection of women, girls and other citizens lies
with the State concerned, the United Nations and other
international partners should undertake enhanced
efforts that support the building up of the relevant
national capacities and enhancing synergy among the
various national actors on the protection imperative.
Thirdly, all efforts to protect civilians in armed
conflict must be founded on the tenets of human rights,
security and development — the three pillars of the
United Nations. Those three principles should guide
our efforts to ensure that civilians are protected in
conflict and in post-conflict situations.
In developing a more effective policy in this
particular field, we believe that the Security Council
should make use of inputs emanating from the various
relevant initiatives under taken by Member States,
including outside the United Nations framework,
that involve engagement with a broad range of
actors, including think tanks and non-governmental

S/PV.7374

organizations working in the field. To cite a few
examples in that regard, I would mention the series of
regional workshops that have taken place; the Global
Conference on Reclaiming the Protection of Civilians
under International Humanitarian Law, initiated by
Norway, in which Indonesia took an important part; and
the Global Summit to End Sexual Violence in Conflict,
initiated by the United Kingdom, with which Indonesia
associates itself.
It is worth underlining that women should not
be seen just as victims, but also as peace enablers
in mitigating conflicts. History has proven their
credentials in creating peace. The policies of the United
Nations system should therefore promote extensive
measures to ensure greater participation of women at all
stages, from conflict prevention to conflict resolution
and from peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
I would also like to briefly share our view on how
the United Nations missions can deliver their mandate
to protect women and girls in times of war and postconflict periods.
First, on prevention, we should continue to promote
gender mainstreaming in peacekeeping missions at
both the policy and operational levels. Integrating the
gender perspective in humanitarian responses and
development assistance relating to displacement and
early recovery is significant.
Secondly, recognizing that women and girls have
distinct needs, specific assistance and protection should
be arranged accordingly. That includes ensuring women
and girls’s equal access to humanitarian assistance and
providing specific basic services such as reproductive
health and protection from gender-based violence.
Thirdly, to effectively ensure that women and girls
can thrive as survivors and leaders in post-conflict
situations, we have to empower them. Women can play
a vital role as societies recover from armed conflict.
It is essential to ensure their full participation in the
economic and political lives of their nations.
To conclude, I reiterate Indonesia’s commitment
to working together with all partners in strengthening
the protection of civilians, in particular women and
children.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Hassan (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): First of all,
I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your

15-0265251/82

S/PV.7374

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

presidency of the Security Council for this month. We
would like to thank you for organizing this debate on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. We would
also like to thank you for the concept note (S/2015/32,
annex), which has made it possible to structure the
debate on this very important topic.
You recalled rightly that 11 years ago the
Secretary-General submitted his first report on the
issue of the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
In fact, the Security Council adopted its first resolution
on that topic 15 years ago, in 1999. We continue to
hope that the successive discussions of the Security
Council on the topic will lead to the development
of a holistic methodology and an objective strategy
for the protection of civilians in armed conflict by
avoiding the twin traps of politicizing the notion
of the protection of civilians and selectivity in its
implementation. We endorse the concept note’s content,
as we know that civilians continue to be the majority of
victims in armed conflict. However, those civilians are
generally targeted by insurgency movements who take
up weapons against women and children in order to
provoke the international community against national
Governments and to intervene in the conflict.
That is why we would like the message sent by
the Council to those movements to be entirely clear.
I would like to return to the statement made by the
representative of the United States with regard to
the situation in Darfur. Let us recall the facts. The
allegations raised were based on rumours spread by
Radio Banga, a radio station led by the insurgents. So it
is an outlet representing the views of those insurgents.
The United Nations conducted a field visit. A report
was drawn up rejecting those allegations. However,
we see that even today that some continue to recall
those allegations as though they were facts. It was a
radio station controlled by militias. It is not reliable,
especially when dealing with such serious issues. The
mission recalled, as I just said, that those allegations
were not justified.
I would also note that many conflicts considered
by the Council claim hundreds of thousands of victims,
and the Council continues to not take any measures to
deal with them. That is why I do not think we should
be speaking of Darfur in discussing the issue of armed
conflict. There is a great deal of misinformation, even
among the parties to the conflict.
When we speak of the protection of civilians, I
think we should prioritize peace processes and political
52/82

30/01/2015

settlements by forcing the armed movements to take
part in the political process and peaceful negotiations
in order to express their demands rather than resorting
to military action and seeking to make civilian victims.
I further recall that experience has shown that in
many countries where there is no peace to be kept on
the ground, peacekeeping operations are not able to
protect civilians and fulfil their mandate. What truly
protects civilians is peace for the entire population
and the subsequent implementation of development,
reconstruction,
reintegration
and
disarmament
programmes that then enhance programmes for the
reintegration of returning displaced persons.
We have been speaking with the Council since
last August regarding the withdrawal strategy of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur. I recall that we have not yet received the third
United Nations delegation. Intense negotiations are
under way between the Government of the Sudan, the
African Union and the United Nations with regard
to that peacekeeping operation. We ask the Council
to support our withdrawal strategy, which would be
implemented jointly by the Government of the Sudan,
the African Union and the United Nations.
The principle of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict is a noble idea. However, we would like
to express our concern at seeing this concept used for
political ends, in particular in terms of promoting the
concept of the responsibility to protect. We would like to
recall that the principle of the responsibility to protect,
while it is part of the final outcome document of the
2005 World Summit (resolution 60/1), continues to have
different interpretations among Member States because
it is in contradiction with the fundamental principle of
the Charter of the United Nations concerning respect
for the sovereignty of Member States, their legitimacy
and their full responsibility for the protection of their
citizens. I recall that the right of civilians to protection
in armed conflict is just one among a number of rights
and obligations highlighted by the World Summit
Outcome, including the right to development, the fight
against poverty and the prevention of conflicts by
dealing with their root causes.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Khalek (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to first congratulate Chile on its assumption of the
Council presidency and for organizing this important
debate.
15-02652

30/01/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The Security Council has succeeded, over the past
15 years, in anchoring the legal basis of the women
and peace and security agenda by adopting resolution
1325 (2000), followed by six other resolutions. The
most recent was resolution 2122 (2013), which linked
human rights and violations of women’s rights during
and after a conflict. In spite of this legal framework
of protection and by adding the protection of women
and girls in conflict and post-conflict situations to the
mandates of peacekeeping operations, this focus did
not deal with violence against women and girls in these
regions that is committed by terrorist groups, thus the
measures taken by United Nations have a limited effect
in alleviating their suffering.
I should like to draw the attention of the Council
to the following points. First, we firmly condemn
all forms of violence targeting women and girls in
conflicts because of terrorist groups in the Central
African Republic, Somalia, Syria and other countries.
We must ensure follow-up to the implementation of
Security Council resolutions and take a more organized
and better harmonized approach to collecting data and
following up on resolutions. We must also redouble
our efforts to ensure that transitional justice measures
contain procedures to punish those who perpetrate
crimes against women and girls in armed conflicts and
their aftermath.
The empowerment of women in economic,
social, political and cultural terms is crucial, as it is
to ensure their participation in the prevention and
settlement of conflicts and in peacebuilding. This is
an essential element for dealing with the root causes
of conflicts. Financial guarantees are also needed for
the implementation of woman and peace and security
programmes, especially in regions where women
and girls are raped by terrorist groups or where State
authority is practically non-existent or extremely
limited in terms of human resources and financing.
We must also continue to seek the best ways to respond
to the challenges facing peacekeeping operations in
the international context by implementing effective
strategies on the ground.
The principal responsibility for protecting civilians
lies with States themselves under international law
and relevant resolutions of the Security Council.
Egypt firmly believes that it is extremely important
to address the root causes of these conflicts. In other
words, eliminating poverty and social marginalization
is essential to stabilizing any country, regardless of

S/PV.7374

culture or location. This should be one of the priorities
of every States during and after conflicts. States must
take ownership of these strategies to achieve sustainable
peace.
Egypt also believes that armed terrorism poses a
serious threat to the safety of women and girls. The
international community must spare no effort in this
regard, and the United Nations and non-governmental
organizations must focus on bringing to an end the
violations of the rights of women in areas where such
heinous form of terrorism exists. Programmes must
seek to eradicate terrorism, not just deal with it in a
superficial passing fashion. International financial
organizations and donors must respond to this form
of terrorism, which destabilizes the entire world and
jeopardizes development as we embark formulating the
post-2015 development agenda in September.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank Chile for
having organized this important debate and Assistant
Secretary-General Kyung-wha Kang for her insightful
statement earlier today. The briefings by Ms. Helen
Durham, of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, and Ms. Ilwad Elman, of the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security, were very
informative and useful.
The protection of civilians in armed conflicts is
one of the core functions of the Security Council in its
mandated peacekeeping missions. Civilians continue
to be targeted in conflict. Women and girls, being the
most vulnerable, bear the brunt of the devastation of
conflicts disproportionately. Last year, the combined
caseload of refugees, asylum seekers and internally
displaced persons around the world crossed the mark
of 50 million people; the majority of them are women
and girls.
More worrying still is the fact that women and girls
are being attacked by directly by parties to conflicts as
part of their tactics. Violence against women is being
used as an instrument of war. The plight of women
and girls in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Mali, South Sudan, the Central African Republic,
Syria and Iraq has mobilized the Security Council in
the recent past to generate sufficient momentum for
decision-making to protect women and girls in armed
conflicts.

15-0265253/82

S/PV.7374

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

There is an increasing understanding of the need
to enhance women’s participation in all aspects of
the prevention and resolution of conflict. The gender
perspective has been integrated into the Council’s
protection-of-civilians agenda. Monitoring and
reporting arrangements have also been made to prevent
sexual violence. We agree with you, Sir, that gender
equality and women’s empowerment are essential
to reinforce the protection environment, which is an
integral part of the protection of civilians. Parties to
conflicts are bound under international humanitarian
law to protect women and girls. Women must sit at
peace negotiating tables to ensure that women’s rights
are protected during and after conflicts and during
recovery, reconstruction and peacebuilding.
The present debate is timely because the SecretaryGeneral’s High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations is focusing on the protection of civilians.
First and foremost, the Security Council should continue
to curtail and end impunity for perpetrators of violence
against women in conflicts and bring non-State actors
under the ambit of international humanitarian law.
As peacekeepers face non-traditional threats,
such as terrorism, extremism and transnational crime,
existing measures and tools should be refined and
strengthened to choke financing resources and bring
criminals to justice. In this regard, we would like to
make the following suggestions.
The command-and-control of peacekeeping
missions should be streamlined and harmonized to
pay particular attention to the protection of civilians,
especially women and girls. The doctrinal differences
regarding the protection of civilians and protection-ofcivilian mandates should be resolved so as to enhance the
protection of women and girls. Barriers to humanitarian
access should be removed so that peacekeepers and
the international humanitarian community can reach
women and girls trapped in conflicts. The Council
should continue constantly to ensure that peacekeeping
and political missions institute monitoring mechanisms
to enhance the protection of women and girls on the
ground. The protection of civilians agenda should be
broadly linked to the Secretary-General’s Human
Rights up Front initiative. Finally, the Council should
devote a special session to dealing with the threats
posed by violent extremism to the safety and security
of civilians, especially women and girls.
United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant
missions must be properly mandated and geared
54/82

30/01/2015

towards protecting women and girls caught in conflicts.
As a leading participant in peacekeeping, Pakistan has
regularly contributed to this effort. Gender sensitization
as a core cultural value has been a mandatory part of
our training for peacekeepers. Pakistani women have
served as police officers, doctors and nurses in various
missions in Asia, Africa and the Balkans. Our feedback
about the work of the police officers is very positive.
Women police officers instinctively, and because
of their special training, show empathy to women
suffering in conflict situations. These women in turn
relate instantly to these police officers.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): Liechtenstein aligns
itself with the statement delivered earlier today by the
representative of Switzerland on behalf of the Group of
Friends of the Protection of Civilians. We should like
to add a few additional points without repeating too
much of what has already been said. I shall not reiterate
comments on the various reviews under way, except to
say that this year, as we review peace operations and the
Peacebuilding Commission, we hope that the protection
of civilians will be an unconditional core element of
those reviews. In the public eye, the United Nations is
truly expected to protect civilians in the field. That is a
core task, and we very much hope that the reviews will
focus on it.
As to the topic of today’s debate — the protection
challenges and needs faced by women and girls in armed
conflict and post-conflict settings — we appreciate the
focus. At the same time, we want to ensure that women
are not just portrayed as victims during conflict. It is
absolutely crucial that we emphasize the importance
of women being part of the solution as empowered
members of society, with the right to participate at every
level of decision-making. Obviously, that is a long-term
project, and we need to address vulnerabilities well
before conflicts break out. Promoting gender equality,
I believe, can best be done in times of peace and not as
well during times of conflict.
Liechtenstein appreciates the increasing recognition
of women’s vital role in preventing and resolving
conflict in peacebuilding, and not just a focus on their
vulnerability. While the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Peacebuilding Commission in
particular have very strongly acknowledged this, we
need to translate those commitments into progress
on the ground. We especially want to emphasize that
15-02652

30/01/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

implementing those existing commitments is absolutely
key and will require leadership, not just in United
Nations Headquarters, but particularly in the field on
the part of heads of missions, special envoys and so
on. They must lead by example. They must ensure that
an adequate number of gender advisers are deployed
and that there is sufficient focus on including women
in conflict-resolution efforts. In that regard, we should
like to highlight the very positive examples set by
Hilda Johnson in South Sudan and Mary Robinson in
the Great Lakes region. These leaders have insisted on
bringing appropriate gender expertise to their efforts.
For example, one of the first things that Mary Robinson
did as part of her conflict-resolution effort was to
convene a women’s forum for the Great Lakes region.
I would also like to briefly touch on the issue of
criminal accountability. It is a fact that the United
Nations and the international community have very
limited tools at their disposal to fight violence against
women and girls in conflict. Of course, we have
peacekeepers and we have troops on the ground, but
judicial systems are another hugely important tool not
just to provide justice after crimes have occurred but also
to provide deterrents. Both national and international
justice mechanisms, such as the International Criminal
Court (ICC), are crucial.
We have also seen increasing evidence of the
deterrent effect of the International Criminal Court,
especially with regard to actors who seek some degree
of legitimacy. Deterrence can be very difficult to
measure, but there has been a recent study on the issue
and I think we should seriously look into it further. I
would also like to remind Council members that the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court has
declared the fight against sexual crimes and violence
against women as one of her priorities. Therefore, we
really believe that the ICC is an important ally of the
United Nations in the fight against sexual violence. We
must also emphasize that criminal accountability must
start at the domestic level, when possible. Sometimes
that will require a great degree of capacity-building
and creativity, as evidenced, for example, by the mobile
courts that are under way in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
Finally, I would like to take a brief moment to draw
attention to a slightly different issue that, thankfully,
has already been raised today by the representative of
New Zealand. whom I would like to thank for raising
the absolutely crucial topic — the protection challenges

S/PV.7374

faced by persons with disabilities in conflict and postconflict settings. Persons with disabilities are highly
vulnerable in conflict due to the multitude of challenges
they face. There are three typical barriers that persons
with disabilities face: barriers in the environment,
barriers regarding communication and barriers in the
attitudes of other persons. During conflict, all these
challenges are exacerbated. Persons with disabilities
confront some incredibly practical problems in times
of conflict, such as having difficulty fleeing violence
during attacks on civilians.
The problems faced by persons with disabilities
are numerous. Just because persons with disabilities
are largely invisible in society — including our own
society — does not mean that they are not there. It
is generally estimated that 15 per cent of persons in
the general population have a disability. The rate is
significantly higher in conflict zones, because conflict
is of course a cause of disability. We read about casualty
numbers, persons killed in certain incidents and
persons injured. Those injured persons in many cases
continue their lives as persons with disabilities, and as
I noted, persons with disabilities are disproportionately
affected by conflict.
Even more affected are women and girls with
disabilities. They are at particular risk of violence
and of sexual violence. It may seem hard to believe,
but women and girls with disabilities are at higher risk
because perpetrators often believe that they will get
away with sexual violence against women and girls with
disabilities, because nobody will believe the victim.
This problem has been little studied and requires
the urgent attention of humanitarian actors and the
Security Council. If we compare the level of attention
given to this issue to that given by the Security Council
to the protection of women and girls in conflict, we
find that many policy debates have focused on women
and peace and security and the challenges of protecting
them. It seems that we have actually been struggling
to say new things in such debates. However, the issue
of persons with disabilities in conflict has barely been
discussed in the Council. There appears to be a gaping
hole on the issue. Respectfully, my delegation would
like to call upon the Security Council to start building
a ramp over that gaping hole.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.

15-0265255/82

S/PV.7374

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Ms. Wilson (Australia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for the invitation and for bringing the Council’s dedicated
attention to the critical issue of the protection needs and
challenges faced by some of the most vulnerable and,
potentially, most powerfully transformative members
of conflict-affected societies — women and girls. We
would also like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Kang, Ms. Durham of the International Committee of
the Red Cross and Ms. Elman for their valuable and
powerful briefings today and for the work that they and
their organizations do in some of the most challenging
environments around the world.
As the United Nations community prepares to mark
the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) later this year, it is a timely opportunity
for us to reflect on how effective the Council has
been, particularly in its efforts to protect and promote
the human rights of women and girls in conflictaffected situations and their roles in peace and security
settings, and to see how those proactive efforts can be
strengthened.
Of course, as many have acknowledged, the
challenges facing the Council are immense, covering
more simultaneous conflicts, having a greater impact
on civilians and encompassing a wider breadth of
the world. It is clear to us that in facing those many
challenges, it is imperative that the Council move
early to secure the protection needs of women and
girls as conflicts emerge, and that it consistently and
comprehensively apply a gender lens across the breadth
of its work.
Today, Australia would like to highlight three key
areas where we think the Council and Member States
could usefully focus their efforts to substantively
improve protection outcomes for women and girls in
conflict and address the underlying causes of gender
inequality. Acknowledging the many who have spoken
before us on a range of very important issues, we are
just picking up three particular issues that many have
already addressed.
First, on improving women’s participation in
prevention and protection efforts, we think it essential
to recognize and make full use of women’s capabilities,
particularly by ensuring that they play central roles in
inclusive peace and security mechanisms, including
the design and implementation of conflict prevention
initiatives, conflict resolution strategies and postconflict rebuilding and reconciliation. We must also
work to counter cultures of impunity for violations
56/82

30/01/2015

of women’s human rights and ensure accountability
for crimes perpetrated against them, as others have
mentioned. Furthermore, in designing peacekeeping
and special political missions, we encourage Council
members and United Nations leaders to remain
focused on the protection of civilians and on ensuring
that mandates are implemented in a gender-sensitive
manner.
Key to that is following up with practical action.
We have heard some examples, such as deploying
women protection advisers to address the protection
needs of women in conflict, particularly from sexual
violence, and deploying gender advisers who can be
very instrumental in helping local women to participate
in peace processes and empowering women in the area
of legal and judicial processes. Of course, we strongly
believe that the responsibility for the protection of
women’s and girls’ rights is not a matter for women
and girls alone. Men and boys have a vital role to play,
and so it is critical that peacekeepers receive adequate
predeployment training on protection of civilians,
gender and human rights.
Secondly, as to empowering women economically
and politically, a key element to strengthening the
protection of women and girls and securing their
livelihoods in post-conflict situations is prioritizing
women’s economic empowerment. The economic
empowerment of women is a major priority of Australia’s
foreign affairs, trade and aid, and it is championed by our
Government. Ensuring the full and equal participation
of women in the political, economic and social spheres
is fundamental to that; it must be embedded early
and be a priority in all conflict resolution and postconflict rebuilding efforts. It also links importantly to
the eventual outcomes of the post-2015 development
agenda discussion this year. It will be important for us
to ensure that any discussion take account of conflictaffected women and girls and global efforts to promote
economic growth and poverty reduction and to ensure
peaceful and resilient communities.
Thirdly, we must ensure that United Nations
missions and agencies collect, analyse and provide
to the Council information and data on the gendersensitive aspects of their work. We have seen how a
lack of data, including sex and age-disaggregated data,
fundamentally affects and undermines our prevention
and response efforts. It is therefore important that
United Nations missions and agencies monitor and
report on both the gender aspects of their mandates

15-02652

30/01/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV.7374

and the gender impacts of their work. It is equally
essential to that this information be provided to the
Council through regular reporting, as well as through
briefings. Such information can be very powerful in
conflict-prevention efforts, so we see it as an area of
fundamental importance to the Council’s protection
efforts.

constitution-making processes and transitional justice.
Women and girls should be consulted at every stage of
peacebuilding activity. They must play an active role
in addressing causes of conflicts. Measures should
be also taken to hold the perpetrators of sexual abuse
accountable and to provide reparations for survivors of
sexual violence.

In conclusion, the year 2015 will provide us with
a rare opportunity to strengthen the United Nations
architecture on women’s and girls’ rights, including
through the parallel reviews of resolution 1325 (2000),
United Nations peace operations and the peacebuilding
architecture. We must seize this chance together.
Australia calls on those involved in the reviews to ensure
that we make concrete and practical recommendations
on how all arms of the United Nations peace and security
architecture can work more effectively and consistently
to protect civilians in conflict and to promote the rights
of women and girls across the Council’s agenda.

The United Nations sets a good example in
promoting women’s empowerment. However, we need a
holistic approach integrating Security Council actions
with the efforts undertaken by other United Nations
bodies, such as the Economic and Social Council, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and UN-Women. The year 2015 is a year of
hope in that respect as it marks the anniversary of the
adoption of the landmark resolution 1325 (2000) and
the beginning of a new development agenda. Moreover,
it is the year of the review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture and peace operations. The
protection of civilians, especially women and girls,
should be at the centre of the actions undertaken this
year.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Poland.
Mr. Radomski (Poland): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s debate. It once again
confirms Chile’s strong commitment to identifying and
finding ways to resolve the most pressing issues related
to international peace and security. Let me underline
that Poland aligns itself with the statement delivered on
behalf of the European Union. I would like to present a
few remarks from our national perspective.
It is a sad paradox that in 2014, when the issue of
the protection of women has been so widely noticed and
so many actions have been taken, women were victims
of unspeakable acts of violence, including abductions,
sexual slavery, torture and rape. Women and girls were
constantly attacked as members of religious minorities,
including Yazidis and Christians in Iraq. They were
disproportionately affected as displaced persons in the
worst humanitarian crises in the world — in Syria, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Ukraine. On the
other hand, just last week the New York Times reported
that 10 per cent of Western recruits to the so-called
Islamic State were women.
The root causes of all these problems lie in
the lack of respect for women and girls and in the
multigenerational cycles of poverty. That is why we
need to ensure the full inclusion of women at all stages
of peace processes and in all follow-up activities,
including in the re-establishment of the rule of law,

For the past few years, Poland has been an active
partner in implementing programmes and projects
supporting women’s and girls’ economic needs. We
have been involved in projects in Nigeria, the Sudan,
Zambia and Kenya, as well as in Palestine, Afghanistan
and other countries. Since it is women who are most
severely affected by displacement in conflict settings,
we have continued our assistance to the Syrian people
by channelling resources via the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees field office
that looks after Syrian refugees in Lebanon and
by implementing the projects of non-governmental
organizations for Syrian refugees in Jordan and
Lebanon.
We are ready to act together with the international
community in the spirit of resolution 1325 (2000).
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ireland.
Mr. Mawe (Ireland): At the outset, I would like to
align my delegation with the statement delivered earlier
on behalf of the European Union and its member States.
I would also like to thank the external speakers, and in
particular Ilwad Elman for her powerful and insightful
remarks on the situation faced by women and girls in
Somalia. And I thank you, Mr. President, for including
the vital voice of civil society in the Council.

15-0265257/82

S/PV.7374

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Early intervention to prevent conflict is of course
greatly preferable to dealing with its consequences. In
that regard, Ireland warmly welcomed the adoption of
resolution 2171 (2014) in August. We continue to work
with colleagues in the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency Group on strengthening the Council’s
conflict-prevention perspective and encouraging it
to take action at an early stage to prevent conflicts
occurring. But sadly, conflicts do occur and civilians
do get killed, wounded and displaced. Indeed, in many
cases, civilian populations are deliberately targeted.
And while the precise data has not been agreed on,
there is no doubt that as technology and weaponry
have advanced and the pattern of conflict has changed,
it is civilians and not combatants who are suffering
more and more from conflict. We therefore have to
ask ourselves how the United Nations can best act to
minimize the impact of conflict on civilians. There are
no clear answers, but we believe it is important to look
closely at the integration of human-rights priorities into
peacekeeping mandates and operations, with a special
consideration of the impact on women and girls.
We strongly support the thorough and ongoing
implementation of the Secretary-General’s Rights
Up Front initiative. Breaches of human rights should
always serve both as a warning sign for potential
conflict and an indicator of the need to protect civilian
populations. We welcome the increasing integration
of human rights components into peace operations,
especially as they concern women and girls. However,
in many countries and regions, including, for example,
Syria, Iraq, Afghanistan and Nigeria, there are gross
violations of human rights, and those whose rights are
most grievously disregarded are disproportionately
female. While of course the primary responsibility lies
with the parties to a given conflict, there is, however,
a crucial role to be played by the United Nations.
Ireland believes that the knowledge, experiences and
perspectives of women should be factored into all
conflict and post-conflict discussions. We strongly
support efforts to increase the numbers of women active
in the policymaking, planning and implementation
processes related to international peace and security,
and not just in particular conflicts but also in relation to
disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control.
The United Nations must show leadership here and
play a more directive role in order to ensure that women
are fairly and fully represented in conflict resolution
and related processes. Like many other speakers, we
also believe that gender advisers should be deployed
58/82

30/01/2015

in all United Nations peacekeeping operations and
special political missions, and we call for the further
deployment of United Nations women protection
advisers.
The protection of civilians affected by conflict
should be at the heart of United Nations peace
operations. We look forward to the review currently
under way, focusing on how the protection of civilians
can be made a central part of the mandates of all
peace operations and ensuring that those charged with
implementing the mandates have the necessary tools
and support. For the United Nations to be credible
in protecting civilians, troops deploying to difficult
theatres to execute challenging mandates must have
the ability, means and willingness to perform their
task. We agree, for example, with the remarks made to
the Council in October (see S/PV.7275) by the Force
Commander of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Lieutenant General dos Santos Cruz, who
stressed that all components of a mission must be
proactive and ready to take action to protect civilians.
We must also acknowledge failures to protect
civilians, such as those identified in the March 2014
report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services,
which cited “a persistent pattern of peacekeeping
operations not intervening with force when civilians
are under attack” (A/68/787, summary). Some of
those failures were due to poor leadership and a lack
of accountability, which must be corrected. In that
context, I am pleased to record that Ireland is providing
funding to the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
to review command-and-control policy so as to address
those and other issues. As a troop-contributing country
of long standing, it is an issue that we have a strong
interest in.
It would be naïve to expect that conflict can be
eliminated in the short term. It is therefore vital that the
Council and the Organization deploy their best efforts
to protect civilians, especially women and girls, who
play no part in conflict, do not support it and just wish
to avoid falling victim to it.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Albania.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Albania aligns itself with
the statement delivered earlier by the observer of the
European Union, so I will just add a couple of remarks
in my national capacity.

15-02652

30/01/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The protection of civilian populations is at the core
of the mandate of the United Nations and the agenda of
the Security Council. Yet civilians continue to suffer
and are the primary victims of all conflicts. It is indeed
highly regrettable that in the twenty-first century the
outbreak, persistence and escalation of armed conflicts,
and the recurrence of violence in post-conflict settings
all over the world, have taken a particular toll on women
and girls.
As the September report of the Secretary-General
on women and peace and security points out, in
many parts of the world the situation has deteriorated
significantly. We remain deeply concerned that,
according to the report, there has been
“a series of deeply troubling developments and
abhorrent crimes linked to violent conflict and
terrorism leading to new mass displacements,
humanitarian catastrophes and serious violations
of international humanitarian and human rights
law.” (S/2014/693, para. 76)
As a result, for the first time in the post-Second World
War era, the number of refugees, asylum-seekers and
internally displaced people worldwide has exceeded
50 million, most of them women and children.
Thousands of men, women and children from all
ethnic and religious groups have been savagely killed
and many more today remain at risk of genocidal
slaughter at the hands of newly emerging terror
groups such as the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria
and Boko Haram. Unrivalled in their savagery, they
have specifically targeted women and girls through
mass abductions of women and girls from religious
minorities, rape, killings, forced marriage, forced
prostitution and stoning. Such appalling practices have
made it our moral responsibility to immediately respond
by assisting efforts to bolster Iraq’s efforts to protect
civilians. The sad reality is that much, much more has
to be done to reverse the catastrophic consequences of
those groups’ continuing actions.
The Security Council has had an undeniable
role in raising awareness of the fact that women and
children are uniquely and disproportionately affected
by conflicts and their aftermath. The President’s
concept note (S/2015/32, annex) rightly points out the
important role that the Security Council has played in
that regard. Significant progress has also been made in
the evolution of the international normative framework
on the protection of civilians. Furthermore, with every

S/PV.7374

passing year the consensus grows stronger around the
idea that while the primary protection of civilians lies
with States, it is also a legitimate and necessary focus
of collective action. But progress made at the normative
level makes sense only if translated into tangible action
on the ground. It is therefore important that we recall
the need for the Security Council to act swiftly and
resolutely in all situations affecting civilians.
On a final note, we would like to recognize that
there have been some important steps taken to provide
justice by making those responsible for human-rights
violations accountable. By creating the International
Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda,
and referring the situations in Darfur and Libya to the
International Criminal Court, the Security Council
itself has provided important examples. We regret the
fact, however, that the Council has not been able to act
on Syria or, unfortunately, Ukraine. Civilians continue
to be targeted and killed today — now.
As the Council itself has acknowledged, it is equally
important to ensure humanitarian aid and funding by
providing a full range of medical, legal, psychological
and livelihood services to women affected by armed
conflicts and post-conflict situations. Sixteen years
after the end of the conflict in our neighbour Kosovo,
thousands of female victims of rape, many of whom were
helped to abort forced pregnancies, are still struggling
to properly address the trauma after the conflict. In
that context, the role of civil society and national and
international non-governmental organizations has
proved critical.
Let me conclude by emphasizing that the upcoming
twentieth anniversary of the Srebrenica massacre
and the tenth anniversary of the 2005 World Summit
offer an opportunity for all of us to renew and further
the commitment made at the Summit to protect
populations — women, girls, the elderly, boys and
men — from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity. We must live up to that.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Ms. Bolaños Pérez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the delegation of Chile for organizing this
open debate on the eve of the 2015 high-level review by
the Security Council to assess progress in implementing
resolution 1325 (2000). In that regard, we believe
that addressing this issue is very timely. We are also
grateful to Ms. Kyung-wha Kang, Ms. Helen Durham

15-0265259/82

S/PV.7374

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

and Ms. Ilwad Elman for their respective statements.
We are also grateful for the concept note (S/2015/32,
annex), which the presidency circulated among all
delegations and which contains valuable guidance to
focus our debate.
It is undeniable that women and girls suffer the
most devastating effects, in addition to the effects
that are already part of an armed conflict, particularly
because of the increasingly widespread use of genderbased violence, rape, sexual exploitation, sexual
slavery, the unwanted pregnancies resulting from these
deplorable acts and their stigmatization in their own
communities — all of which affect their mental and
emotional stability and even put them at risk of losing
their lives.
Any response that addresses these women and girls
must take into account the trauma they have suffered
and continue to suffer as displaced women, through
flashbacks, constant rejection and prolonged separation
from their families. They therefore require assistance
and counselling for rehabilitation on a massive scale.
However, the road to recovery also involves the
attempt to restore some kind of normalcy to their lives,
including through employment, which brings with it the
dignity of earning their own money and the freedom
of spending it themselves, and providing an education
for their children because that engenders hope for a
better future. Similarly, for a girl, going to school, even
though it may be in a bombed building or in a refugee
camp, symbolizes a system, a routine and a path to
normalcy, recovery from trauma and overcoming it.
The empowerment of women starts in childhood with
access to education, the certainty that women’s rights
are protected and promoted and the conviction that they
are part of all the processes that affect their well-being
and their future.
Despite all this, women should not be considered
only as victims of war. They have a fundamental role
to play in ensuring the survival of their families in the
midst of chaos and destruction and actively participate
in the movement for peace at a community level and
promote peace within their communities. However, the
absence of women at the negotiating table and in the
roles of mediators, negotiators and technical experts in
peace processes is undeniable.
Furthermore, we are concerned with the
emergence of new and more radical armed groups; the
fragmentation of the armed forces and the increase of
other crueller groups, such as the Islamic State in Iraq
60/82

30/01/2015

and the Levant and Boko Haram, which use sexual
violence as a weapon of war and which have been
changing the landscape of armed conflicts by forming
alliances; and the emergence of other structures — some
in opposition to their Governments and others in
association with them. In that connection, I would like
to stress Guatemala’s support for the United Kingdom’s
initiative on the prevention of sexual violence in conflict.
Ending that scourge is a global responsibility. For this
reason, we believe that the focus on the protection of
civilians should develop in accordance with changing
circumstances. We believe that in societies with greater
gender equality, extremism is less likely to take root
and women are less vulnerable to its effects.
We must ensure that all the instruments at the
Council’s disposal are adequately adapted to combat
crimes against civilians, particularly women and
children, and contain solid elements of deterrence,
accountability and justice. The lessons learned
from conflicts — from the worst failures to best
practices — should serve as a useful guide. All
these instruments available to the Council should be
used consistently to impose sanctions, including in
cooperation with the International Criminal Court
and special tribunals, fact-finding missions and
commissions of inquiry. We must redouble our efforts to
ensure that justice is served and put an end to impunity
for crimes committed against innocent civilians.
The protection of civilians is a legal obligation. We
must ensure that members of the security forces, local
militias and other armed groups who have committed
violations of international humanitarian law or human
rights law be held accountable. It bears repeating again
that United Nations troops cannot be a substitute for
the State in fulfilling its basic commitment to protect
its civilian population. When States are unable or
unwilling to honour that commitment, we face major
humanitarian disasters, as we have seen repeatedly in
recent years and even in recent weeks in Iraq, Syria,
the Central African Republic, South Sudan and the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, among
other countries.
In order to protect and strengthen the rights of
civilians and displaced people and integrate the rightsbased orientation of governmental structures, we must
increase the capacities of public institutions, which
tend to be dismantled or weakened after a conflict.
This requires ensuring that the practice of protection
be made more coherent and effective through training

15-02652

30/01/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

and awareness-raising among members of the national
security forces; supporting local civil society groups
working in the field of human rights and the protection
of displaced women; and conducting awarenessbuilding activities for the rights of displaced women
with relevant stakeholders. Like others, we believe it is
important for the United Nations to redouble its efforts
in training peacekeepers in multidimensional United
Nations mandates.
We must ensure that the special needs of women
and girls in the field receive the special and privileged
attention they deserve in the framework of the active
cooperation of the United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes that relate to the issue and Member States
with the support of non-governmental organizations
and civil society. We call on them to continue their
valuable contribution in response to the challenges that
reality presents.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Van der Vliet (Netherlands): I would like to
start by thanking Chile for organizing this important
debate on the protection of civilians.
I align myself with the statement made by
the observer of the European Union. I would also
like to thank Ms. Kyung-wha Kang, Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator; Ms. Helen
Durham, Director for International Law and Policy
of the International Committee of the Red Cross; and
Ms. Ilwad Elman, representative of the NGO Working
Group on Women Peace and Security for their valuable
contributions to this debate.
I would like to make three points today on women
as agents of change, on peacekeeping and on the
importance of the prevention of conflict.
First, the rights of women and girls are increasingly
under attack in armed conflicts. When the role of women
as agents of change in society and as contributors to
peace processes is undermined, the stability of societies
and of peace itself is eroded. It is therefore imperative
to integrate the protection needs of women and girls
systematically in the protection of civilians agenda. The
Netherlands attaches great importance to implementing
good practices related to the improvement of the
position of women. For example, in Syria we work with
the United Nations Development Programme and UN-

S/PV.7374

Women to support the Syrian Women’s Initiative for
Peace and Democracy.
My second point relates to peacekeeping. We
welcome the high-level review of United Nations peace
operations, as well as the Global Protection Cluster
whole-of-system review of protection in humanitarian
action. We also welcome the continuing efforts of the
Secretariat to strengthen the policies and guidance
on the protection of civilians. We urge the Council to
examine the challenges impeding the implementation
of protection of civilians mandates more systematically,
specifically where they pertain to the needs of women
and girls.
With regard to concrete contributions to
peacekeeping, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
is doing its share. We train our staff to protect
civilians effectively. Between 2007 and 2017 we will
be contributing €54 million for capacity-building
through the Africa Contingency Operations Training
and Assistance programme. Together with Spain, we
conduct gender training for civilian, military and police
personnel who are to be deployed as part of United
Nations missions. We also fund Phase II of the Senior
Women Talent Pipeline project, aimed at placing more
qualified women in senior positions in United Nations
missions. We also fund the female military officers
training project of UN-Women, which aims to facilitate
and increase the deployment of female military, and
we are contributing €5.6 million to the Women on the
Frontline programme for the 2013-2016 period, aimed
at the Middle East and North Africa region.
On 16 and 17 February, we are organizing a
conference on women, peace and security with particular
attention to enhancing participation and leadership of
women in conflict and post-conflict peacebuilding. We
aim to gather concrete inputs for the United Nations
high-level review on resolution 1325 (2000). We want
to share real examples of action and change — and
learn. The conference will take place in parallel with
a regional European conference in support of United
Nations peace operations, also in the Netherlands.
The conference aims to feed into the United Nations
peace operations review. Both conferences intersect on
the topic of gender perspectives in peacebuilding and
peace operations, and both reviews are thus of direct
relevance to each other.
My third and last point is on the importance of
prevention and mediation. Ensuring the rights of civilians

15-0265261/82

S/PV.7374

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

before, during and after armed conflicts is essential,
because we know peace is fragile and conflicts often
repeat themselves. That is why conflict prevention,
good offices and mediation are so important. And to be
effective, we must ensure early on that women are at the
centre of these efforts. When mass atrocities do occur,
the Security Council should strongly condemn them.
Failure to do so contributes to a climate of impunity.
We support the French initiative aimed at voluntary
restraint in the use of veto by permanent members of the
Security Council in situations where mass atrocities are
imminent or deemed to be occurring. And we believe
that the principle of responsibility to protect should be
increasingly applied and further operationalized.
I want to end by focusing briefly on protection
by humanitarian actors and also of humanitarian
actors. Humanitarian relief is under extreme pressure.
Relief organizations are stretched to the limit and
face increasing difficulties due to the arbitrary denial
of access, funding shortages and even attacks on
humanitarian personnel and medical staff. This is
unacceptable and must be condemned by the Security
Council. We welcomed the debate that took place on
this issue at the initiative of the United Kingdom last
August.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.

30/01/2015

what should be, between the facts and the law (see
S/PV.7289).
If I may, I would like to evoke an initiative of the
current president of Chile when, in her first term, she
invited Chilean society to make a new social contract, a
new covenant, a covenant that will have equality as its
substance and point of view, including the fundamental
equality between men and women. In that same spirit, I
want to draw the Security Council ‘s attention to what
is being discussed in other organs.
The post-2015 agenda is not just a set of good
and clear ideas; it is the substantive pressure brought
to bear by the ideal of our time. And that is why this
agenda is destined to become a new social, economic,
environmental contract at the global level which we all
need. This agenda will certainly have an impact on the
international peace and security the Council is charged
with overseeing. This agenda, based on an ideal that
is known and felt to be urgent, complex, ambitious, is
a political ideal etched with compassion and insight
with respect to the geography of this global, uncertain,
interdependent, fearful, dynamic, violent world. It is a
necessary agenda because if humankind were content
and the world were full of wonders then this agenda
post-2015 would have no justification whatsoever.

Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
The commemoration in July this year of the twentieth
anniversary of the Srebrenica genocide, described by
Secretary-General Kofi Annan as “the worst crime
committed on European soil since the Second World
War”, in which more than 8,000 people were killed and
more 25,000 women and girls were forcibly deported,
many of them after being subjected to rape and torture,
is not only a sad reminder but also a deep commitment
to the principle of “never again”. That is why the debate
you and your delegation have called, Mr. President, is
so timely.

And we are acting with awareness of how far we
have come far but also, and to a greater extent, of how far
we still have to go. This year, in which our Organization
celebrates 70 years of existence, whose ideal embodied
in the Charter and in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, adopted on 10 December 1948 by the
General Assembly tells us that freedom, justice and
peace in the world are based on the recognition of the
inherent dignity of all members of the human family
and of their equal and inalienable rights. The people
of the United Nations have reaffirmed in the Charter
their faith in fundamental human rights and dignity and
value of the human person and the equal rights of men
and women.

I welcome each of the briefings made by the
different persons invited to inform us at this meeting of
the Security Council on the protection of civilians with
a special focus on the situation of women. I recall the
most recent briefing to the Security Council, in October
2014, by Executive Director of the United Nations
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women, Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka, in which she discussed
the chasm that exists and persists between what is and

We will not go through all the articles, but without
fear of error we could affirm that the ideals in the Charter
and the Declaration of Human Rights are contained
in the post-2015 goals, in particular with respect to
the cause of women, which is none other than that of
equality and freedom. When we proposed to make
poverty a priority, we did so not because we believe
or think that all poor people are good but because the
poor are poor. In that context, we also have to work

62/82

15-02652

30/01/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

for freedom and equality for women not because we
believe that women are blameless but because they are
human and have the right to dignity.
If we were to make equality and freedom as the
right of all people, there would have no place for
violence against women neither in conflict or postconflict situations or in peacetime. Until now, however,
we have not been able to prevent forced marriage from
affecting more than 400 million women worldwide,
nor have we been able to innovate ethically. We will
not be able to prevent it from extending to more than
142 million girls during this decade. Until now, it has
been very difficult to prevent 86 million girls around
the world from suffering mutilation of their external
genitalia from here to 2030 if the practice continues
at the current pace. Until now, world hunger does not
spare women, who represent a little more than half of
the world population; in fact, of the 842 million people
who are hungry more than 60 per cent of them are
women. About half of all pregnant women have anemia.
Until now, and beyond the progress made, if we take a
snapshot picture of the state of education worldwide the
image we would get would show us that of the number
of children not attending school, around 93 million,
most of whom are girls.
With regard to the world of work, in particular
the world of paid work, if we exclude women in the
agricultural sector we find that more than 60 per
cent of female workers are in informal employment.
And what can be said of human trafficking? It is a
big business, as is that of weapons, amounting to
$32 billion dollars annually. And who tends to be the
victims of that trafficking? We are — women and girls.
We have been unable to save 66,000 women per year
from falling victim to femicide; the over 500,000 whose
lives are repeatedly put in danger; or the 70 per cent of
women who will experience violence at some point in
their lives; or prevent the abuse of a woman every 18
seconds somewhere in the world. And why have been
unable to prevent all of this? It is because women’s
equality and freedom need to be more than just an idea;
they have to be a reality, a feeling, and an expression
of will. If gender equality and freedom could be the
mere manifestation of an idea, then the statistics I just
shared, which highlight the suffering and humiliation
of millions of women in times of conflict, post-conflict
and peace, would not exist.
We have come together here today to say that we did
not choose to be born women, but once we were born,

S/PV.7374

we came to learn that we needed to act collectively to
prevent the de facto entrenchment of the idea that being
a woman is equal to being nothing, that our bodies can
be used as weapons of war. We are discovering little
by little that throughout the world this emanicpation
involves efforts to prevent any and all attempts to make
our lives, be it in times of conflict or peace, a constant
punishment, a source of shame and inequality simply
because we are women.
All women and many men feel that this is the case.
While there is a single woman who lives in terror due to
the simple fact that she is a woman, those who are more
fortunate will not be at ease. We know this not because
we are good, but because since our births we have had
this reality and perpetual disgrace before our very
eyes. We know it is possible and plausible to humiliate
women with impunity everyday in conflict and postconflict situations and in times of peace. The world will
not be viable, economically fairer, environmentally
sustainable or more socially inclusive if it is ethically
regressive.
Some of those present might ask, “Well, what
innovative ideas have you brought?” To that, I would
say “none”. And that is the worst part. I am repeating
what has already been said in the Charter of our
Organization. I am saying what has already been said
in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. I am
repeating what the victims have said in conflict and
post-conflict situations and in times of peace.
The World Food Programme launched an amazing
programme that has provided fuel-efficient stoves to
more than 2 million people over the past few years
and improved the living conditions of all families it
has touched in those countries where it operates. Did
it launch that programme so that men and women could
prepare their meals with greater peace of mind and
in relative comfort? No. Does anyone know why the
World Food Programme was launched? It was launched
in situations of conflict because those fuel-efficient
stoves made it possible for women to avoid leaving
their shelters for a number of days in search of fuel,
where doing so would have ended in their rape and
humiliation.
The Council and this world can do much. We
acknowledge the pioneering role played by resolution
1325 (2000), but we should all move beyond ideas that
are merely clear or different, and toward a set of ethics,
and the will to transform those ideas about gender
equality and the freedom of women into a reality. The

15-0265263/82

S/PV.7374

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

dignity of the human race, as well as international
peace and security, are at stake.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ahmad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I would like to thank you, Sir, for having
convened this very important meeting. This year marks
the seventieth anniversary of the creation of the United
Nations, which has made the preservation of humankind
from the horrors of war its highhest priority. The
Organization has given the people of the world the hope
that they can live in peace and security. Unfortunately,
however, the past 70 years have clearly shown that the
United Nations has been unable to meet the aspirations
of its founders, despite the wealth of experience it has
accumulated over the years.
Although 16 years have passed since the Security
Council started its periodic set of debates on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, experience
has shown that the protection of civilians continues
to be exploited in a selective way based on a policy of
double standards. It is being used for schemes that run
counter to the fundamental rules of international law.
It is enough here to recall the unjustified, unacceptable
manoeuvres that have led to the violation of the
integrity of Libya as a State, people and territory, under
the pretext of protecting those very same Libyans. My
delegation would like to reaffirm the following points.
First, conflict prevention should be undertaken with
a view to finding compromise and peaceful solutions to
conflicts before they escalate, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and international law. It
is only in that manner that we will be able to protect
civilians, including women and girls, and save them
from the horrors of war.
Secondly, the primary responsibility for the
protection of civilians against the dangers that they
may be exposed to, including the threats of terrorism,
lies with the relevant State, the only party that has the
right to maintain stability and security throughout its
territory.
Thirdly, civilians in armed conflict cannot be
fully protected without unwavering compliance with
international law and the provisions of the United
Nations Charter, including the principle of sovereignty.
sovereign equality, and non-interference in the internal
affairs of States.

64/82

30/01/2015

Fourthly, a discretionary approach to protecting
civilians is unacceptable, as it transforms the protection
of civilians into a tool to serve the policies and interests
of influential States to the detriment of the sovereignty,
stability and independence of other Member States. The
exploitation by some members and non-members of this
Council of the concept of the protection of civilians to
impose their selective policies and double standards on
the Council can only undermine the role mandated to it
by Charter of the United Nations.
Fifthly, a comprehensive approach to the protection
of civilians is necessary to remedy all those concerns
that could pose a danger to them, including by putting
an end to unilateral coercive measures of which the
United Nations has already affirmed the illegitimacy
in this era of globalization. I refer here to measures
imposed by certain States upon other States, including
Syria, that harms their people by depriving them of the
means of subsistence, including food, medicine and
fuel, and by compelling them to seek refuge abroad, and
consequently fall prey to gangsters, human traffickers
and other horrors.
My delegation reaffirms the need to protect the
civilians sufferingt under Israeli occupation, including
in the occupied Syrian Golan and other occupied Arab
territories. We need to put an end to the practices of the
Israeli occupation. Israel believes that it enjoys impunity
because the Council has not responded to violations of
international humanitarian law, international human
rights law and other international instruments against
terrorism. It therefore pursues its aggressive policies
with full impunity and continues to support to terrorist
groups active in the separation zone in the Syrian
Golan, thereby threatening peace and security in the
region and beyond.
In their statements, numerous speakers have
underscored the great suffering of Syrian women and
girls. Many of these speakers, however, simply ignore
the fact that the main reason for the plight of Syrian
women, who are subject to all forms of persecution
and inhumane treatment such as human trafficking
by terrorist organizations, lies in the policies of
Governments that back terrorism.
The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
reiterates its call on the Security Council to meet its
Charter responsibilities by condemning the terrorism
from which all Syrians — men, women, children and
the elderly — are suffering. States that back terrorism

15-02652

30/01/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

must end their destructive practices, which are a grave
violation of international law and international counterterrorism instruments — including resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005), 2170 (2014) and 2178
(2014), as well as the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy — and pose a threat to international
peace and security.
My delegation reaffirms that all counter-terrorism
measures must be coordinated with the Syrian
Government while respecting its sovereignty. In
this regard, we wish to highlight that the so-called
international coalition has recently carried out a number
of air raids targeting a centre for the deaf and mute in
the province of Raqqa, depriving many special-needs
individuals of access to its services. The same air raids
also destroyed a number of other economic centres.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Mendoza-Garcia (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): Costa Rica thanks the Chilean for having
convened today’s open debate on the protection of
civilians, focused particularly on protection challenges
and needs faced by women and girls. The twentieth
anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action provides us with the most fitting framework
for this debate. We welcome the input of civil society
on this item, and we commend Chile for having
invited Ms. Ilwad Leman to address the Council. We
hope that this practice will continue in the future, as
recommended by the Secretary-General.
We align ourselves with the statement made by
the representative of Austria on behalf of the Human
Security Network, and wish to make the following
points in our national capacity.
Costa Rica is deeply concerned by the content of
the concept paper before us, which states that in many
settings, “control of women’s rights is at the very
centre of the armed conflict” (S/2015/32, annex, p. 2).
We are alarmed by the deliberate campaigns against
women and the restrictions and conditions placed on
the human rights of women and girls by extremist
groups, as well as in the tragic evolution of terrorist
activities targeting women and girls. We must reject
any violation of the human rights of women and girls
through the strict imposition of sumptuary codes, and
attacks on women in public employment, schools, girls
and teachers. We recognize the interlinkage of such
practices with extremist violence. In that regard, the

S/PV.7374

report of the Secretary-General on women and peace
and security (S/2014/693) demonstrates that violence
against civilians often accompanies restrictions on
the rights of women with respect to clothing, travel,
education and employment.
In societies with greater gender equality, extremism
is less likely to thrive and women are less exposed to
its impact. We categorically condemn any form and
manifestation of terrorism, given its destructive impact
on civilian populations, societies and international
security. Costa Rica deplores the activities carried
out by the group known as Boko Haram, particularly
the abduction of school girls, and self-styled Islamic
State, which undermine the rights of women and girls.
We call on the Security Council to redouble its efforts
to combat such barbaric acts within the framework of
international law, to consider the more effective use of
sanctions committees to that end, and to bring those
responsible to justice.
We also express our deep concern at the ongoing use
and widespread impact of weapons against civilians,
including men, women and children. Against this
backdrop, we would like to raise the following issues.
First, it is important to sign, ratify and fully
implement the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT), including
its provision relating to the criteria for gender-based
violence. The devastating impact of cluster bombs on
civilian populations is well known, and we must put a
definitive end to their use. Despite the 2008 Convention
on Cluster Munitions, which Costa Rica has the honour
of presiding, we have unfortunately seen the continued
use of these weapons in recent conflicts. We call on
the signatories to ratify the Convention and on all
other States to join. States parties to the Convention
are legally obligated to stop using them, but given the
impact of these weapons on civilians, it is a moral
obligation for everyone else. Costa Rica therefore also
supports an international commitment to ending the
use of explosive munitions in densely populated areas.
Finally, we note the importance of including in
all mandates of United Nations missions provisions to
promote gender equality and women’s empowerment,
as stated in resolution 2122 (2013), including specific
provisions on the protection of women and on zero
tolerance for sexual exploitation and abuse. As we
have indicated in other forums, extremist violence is
not representative of humankind or of any particular
culture or religion. It is an affront to the rule of law and

15-0265265/82

S/PV.7374

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

to our common humanity. Respect for human dignity,
the bedrock of human rights, is present in all cultural
and religious traditions. We must combat the culture
of hatred and foster a culture of peace that will build
inclusive and cohesive societies that respect human
rights in their entirety.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Latvia.
Mr. Mažeiks (Latvia): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of Latvia and Estonia. I thank
Ms. Kyung-wha Kang, Assistant Secretary-General of
Humanitarian Affairs; Ms. Helen Durham, Director
on International Law and Policy at the International
Committee of the Red Cross, and Ms. Ilwad Elman of the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security,
for their statements. I also thank the Chilean presidency
of the Security Council for organizing this debate and
focusing on the protection challenges faced by women
and girls in conflict and post-conflict situations.
Estonia and Latvia align themselves with the
statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union.
Remarkable achievements have been made at the
normative level to operationalize the women and peace
and security agenda. Women’s protection has also been
at the centre of many Security Council deliberations.
However, challenges lie at the implementation level
and in sustaining progress. We look forward to the
high-level review and the global study on progress and
obstacles in implementing resolution 1325 (2000), as
well as the follow-up resolutions. The year 2015 will
be an important one for the advancement of women’s
rights due to the convergence of the review with other
global policy events, such as the post-2015 development
agenda and the twentieth anniversary of the Beijing
Declaration and the Platform for Action. We should
take full advantage of those opportunities to recommit
ourselves to the women and peace and security agenda,
and to address the specific needs and challenges faced
by women and girls, including in conflict and postconflict settings. Latvia and Estonia will spare no
effort in facilitating progress in that regard.
The increase in conflicts and violent extremism
over the past year has had a dramatic impact on
civilians, in particular on women and girls. Last
Saturday’s barbaric shelling of Mariupol by terrorists,
in which 30 innocent civilians perished — two-thirds

66/82

30/01/2015

of them women and children — is a grim reminder
of why our work on this issue must move forward.
The perpetrators of that senseless attack and their
supporters must face the consequences. We are also
concerned about the continued incidence of sexual and
gender-based violence, and the targeted attacks against
women and girls and those defending their rights. We
welcome the increased use of the human rights- and
sexual violence-related criteria in the Security Council
sanctions regimes. All parties to armed conflict should
comply with international humanitarian and human
rights law.
We stress that all crimes of sexual violence
should be prosecuted and punished under national
and international law. Accountability is an important
element in enhancing the compliance of parties to
armed conflict with their international obligations;
it is equally important for bringing justice to victims
of those crimes. National authorities have a primary
responsibility to provide accountability for serious
human rights violations; at the same time, the
International Criminal Court continues to play a crucial
role if they are unable or unwilling to do so.
Latvia and Estonia support efforts to mainstream
gender aspects into peacekeeping operations.
Peacekeeping operations need to be equipped with
robust mandates that put the protection of civilians,
including the prevention of sexual and gender-based
violence, at their core. The key elements of the effective
implementation of those mandates are, among others,
appropriate training for peacekeeping personnel and
their senior mission leadership; effective coordination
among all mission components and between
peacekeeping operations and other United Nations
actors on the ground; as well as close cooperation with
the local population, civil society organizations and
local institutions. It is also particularly important that
women’s rights violations be adequately reflected in the
periodic reports of peacekeeping operations and special
political missions to the Security Council. We welcome
efforts to build capacity for gender-sensitive conflict
analysis and the use of sex-disaggregated data.
Latvia and Estonia strongly believe that issues
related to the women and peace and security agenda
should be fully integrated into the various reviews
currently being undertaken by the United Nations
on peacekeeping, peacebuilding and sanctions. We
welcome the Secretary-General’s Rights Up Front

15-02652

30/01/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

initiative to develop a coherent approach to human
rights issues throughout the United Nations system and
to strengthen early warning and preventive capabilities.
In a year when several global processes provide an
opportunity to put priorities and commitments on gender
equality at the centre of the international and national
agendas, we cannot afford to backslide on women’s
rights. Gender equality and women’s empowerment are
fundamental to addressing security challenges faced
by women. Women’s representation and participation at
all stages and levels of decision-making in conflict and
post-conflict settings are essential to voicing women’s
rights and concerns early on, and to ensuring their
protection.
In conclusion, let me reiterate the commitment of
both Latvia and Estonia to gender equality and women’s
empowerment, and their readiness to contribute to all
ongoing processes to ensure that sustainable progress is
made so that women and girls can enjoy all their human
rights.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Luxembourg.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Allow
me to thank Chile for organizing this open debate on
the protection of civilians, and for choosing to focus on
the specific needs of women and girls in armed conflict
and post-conflict settings.
Luxembourg fully associates itself with the
statement made by the observer of the European Union.
The year 2015 will coincide with several important
events. The high-level review on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) and the review of the
implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action will undoubtedly be the significant events
of the year in advancing gender equality and women’s
empowerment. Two other important reviews will
take place this year, relating to United Nations peace
operations and the peacebuilding architecture. In
terms of the protection of civilians, all of these reviews
should help us to identify ways and means to improve
our methods of action. To that end, it is imperative that
all the findings and recommendations of these distinct
but complementary studies be coordinated to ensure
synergy.
The concept note that you, Sir, have circulated for
this debate (S/2015/32, annex) and the briefings made
by the Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian

S/PV.7374

Affairs amd the representatives of the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security have well
described the tragic plight of women and girls in
situations of armed conflict and the numerous
widespread violations of international humanitarian
law to which they are subject. That is the case in Syria,
Iraq — where Daesh uses sexual violence as a weapon
of war — the Central African Republic and South
Sudan, where women are impacted disproportionately
by the massive displacements of populations. It is also
the case in Nigeria, where Boko Haram deliberately
targets women and young girls. The list, regrettably, is
far from exhaustive.
Given this widespread scourge, all Member States,
regional organizations, bodies and entities of the United
Nations system and civil society organizations should
work together to provide a protective environment
for civilians. The Security Council in particular must
act consistently by ensuring that those responsible
for crimes committed against civilians are brought to
justice, and by taking targeted measures against those
responsible for grave violations of human rights. On its
field visits, the Security Council should systematically
raise the issue of the protection of women with the
relevant authorities and meet with local women’s
organizations.
The same consistency of action is necessary in
establishing peacekeeping and peacebuilding missions.
These missions should have an adequate mandate and
sufficient resources to protect civilians, including
through the deployment of gender advisers and advisers
for the protection of women and children. These three
types of advisors, it must be remembered, each has a
specific role to play. The Council should also continue
to keep abreast of the situation of women and girls by
regularly inviting to its debates the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, or the Executive Director of
UN-Women.
While the protection of civilians and the specific
needs of women and children lie at the centre of our
debate, it would disempower women to limit them to
playing the passive role of victims. We must ensure
strengthened participation of women in mediation,
conflict resolution and in all political processes. Since
2010, Luxembourg has been supporting a programme
conducted by the Department of Peacekeeping

15-0265267/82

S/PV.7374

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Operations promoting the political participation of
women in the aftermath of conflict. This programme has
resulted in progress in terms of women’s participation
and organization in Timor-Leste, Haiti, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Liberia. It has also shown
that protection the rights and the physical and moral
integrity of women is an important precondition for
them to take their rightful place in the field of political
action.
In conclusion, let me express our wish that the
ideas put forward in this debate will be implemented
consistently with a view to improving the protection of
civilians on the ground. We must all mobilize so that
2015 can deliver on its promise and start the change
that millions of women and girls around the world are
waiting for.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Eler (Turkey): Women and girls are among
those most affected by the growing number and
intensity of conflicts around the world. They continue
to be specifically targeted conflicts, often subjected
to such sexual violence and various forms of political,
economic and social discrimination. It is women who
are most affected by mass displacements, protracted
crises and humanitarian emergencies. They are also
vulnerable in post-conflict situations, mostly during
contested political processes, ceasefires and the early
days of the implementation of peace agreements. The
risks of sexual and gender-based violence, in either in
rural or urban settings, are growing and transforming.
Against the backdrop of the threats and needs
facing civilians, especially women and girls, a stronger
and more inclusive approach is required in order to
achieve the goals set by resolution 1325 (2000) and its
subsequent resolutions. Strengthening our political will
comes as a first step. We also need to find creative ways
to respond to the challenges facing women and girls at
all stages of the conflict cycle. We should be cognizant
of the lessons learned and best practices.
In conflict situations, working to eliminate
the root causes of conflict would be the best way to
prevent sexual violence and threats against women
in a sustainable manner. In the short-to-medium
term, protecting against gender-based violence, the
prosecution of such acts, seeking a multisectoral
response and continuing to provide humanitarian
assistance to women and girls is imperative. Adherence

68/82

30/01/2015

to the principles of international humanitarian law in
this context is particularly important.
Ensuring the inclusivity of decision-making and
policymaking, as well as peace processes, mediation
efforts, peacekeeping and peacebuilding is another
important step. The social and economic empowerment
of displaced women and girls must be among the
priorities. Inclusion and empowerment are the best
tools in combating violent extremism. Continuing to
strengthen the integration of the protection of women
and girls, and deepening the gender perspectives in
the United Nations system’s normative frameworks,
entities and practices would be a final step towards
promoting protection.
Today in order to contribute to the debate on best
practices and lessons learned, I would like to stress in
particular the challenges and threats facing displeased
women around the world, based on our own experience
resulting from the tragic conflicts just across our
borders. In response to the enforced displacement
due to the tragedies in Syria and Iraq, Turkey has
taken key steps to ensure durable solutions to policies
encompassing the principles of prevention, protection,
participation and empowerment.
It terms of participation, we prioritize women’s
participation in camps by including them in
decision-making and camp administration. Camp
management staff has been trained to facilitate
and encouragement women’s participation and
representations in camp community relations.
Regarding protection, adequate numbers of women
staff are employed in camps to maintain quality healthy,
education and security services for women and girls.
The psychosocial and reproductive health needs of
women are given particular emphasis. For instance, the
psychosocial support service centres project, financed
by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and implemented by the Ministry of
Family and Social Policy, establishes 11 centres outside
and 20 centres inside the camps in order to address the
psychological needs of women and their families.
On prevention, special measures were put in
place to prevent assaults within camps and to protect
groups. Outside camps, measures are taken to promote
the monitoring and prevention of domestic and sexual
violence where significant populations of displaced
people live.

15-02652

30/01/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

In terms of empowerment, the enrollment of girls
in schooling and continuing education for women is a
priority policy for Turkey. Over 68,000 Syrian children
are enrolled in education and close 40,000 adults have
received vocational training. The displaced families
and women have the opportunity to attend lectures
on issues such as maternal health, child mentality,
psychosocial support, human rights and the domestic
violence. It goes without saying that the international
community’s strong support to these efforts is crucial in
order to make sure that there will be no lost generations
in our region just because we can not offer them hope
and opportunity for their future.
We are looking forward to the various review
processes to be conducted this year on strengthening
the United Nations response to violent conflict, among
which the global review of the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) will be of particular importance.
In conclusion, I would like to congratulate the
Chilean presidency for their efforts to connect the
women and peace and security agenda with the general
protection of civilians to debate.

S/PV.7374

is to say: first, the 12 August 1949 Fourth Geneva
Convention as well as its 1977 additional protocols, and,
secondly, the optional protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children
in armed conflict, which was adopted by the General
Assembly on 19 December 2011.
Thirdly, in October 2009 the African Union, for
its part, adopted the Convention on the Protection and
Assistance of Internally Displaced Persons in Africa,
known as the Kampala Convention, which remains a
vital tool in addressing the root causes of displacement
in Africa, where around 10 million people are displaced
because of conflict and climate-change related natural
disasters, among other things. And, fourthly, there
is the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women, adopted by the
General Assembly in 1979, which is often described
as an international bill of rights for women. Together
with other international instruments, these provide us
with clear guidelines on how to address the protection
of children in armed conflict.

Mr. Mminele (South Africa): The South African
delegation wishes to thank the Republic of Chile for its
leadership in convening this open debate and for your
presence here today, Sir. We would also like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Kyung-wha Kang for
her consistent and visionary leadership on protection
in all its dimensions. Out thanks go too to Dr. Helen
Durham, Director for International Law and Policy
of the International Committee of the Red Cross,
and Ms.Ilwad Elman, from the NGO Working Group
on Women, Peace and Security, for their insightful
briefings.

South Africa is firmly committed to the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, including to the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, which seeks to address many
challenges facing women and children. Furthermore,
South Africa has consistently highlighted its major
concerns about the apparent lack of political will
to address the fact that generations face severe
vulnerabilities and lack of protection in Palestine and
Western Sahara. Children and women in those situations
of armed conflict have for decades been unable to live
a decent life of peace and security and unable to fully
ensure the upbringing of their children in a secure
environment. In that regard, noble programmes, such
as the realization of Millennium Development Goals,
sadly remain unattainable.

The violence against women and girls, which is on
the increase, is becoming a worrisome global scourge.
South Africa applauds the fact that the international
human rights and humanitarian law systems have
produced a body of law for protection in this regard.
The challenge is very often a matter of failure by States
to implement the key provisions of these instruments as
well as failure to comply with their obligations. To this
end, we call on all States committed to taking concrete
and tangible measures for the maximum protection
of women and girls in situations of armed conflict to
faithfully implement the relevant Conventions, that

South Africa welcomes the international
community’s efforts to protect civilians in armed
conflicts. However, the in-country participation of
all the relevant stakeholders must be sought. While
positive efforts and progressive steps are being made, it
is clear that the lack of political will and the complete
disregard for civilian lives remain a major obstacle to
their protection during armed conflict. It is therefore
important that, as international actors and external
organizations provide constructive assistance, they
should comply with the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations, while fully respecting the will,

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.

15-0265269/82

S/PV.7374

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country
concerned and refrain from forcible interference. In
that regard, South Africa strongly believes that allinclusive dialogue and national reconciliation should
be promoted in order to reduce the scourge of violence,
which will also prove valuable in finding solutions and
laying the groundwork for sustainable peace in crisis
situations.
The Secretary-General’s latest report on women
and peace and security in September 2014 (S/2014/693),
highlights some progress on all areas of the women
and peace and security agenda, as well as some notable
challenges and gaps. A sustained, integrated approach
in a coherent and coordinated manner remains
critical to ensuring effectiveness. The most notable
challenge, however, continues to exist at the level of
implementation. It is at this practical level that we see
a lack of progress pertaining to the actual protection
of civilians, including women and girls. Women and
children, especially those displaced from their homes,
in violent conflict areas are especially vulnerable to
attack, including rape, trafficking and all manner of
physical, sexual and psychological abuse. We have
too often seen cases whereby female civilians taking
no part in hostilities become the deliberate targets of
war or find themselves in danger simply because they
happen to be in an area where conflict is taking place.
The African Union Agenda 2063 — “A global
strategy to optimize use of Africa’s resources for the
benefits of all Africans” — has a vision to free the
African continent from armed conflict, terrorism
and extremism, intolerance and gender-based violent
crimes. It furthermore aspires to silence all guns
by 2020, and my delegation views this move as an
important stride forward. We are also pleased to learn
that the Security Council encourages States to adopt
minimum standards and codes of conduct in their
armies, militias and police services, and to ensure
their implementation to reduce the incidence of genderbased violence as a result of power imbalances. Further
to that, the acknowledgement by the Security Council
that sustainable peace requires an integrated approach
based on coherence between security, development,
political activities, human rights, including gender
equality, justice activities and the rule of law, is
particularly encouraging. It should be stressed that
actions by peacekeeping missions to protect civilians
will be successful only if there is confidence and trust
in the security mechanisms and institutions and in the
rule of law of the host country.
70/82

30/01/2015

In the past year, we have witnessed some significant
advances when the Security Council adopted
resolutions that allow for practical expressions to our
collective need to ensure protection of civilians with an
emphasis on the challenges and needs faced by women
and girls in armed conflict and post-conflict settings.
Actions undertaken, such as efforts to strengthen earlywarning mechanisms and risk assessments with gendersensitive indicators, serve as points of departure. The
interaction with civil society and women peacebuilders
regarding the collection of information and reporting
is also pertinent. However, the development and
significant changes in the mandates, monitoring and
training of peacekeeping missions remain vital factors.
Examples of what has been achieved among the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and
the United Nations country teams joint-assessment
missions to identify humanitarian and security
concerns in camps for internally displaced persons in
Darfur have enabled a degree of success.
I would like to conclude by commending all
personnel involved in peacekeeping missions and civil
society groups for the services they perform. Often
they are inadequately resourced for the enormous
challenges that they face on a daily basis. South Africa
will continue to interact closely with them to allow
them to perform their vital international role.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Croatia.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): At the outset, I would like
to commend Chile for conducting the presidency of the
Security Council in the month of January in such an
outstanding way, which has been confirmed again today
by its convening this timely and important debate.
Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier today by the observer of the European Union.
I would like to make some additional remarks in my
national capacity.
This week, we commemorated 70 years since the
liberation of the Auschwitz death camp — indeed a very
special day in the history of humankind. In the past
seven decades, we had said “never again” many times,
yet we allowed genocide in Rwanda and then again in
Srebrenica to ensue. We keep saying “never again”, but
unfortunately, it continues to occur, and we are have
been witnessing horrible crimes committed against
civilians in conflicts throughout the world. It is still
happening in Syria. Under-Secretary-General Amos, in

15-02652

30/01/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

her briefing to the Council in December, said that in
Syria, “The parties to the conflict continue to ignore
the most basic principles of humanity” (S/PV.7342,
p. 2). She continued, “We have run out of words to fully
explain the brutality, violence and callous disregard
for human life which is a hallmark of this crisis”
(S/PV.7342, p. 2).
It is still happening in northern Nigeria, where
Boko Haram continues its campaign of terror. It is
still happening in Iraq, with atrocities, brutality and
barbaric acts perpetrated by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant. The list of conflicts and abuses goes on
and on. Many lessons from the past have been learned,
and the international community does have a much
deeper understanding of the impact of war on civilians.
The United Nations has become increasingly concerned
about the protection of civilians, the testimony to
which is today’s debate. Nevertheless, we are still far
from succeeding in our efforts. Civilians continue to
account for the vast majority of casualties in current
conflicts; they are regularly targeted and subjected to
indiscriminate attacks and other violations by parties
to conflict.
The focus of today’s debate is on the impact of
armed conflict on women and girls. We fully support
that approach, since it is a well-documented fact that
women and girls suffer greatly from the direct and
indirect effects of fighting and violence. Croatia is
deeply concerned and troubled by numerous reports of
violence against women and girls, especially rape and
other forms of sexual violence. For us in Croatia, every
story of every girl or woman who is a victim of sexual
violence and rape, whether in Syria or the Democratic
Republic of the Congo or Darfur or any other conflict
zone, is a poignant reminder of the horrors that many
women in Croatia went through during the Homeland
War in the 1990s.
As a result of that war, many women in Croatia
were victims of maltreatment, torture, humiliation and
degrading treatment and rape, which was used as a
method of intimidation and terror. Two decades after
those war atrocities were committed, these women,
their families and their communities are still coping
with devastating and lasting consequences. Sexual
violence is not only one of the most heinous crimes
committed against women in conflict, but at the same
time, it is one that is often the least visible. Therefore,
Croatia believes that time and again we have to raise our
voices against sexual violence and that the international

S/PV.7374

community can and must do more to prevent and respond
to sexual violence in conflict. For us, it is also of the
utmost importance that rape and other forms of sexual
violence in conflict be recognized as war crimes and
crimes against humanity, for which the International
Criminal Court is also competent.
Protection challenges and needs faced by women
and girls in armed conflict and post-conflict settings
are numerous, including pregnancy as a result of rape.
It is therefore vitally important to ensure full access on
the ground to comprehensive health care for the victims
of sexual violence and to meet their needs, whatever
they may be. It is our obligation and responsibility to
stand by the victims, to find better ways to prevent all
forms of violence against women in conflict and to
assist the survivors.
The United Nations protection-of-civilians
infrastructure should not only keep women and girls
issues in focus, but also provide women with more
prominent roles in peacekeeping and peacebuilding
operations. Stronger women’s participation should
be a part of every enhanced response, including
humanitarian work on the ground.
Finally, I want to emphasize the importance of the
International Criminal Court and its crucial role in the
context of the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
The perpetrators of such heinous atrocities must know
that they will not escape justice. They must be aware
that they will be held accountable and pay for their
crimes. That is why it is important to strengthen the
relationship between the International Criminal Court
and the Security Council.
Let me conclude with the words of Ms. Eve Ensler,
the American playwright and activist who raises
awareness on sexual violence against women. In April
2012, Ms. Ensler participated in a round table in the
Croatian town of Vukovar, on the plight of women
victims of rape and sexual violence. On that occasion
she said,
“I have sat here today and listened to the words of
women who have been victims of rape, and I was
simply overcome by fury. The life of one woman is
the life of all of us. If someone inflicts pain on one
woman, he has inflicted pain on us all.”
I am sure that we as the international community
hear those cries of pain. We cannot afford not to.

15-0265271/82

S/PV.7374

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Zimbabwe.
Mr. Shava (Zimbabwe): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this open debate on such an important
matter. On behalf of the 15 States members of the
Southern African Development Community (SADC), I
wish to express appreciation to you, Sir, for providing
us with an insightful concept note (S/2015/32, annex) to
guide today’s discussion on protection challenges and
needs faced by women and girls in armed conflict as
well as in post-conflict situations. Let me also thank all
of the briefers for their comprehensive briefings at the
commencement of the debate this morning.
In recent years, the world has witnessed an upsurge
in conflicts that have led to an unprecedented increase
in violence against women and girls. The increase in
violence leading to humanitarian catastrophes has had
a disproportionate impact on women and girls. Women
and girls are more vulnerable as a result of gender
inequality and of being directly targeted as part of war
tactics and deliberate assaults on their rights.
It is widely recognized that emerging unconventional
threats to peace and security associated with the
proliferation of militias, armed groups, jihadists and
terrorists linked to violent extremism affect women and
girls more than their male counterparts. In that regard,
women and girls constitute one of the most vulnerable
groups in armed conflict, as well as in post-conflict
situations.
It is estimated that three quarters of the population
of refugees and internally displaced persons are women
and girls. Displacement exacerbates existing gender
inequalities, thereby amplifying the discrimination
and hardships borne by both women and girls. It also
causes women heightened risk to poverty, human
trafficking, sexual exploitation and child, early and
forced marriages.
SADC recognizes that the majority of the world’s
conflicts are in Africa. We believe that States have
the primary responsibility to protect their women
and girls from all forms of gender-based abuse,
particularly in conflict situations. While international
cooperation and assistance are important, they should
not and cannot replace the role of the State in protecting
women and girls. We also recognize that the economic
empowerment of women is essential in any prevention
and protection response.

72/82

30/01/2015

In the year 2000, the Security Council laid the
foundation for the women and peace and security
agenda in the landmark resolution 1325 (2000), which
calls for the special protection and full participation of
women in conflict prevention and resolution, as well
as in post-conflict and peacebuilding processes. Today
the narrative on conflict prevention and resolution
reflects our commitment to prevent sexual violence in
conflict and to address its disastrous and far-reaching
consequences.
At the continental level, the launch, on 2 June 2014,
in Addis Ababa, of the African Union (AU) five-year
Gender, Peace and Security Programme attests to
Africa’s commitment to addressing challenges and
needs faced by women and girls in conflict and postconflict settings. The Programme is designed to serve as
a framework for the development of effective strategies
and mechanisms for increased participation in the
promotion of peace and security. The appointment by
the AU Commission Chairperson of a Special Envoy on
Women, Peace and Security reaffirms the continent’s
commitment to firmly addressing issues affecting
women and girls in conflict situations.
At the regional level, the SADC Protocol on Gender
and Development, signed in August 2008, seeks to
harmonize the various commitments made by member
States in continental instruments to achieving gender
equality. Articles 20 to 25 of the Protocol provide for
the implementation of a variety of strategies, including
enacting, reforming, reviewing and enforcing laws
aimed at eliminating all forms of gender-based violence
and trafficking. Article 28 of the Protocol provides for
the equal representation and participation of women in
key decision-making positions in conflict resolution and
peacebuilding processes, as well as for the integration
of a gender perspective in the resolution of conflicts, in
accordance with resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security.
While considerable progress has been achieved
since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), gaps
remain in trying to achieve sustained change and overall
peace and security. There is growing consensus that a
peace process that does not include women is flawed.
It is our firm belief that women’s economic, cultural,
political and social rights underpin democracy, stability
and lasting peace.
However, it is regrettable that, in spite of the
existence of legal and normative frameworks, women

15-02652

30/01/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

and girls continue to suffer. SADC is concerned
about continued gross abuses, sexual exploitation and
abduction of women in areas of conflict. We urge the
international community to collectively respond to the
specific needs of women and girls in armed conflict
and to enhance the integration of a gender perspective
in the work of United Nations entities and partners in a
holistic manner. That entails addressing the root causes
of conflict and strengthening national infrastructure
for peace and reconciliation. We need to do more
work on deterring newcrimes by holding perpetrators
accountable. More attention should be given to
women’s roles as leaders and to teir participation in
decision-making, which must be meaningful in order
to realize opportunities for positive change. Women
should not be viewed merely as victims and survivors,
but also as a great resource for the communities
and countries they live in. We know that women’s
participation is essential to building sustainable peace,
and it is therefore important to ensure that the women
and peace and security agenda is duly reflected in
all engagements relating to international peace and
security.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the
continuing strong support of the Southern African
Development Community for the women and peace and
security agenda.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.
Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): Since the
adoption of the landmark resolution 1325 (2000), much
progress has been made on the protection of women and
girls in armed conflict. However, civilians, especially
women and girls, continue to be caught up in armed
conflicts around the world, thereby facing increased
threat and violence. From Syria to Iraq and from the
Central African Republic to South Sudan, the plight
and vulnerabilities of women and girls are aggravated
by sexual and gender-based violence. As recognized
in resolution 2122 (2013), women and girls continue
to be exposed to extensive human-rights violations in
conflict and post-conflict settings. Bearing in mind our
shared concern, I would like to make a few observations
on this important issue.
First, the Security Council must integrate issues
relating to women and peace and security into its work
in a more systematic way. While we recognize that
it has incorporated gender perspectives into several

S/PV.7374

resolutions, particularly those related to United Nations
peacekeeping mission mandates, we further encourage
the Council to provide clear, decisive and consistent
protection mandates concerning women and girls. At
the same time, in order to fully implement the zerotolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse
initiated by the Secretary-General, it is important
that we stress gender perspectives in United Nations
peacekeepers’ predeployment training. Dispatching
more women protection advisers, and expanding
sanction designation criteria to include gross violations
against women, is a practical measure that can be taken
to facilitate concrete results on the ground.
Secondly, women’s empowerment and participation
must be strengthened in the peacekeeping, post-conflict
recovery and peacebuilding processes. Their needs,
priorities and voices should be reflected in the relevant
decision-making processes. Official development
assistance (ODA) should be expanded to help improve
women’s capacity in that area.
Thirdly, accountability is key to the protection
of women and girls in armed conflict. The Security
Council can employ various means to end impunity
for those who harm women and girls, such as making
referrals to the International Criminal Court and
mandating international commissions of inquiry. Given
the equal importance of ensuring accountability at the
national level, we recognize the ongoing efforts to
strengthen the capacity of national justice systems by
the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict established pursuant to resolution
1888 (2009).
The Government of the Republic of Korea has been
making great efforts to promote the human rights of
women in fragile and conflict-affected areas, including
providing predeployment training on gender equality
for all persons dispatched to peacekeeping operations,
as well as implementing ODA projects designed to
promote women’s empowerment in conflict situations,
as described in our national action plan for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
In conclusion, the Republic of Korea, as a strong
supporter of resolution 1325 (2000) and the United
Kingdom’s Preventing Sexual Violence Initiative,
reaffirms its commitment to international efforts to
protect women and girls in armed conflict.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Afghanistan.

15-0265273/82

S/PV.7374

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important debate. I would also like
to thank the Ms. Ilwad Elman and the representatives
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and the International Committee of the Red
Cross for their briefings.
The protection of civilians is a pressing priority for
the Government of Afghanistan. The Afghan people
have suffered for more than 30 years as a result of war
and conflict, and continue to suffer today. The past
year was the deadliest for civilians in Afghanistan
since 2001. The Taliban and other extremist armed
groups are responsible for the overwhelming majority
of civilian casualties in Afghanistan. They directly
target civilians with their brutal violent campaigns and
utter disregard for human life. They carry out heinous
acts of terror on mosques, markets, schools, homes
and critical infrastructure, and threaten communities
by planting improvised explosive devices (IEDs) and
launching suicide and complex attacks in public places.
They target men, women, children, clergy, tribal elders,
Government officials and justice-sector employees
alike. Let me be clear: attacks on civilians are a sign
of weakness, not strength. They are a serious violation
of international humanitarian law and breach the basic
tenets of Islam.
The women of Afghanistan have borne the brunt of
conflict during more than 30 years of war. They have
been the biggest victims of violence. The past year
in Afghanistan was particularly deadly for women,
with 12 per cent more killed and injured than the year
before. Women in Afghanistan, including women
in public roles and girls seeking education, are often
targeted with every kind of gender-based violence.
Even when their lives are not directly at risk, their
livelihoods are affected by the negative consequences
of violent conflict. When husbands, parents, siblings
and guardians die or become handicapped, women are
often left as the family’s sole breadwinners. Many lack
access to paid work and financial resources, which
impedes their ability to provide for themselves and their
families and makes them vulnerable to exploitation.
Women displaced by conflict are also economically
vulnerable and at a heightened risk for exploitation and
discrimination.
Mitigating the specific impact of conflict on women
is a priority for the Government of Afghanistan. In that
regard, the Government is implementing resolution
1325 (2000) and subsequent related resolutions through

74/82

30/01/2015

Afghanistan’s national action plan on 1325 for women,
peace and security, signed in October 2014, and our
national action plan for the women of Afghanistan.
Moreover, the Government recognizes the importance
of women’s active participation in ending conflict,
and is committed to ensuring that women’s voices are
represented in peace, reconciliation and development
efforts in the country.
As attacks on civilians by armed extremists in
Afghanistan are increasing around the country, the
Afghan national defence and security forces have
been engaged in large-scale counter-terrorism and
counter-insurgency efforts. It is tragic that Afghan
civilians, including women and children, are caught
in the crossfire of security operations. However, I
would like to emphasize that the Afghan forces are
doing their utmost to ensure that the safety of civilians
is central to their campaigns, and they are taking all
necessary measures to prevent the loss of life among
Afghan civilians. Thousands of members of the Afghan
security forces have lost their lives fighting armed
insurgents; their bravery and sacrifice are a testament
to the Government’s strong commitment to protecting
civilians and bringing peace and security to the country.
In addition, the Government of Afghanistan is pursuing
the vigorous implementation of our national counterIED strategy and facilitating ongoing training of the
Afghan national defence and security forces to conduct
counter-IED operations and disposal.
Unfortunately, a number of civilian casualties
occur as a result of explosive remnants of war, which
pose a serious threat to Afghan civilians, particularly
children. Indeed, the majority of the casualties caused
by explosive remnants of war have been among
children. With the sharp rise in kinetic engagements in
2014 and the conclusion of the International Security
Assistance Force mission, the associated risk to civilian
life from such remnants of war is at its highest level.
In that regard, I would like to highlight the importance
of robust efforts to fully support the Afghan national
defence and security forces in marking hazardous
areas, ensuring the clearance of explosive remnants
of war from the battlefield and continuing awarenessraising programmes that educate civilians, particularly
children, of the deadly dangers of explosive remnants
of war.
The cycle of violence that has interrupted the lives
of innocent Afghans for over 30 years must stop. To
that end, my Government is vigorously pursuing a

15-02652

30/01/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

reconciliation agenda with the armed opposition and
engagement with countries in the region to move the
process forward. With the support of the international
community and our neighbours, peace and security can
be realized in Afghanistan and all civilians can live with
honour and dignity in a country free from violence.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I thank you, Sir,
for organizing this open debate on the protection of
civilians. I also thank Ms. Kyung-wha Kang, Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator; Ms. Helen
Durham, Director for International Law and Policy
of the International Committee of the Red Cross;
and Ms. Ilwad Elman of the NGO Working Group
on Women, Peace and Security, for their respective
briefings earlier this morning.

S/PV.7374

Often there exists a gap between the expectations
of the civilian protection and the actual military
capabilities of peacekeepers. We believe that threats
to civilians and the ways of addressing them should
inform mission mandates, strategies, structures and the
allocation of resources. In that respect, as a follow-up to
the high-level summit on peacekeeping operations held
last September on the margins of the general debate
of the General Assembly, Rwanda will organize, on
28 and 29 May in Kigali, an international conference on
the protection of civilians in armed conflicts to further
reflect on how to better implement the protection
mandates of peacekeeping missions.

As the United Nations is celebrating its seventieth
anniversary this year, we recall that our Organization
was founded on the determination to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war and to reaffirm
faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and
worth of the human person. Since the creation of the
United Nations, the Security Council adopted a number
of resolutions and strategies to protect civilians in
conflict, including the landmark resolution 1265 (1999).
Nonetheless, while the international community, and
the United Nations in particular, has adopted an array
of strategies to improve and implement protection-ofcivilians mandates, we are extremely concerned by the
increasing number of conflicts around the world and
the frequent targeting of civilians, including women
and children.

Today, peacekeepers and other key actors who are
supposed to provide protection to civilians in armed
conflicts often struggle to deliver on the promise of
the protection of civilians, embodied in the very heart
of the Charter of the United Nations. In the Great
Lakes region, for example, we are unfortunately still
facing roaming predators against civilians, mainly
the so-called Democratic Forces for the Liberation of
Rwanda (FDLR). Indeed, this genocidaire movement
continues to use civilians as human shields, forcefully
recruit children and rape and sexually abuse women
and girls. Given this dark picture, the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo need to show more
commitment in the neutralization of the FDLR, in
accordance with the relevant decisions of the region
and the relevant resolutions of the Council. Four weeks
after the expiration of the deadline given to the FDLR
for peaceful disarmament, we believe that the time for
announcements, communication and tough talk has
passed. This is the time for action.

Over the years, the world has witnessed armed
conflicts marked by systematic violence and mass
atrocities against civilians. While the protection-ofcivilians agenda has evolved to become the core
mandate of United Nations peacekeeping operations,
the increasing violence against civilians has tested
the fundamental principles and capabilities of those
operations and demonstrated that much remains to
be done. Experience on the ground, however, has
demonstrated that peacekeeping operations that are illprepared, with no adequate means to address large-scale
violence directed against civilians, will falter and may
even collapse.

The conflict in South Sudan also reveals serious
protection gaps that require immediate attention. The
situation in Syria and Iraq have gone from bad to worse
with terrorist activities by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL), which commits the worst sorts
of human rights violations against civilians, including
journalists and humanitarian workers. As difficult as
the situation might be, we believe that the international
community still has a responsibility to use all its
leverage to save those populations in dire need. In that
regard, we commend the role played by the international
coalition against ISIL, led by the United States, which
is in line with our collective responsibility to protect.

15-0265275/82

S/PV.7374

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

On women and peace and security, the Government
of Rwanda considers any violence against women and
girls to be an assault on human dignity. We call for
and support the full implementation of resolutions
1325 (2000) and 1960 (2010), which insist that all
peacekeeping mandates incorporate provisions that
specifically identify steps to address sexual violence.
That should include the clear identification of women’s
protection advisers alongside gender advisers and
human rights protection units, as well as a clearly
defined role for women in post-conflict recovery. We
also call for improved monitoring of sexual violence,
and for more effective identification of good practices
and challenges.
In conclusion, let me emphasize, as we did during
the past two years of our membership in the Security
Council, that the best way to protect civilians is to
prevent conflicts in the first place. We call on the
Security Council, the wider United Nations system and
regional and subregional organizations to ensure that
addressing the root causes of conflicts remains at the
top of our collective agenda.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor the representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): I would like to start by
thanking you, Mr. President, for convening this open
debate and for the concept paper contained in document
S/2015/32. I would also like to express our appreciation
to the representatives of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC) and civil society for their
insightful contribution to our discussions.
The protection of civilians is a human, legal and
political imperative and requires concerted efforts to
ensure that all actors respect this responsibility. We
cannot but agree with the view that greater compliance
with international humanitarian law is an indispensable
prerequisite for improving the situation of victims of
armed conflict. In that regard, we appreciate the joint
initiative of Switzerland and the ICRC on strengthening
compliance with international humanitarian law
in preparation for the thirty-second International
Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent.
The challenges to the protection of civilians are
enormous. The main obstacle relates primarily to
the frequent failure of parties to conflict to comply
with their obligations under existing legal rules. It is
imperative that all parties to conflict abide by their

76/82

30/01/2015

obligations under international humanitarian and
human rights law.
Inaction and the neglect of civilian suffering, along
with the prevailing atmosphere of impunity and lack
of accountability, are among the most challenging
problems giving rise to a need to act. Ending impunity
is essential for the purpose not only of identifying
responsibility among parties to a conflict and individual
perpetrators, but also of ensuring sustainable peace,
truth, reconciliation, the rights and interests of victims
and the well-being of society at large.
Intentional targeting has become a common feature
of conflicts in many parts of the world. It uniquely and
disproportionately affects women and girls and does
not leave much room for doubting the danger of the
phenomenon and the necessity of timely action.
Particular consideration must be given to the
protection of civilians forced to leave their homes as
a result of armed conflict. My country supports the
continuing efforts being made to raise awareness of
the problem of internal displacement and the right of
return.
Another alarming manifestation of violations
against civilian populations is the contesting of the status
of civilians per se and the principle of protection despite
persistent evidence that persons in question belong to
the category of non-combatant. Hostage-taking, illegal
detention and prosecution constitute grave breaches
of the international humanitarian law. This issue is of
a paramount importance to my country, Azerbaijan,
which continues to suffer from Armenian aggression
and military occupation that inherently involve a wide
range violations of the rights of Azerbaijani populations
for the last two decades.
The most recent examples of such violations are
the cases of Messrs. Hasan Hasanov, Shakhbaz Guliyev
and Dilgam Askarov. While visiting the graves of their
parents buried in the occupied region of Kalbajar,
Mssrs. Guliyev and Askarov were taken hostage and are
facing fabricated criminal charges. Mr. Hasanov was
killed on 11 July 2014. It was not before three months
had elapsed, on 2 October 2014, that Mr. Hasanov’s
body was returned from the Armenian side through the
mediation of the ICRC.
With regard to the two captured civilians,
Messrs. Guliyev and Askarov, who are being required
by the Armenians to answer for false and unfounded
accusations as some kind of diversion, it is pertinent to
15-02652

30/01/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

clarify that these civilians were captured on their own
territory, that is, within the internationally recognized
borders of the Republic of Azerbaijan. Except the
conditions specified by the laws of the Republic of
Azerbaijan, no one — and I emphasize, no one — has
the right to impose restrictions on or prohibit the free
movement within the territory of the Republic of
Azerbaijan. Needless to say, putting Messrs. Guliyev
and Askarov through illegal court proceedings,
sentencing Mr. Askarov to life imprisonment and
Mr. Guliyev to 22 years in prison, and subsequently
forcing them to appeal, is null and void.
Through you, Mr. President, I call on all relevant
international human rights and humanitarian actors to
intervene and take the lead in preventing those persons
from being subject to illegal detention, prosecution and
incarceration while it is not too late and they still are
alive. In that regard, we appreciate those countries that
have rejected the so-called court and its verdict. We
commend the work of the ICRC and its dedicated staff
and look forward to their continued engagement in the
release of our civilians.
To conclude, I would like once again to commend
the initiative of the Chilean presidency to convene this
very important open debate and advance the theme of
the protection of civilians in armed conflict within the
work of the Council.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Tsymbaliuk (Ukraine): I thank you, Sir,
for giving the floor to Ukraine to contribute to this
important and timely debate. Let me also thank all
briefers for their important messages.
Ukraine is alarmed by the fact that civilians
continue to account for the majority of casualties in
conflicts. Many of those civilians are women and girls.
The high number of internally displaced persons (IDPs)
is disturbing as well.
The year 2015 marks 15 years since the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), which established the basis
for the women and peace and security agenda and
called for special protection for, and the full and equal
participation of, women in all conflict prevention,
resolution and post-conflict peacebuilding efforts. The
resolution has proven to be an effective instrument
for Member States to implement their policies in this
important area. We look forward to the global review of
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in 2015.

S/PV.7374

We hope that it will provide additional impetus to fulfil
all our commitments on women and peace and security.
Ukraine actively supports the efforts of States
Members of the United Nations on the implementation
of resolution 2122 (2013) on the need to address the
full range of human rights violations and abuses
experienced by women in armed conflict and postconflict situations.
Ukraine is very alarmed at the latest United Nations
reports on the violence in countries where women have
been directly targeted and disproportionately affected
by mass displacement. We fully agree that women’s
rights are under threat and that the role of women in
countering terrorism and extremism is underutilized.
A national action plan in accordance with
resolution 1325 (2000) to promote women’s full and
equal participation in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts, peacebuilding and peacekeeping and
incorporate a gender perspective in all areas of
peacebuilding is being developed by the Government
of Ukraine in close consultation with United Nations
agencies and civil society. We expect the plan to be
adopted in Ukraine this year and we are ready for its
full implementation.
The terrorist groups armed and supported by the
Russian Federation continue to act openly in the east
of Ukraine. Civilians, including women and children,
continue to die from Russian bullets and shells that
are illegally brought into the country. According to the
latest official statistics, the number of the internally
displaced persons in Ukraine due to Russian aggression
stands at 921,640 people.
About two thirds of adult IDPs are women. The
Government fully understands their specific needs, as
most IDP families include elderly and unaccompanied
women with children. In that regard, the law on IDPs
was adopted in Ukraine on 20 October 2014, and was
welcomed by the international community, including
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees. The law is aimed at ensuring the rights and
freedoms of IDPs, including women, and at addressing
key issues in this area, including through facilitating
humanitarian assistance.
In its recent report, the United Nations Human
Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine finds that, in
the Donetsk region, women comprise about 15 per cent
of those killed and 15 per cent of those wounded as a
result of the conflict. There have also been incidents of

15-0265277/82

S/PV.7374

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

abductions and sexual violence by illegal armed groups
whose whereabouts remain unknown.
We are particularly alarmed by the fact that people in
the territory of Ukraine are being abducted and illegally
transferred to the Russian Federation for interrogation.
Ukrainian servicewoman Nadiya Savchenko, captured
in the Luhansk region in July last year, remains in a
detention facility in the Russian Federation without
any legal grounds and has been subjected to inhuman
practices that constitute a flagrant violation of
international law and a breach of obligations under
bilateral treaties. Even after obtaining international
immunity as a member of the Parliamentary Assembly
of the Council of Europe, Nadiya Savchenko remains
in prison.
The most ironic and bullying aspect of this situation
is that Savchenko is now being charged by the Russian
authorities for illegally crossing the Russian border. We
demand the immediate release of Nadiya Savchenko
and will make every effort to ensure that those involved
in her abduction and illegal detention are brought to
justice.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran.
Mr. Safaei (Islamic Republic of Iran): First of
all, I would like to thank Chile for organizing today’s
open debate. I think the broad participation of Member
States in the debate is an indication of the success of
Chile’s initiative. I would also like to thank the briefers
for their excellent input to the discussion.
My delegation asked for the floor just to react to
the allegations made by the representative of the Israeli
regime during this meeting. I would like to state the
following.
What the representative of that regime said in
today’s meeting was totally irrelevant to the subject
of the debate. It is absurd that the representative of a
regime with the darkest record on the protection of
civilians in recent history allows himself to fabricate
baseless allegations against others.
I do not need to repeat the facts about war crimes
committed by that regime during its recent aggression
and invasion of Gaza or the fact that more than 80 per
cent of the victims during that invasion were civilians,
including children, women and the elderly. I believe
that nothing other than the blood of these innocent

78/82

30/01/2015

civilians on the streets, hospitals and schools, including
those belonging to the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, can
show the nature of the regime. It is an interesting
tactic. If you fail to defend your acts, then choose to
attack others. The representative of the regime, as
usual, embarked on attempts to divert attention from
its own heinous and repeated acts of aggression against
and occupation of civilians and the violations of the
territorial integrity of other States in the region.
It is indeed very ironic that a regime famous
for its atrocities and apartheid policies, which are
well documented by the United Nations, its repeated
violations of internationally recognized borders, war
crimes, crimes against humanity, attacks or threat of use
of force against civilians, its neighbours and beyond,
a regime with a well-known record of developing,
producing and stockpiling different kinds of inhumane
weapons, including weapons of mass destruction, tries
to preach to others on the protection of civilians and
purports to be the voice of victims.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to thank the Chilean presidency
of the Security Council for organizing this debate
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict and
protection challenges and needs faced by women and
girls in armed conflict and post-conflict settings. I also
thank Ms. Helen Durham, Director for International
Law and Policy at the International Committee of the
Red Cross, and Ms. Ilwad Elman of the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security for the relevance
of their respective briefings.
Women and girls are often deprived of protection
and support during armed conflicts. They bear the
brunt of the devastating consequences of conflicts
because of their significant vulnerability and their
substandard living conditions. They endure all the
afflictions of armed conflicts: hostage takings,
captivity, torture, rapes, forced marriages, summary
executions, arbitrary detentions, forced displacements,
threats and intimidation. Girls in particular are subject
to the increasingly widespread practice of kidnapping,
and both women and girls are used as human shields
near weapons stockpiles or barracks and suffer from
the direct or indirect effects of hostilities, such as
bombings, famines and epidemics.

15-02652

30/01/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Rape is often the most widespread form of violence,
in particular in refugee camps and camps for displaced
persons. Unfortunately, women and girls are often not
provided with any security in such situations owing to
the militarization of certain camps, the proliferation of
light weapons and the infiltration of armed elements
into refugee populations. We are all called upon to
act, and efforts by the international community in this
regard must be coordinated.
Morocco strenuously condemns such barbarous,
brutal and inhumane practices, especially since
their serious consequences further complicate the
establishment of lasting peace and reconciliation.
Gender-based violence, the threat of such acts or
incitement to commit them constitute a serious violation
of international humanitarian law, in particular the
Geneva Conventions and international human rights
law.
This year is the fifteenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). That resolution
recognizes the contribution of women to peace and
security at the national and international levels and
encourages their participation in all aspects of conflict
resolution, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Since
2000, six other resolutions have been adopted by the
Council on this subject, thereby strengthening the
normative architecture aimed at protecting the rights of
women during and after conflict. Morocco welcomes
the efforts of Member States to implement those
resolutions at the national level, the growing number
of action plans that have been signed or that are in the
process of being negotiated on the protection of women
and girls, and the efforts undertaken by UN-Women
and UNICEF.
However, we must recognize that the progress
achieved to date in terms of the effective implementation
of those resolutions remains very limited. The slow
pace of progress in disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and the impunity that continues to be
enjoyed by those who have committed acts of sexual
violence promote a very unsafe environment for women
and girls.
Women are unfortunately underrepresented at all
stages of peace processes. There are many obstacles that
prevent their participation in the prevention, mediation
and resolution of conflicts and in peacebuilding.
Very few women are able to effectively participate in
public life in the period following conflict because of

S/PV.7374

violence, intimidation, insecurity, lack of rule of law,
cultural discrimination, the rise of sexist extremism
and fanaticism and socioeconomic factors, including
poverty and lack of education. Morocco believes
that women’s marginalization threatens to delay or
undermine the establishment of lasting peace, security
and reconciliation.
The protection of women and girls from all kinds of
violence in conflict periods and the realization of their
fundamental rights during and after conflicts remains
a collective responsibility that requires determined,
coordinated and joint efforts with a view to enhancing
the measures that can be taken to restrain those who
commit and order violent acts to be committed against
women and to prevent the recurrence of such crimes.
Firm measures should be taken on an urgent basis to
promote accountability for all those who continue
act in defiance of international law and the norms of
protection for women and children. Morocco recalls,
in that regard, the obligations of the States parties
to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women and its Optional
Protocol and the Convention on the Rights of the Child
and its Optional Protocols, and recalls the commitments
laid out in the Beijing Declaration and Platform for
Action and all the resolutions dealing with the issue of
women in armed conflict.
In conclusion, allow me to highlight the following
points. Morocco believes that women should participate
fully, effectively and on an equal footing in all the stages
of peace processes, given the crucial role they play in
preventing and settling conflicts and in peacebuilding.
Morocco highlights the key role of women in repairing
the social fabric of countries emerging from conflict
and stresses that they must be included in the drafting
and implementation of post-conflict strategies so
that their needs are taken into account. It is crucial
to strengthen women’s empowerment, which can
contribute to effective peacebuilding following
conflicts. It is important that women be appointed in
sufficient numbers to decision-making positions and as
high-level mediators and members of mediation teams.
In addition, national strategies for women and girls’
protection remain dependent on measures taken to
strengthen Government’s capacities and the availability
of material, financial and human resources ensuring
their definitive status, emancipation and independence.
Therefore, it is important that there be a prompt and
generous response to the call by the Secretary-General

15-0265279/82

S/PV.7374

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

in his report (S/2014/693) inviting donors to provide
the funds necessary for the implementation of plans of
action and national programmes.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Botswana.
Ms. Mogobe (Botswana): I would like to start by
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
January. We wish you every success in the continued
discharge of your duties. We would like to echo the
appreciation the delegations that spoke before us have
expressed to you for organizing this very important
meeting and for the opportunity to be briefed by the
personalities you succeeded in assembling for that
purpose. The information they shared with us earlier
has been extremely insightful and helps to broaden our
understanding of the issue we are discussing today.
We also take this opportunity to thank the
Secretary-General for his reports on the subject matter,
which we found informative, even though some aspects
therein, pertaining in particular to the risks faced by
populations in armed conflict as well as to peacekeeping
mission operations, were cause for some concern.
Botswana joins the international community in
deploring the attacks claiming innocent lives as well
as the gross human rights violations occurring in the
increasing number of war zones and areas of violent
conflict across the world. We find it tragic indeed that
the lives of the innocent, including women and children,
continue to be lost due to indiscriminate killings by
those who apparently have a complete disregard for
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
It is true that States have the primary responsibility
to protect their citizens, be it in armed conflict
situations or wherever human rights abuses occur. It is,
however, also true that all responsible members of the
international community have a critical role to play in
the construction of societies that are strong enough to
prevent and address atrocities. Given the enormity of
populations at risk, it can therefore be argued that we,
the members of the international community, have not
been proactive enough in upholding the second pillar of
the responsibility to protect and building that required
capacity that would assist States in shielding their
populations from harm.
What remains an unequivocal fact is that more needs
to be done to ensure accountability and compliance with
international law. We therefore support the clarion call
80/82

30/01/2015

for the Security Council to fully exercise its Charter
mandate and ensure the maintenance of international
peace and security, as that would represent a significant
step towards the compliance we seek. In that regard, it
would also be important for the relationship between
the Security Council and the International Criminal
Court (ICC) to be strengthened, and for the work of the
Court to be facilitated so that it may hold perpetrators
of human rights violations and other mass atrocities
accountable.
The concerns I have just raised notwithstanding, it
is only fair that the Council be credited for its notable
efforts in this regard. We are informed that at present
the Security Council has 16 peacekeeping operations
deployed around the world. We commend the Council
for this work, which understandably presents its
own variety of complex challenges. These include
ensuring the very safety of the personnel involved
in peacekeeping operations, as they themselves are
increasingly becoming targets in the conflicts they are
deployed to end. We have recently seen United Nations
peacekeepers killed while on duty in countries in
conflict. The proliferation of terrorist groups and foreign
fighters also serves to increase the potential dangers
and risks facing peacekeeping missions. We have also
seen young school girls abducted and used as pawns
by terrorists. These evolving dynamics necessitate a
comprehensive review, including the development of
an all-inclusive framework that ensures the security
and safety of United Nations personnel in their various
assignments, as well as that of the security forces and
rapid-response teams in the affected countries. These
mechanisms must also elaborate methods through
which women and girls in conflict situations can be
protected.
I shall now turn to the specific focus of today’s
debate. As other delegations have emphatically pointed
out, it is women and girls who suffer the most insidious
acts of war, including sexual violations, gender-based
violence and other human rights abuses. As this
year marks the twentieth anniversary of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action, there could me no
more opportune a time for the international community
to reaffirm its commitment to the protection of
women and girls in all situations, as well as to their
advancement, to gender equality and, within the
context of today’s debate, to the six strategic objectives
focusing on women and armed conflict. Among others,
those include the need to increase the participation
of women in conflict resolution at decision-making
15-02652

30/01/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

levels, to promote women’s contribution to fostering a
culture of peace and to provide protection, assistance
and training to refugee and other displaced women.
The need for a rededication to these objectives cannot
be overemphasized. It is critical fully to implement
resolution 1325 (2000). We therefore welcome the
Secretary-General’s high-level review thereof, which is
scheduled for later this year.

S/PV.7374

human rights violations by forcing Palestinian women
to give birth at checkpoints, potentially leading to the
loss of newborn babies.

We also see the international community readying
itself to adopt a new global agenda later this year
intended to deliver the future we want. To realize
this goal, it is clear that we will need to redouble our
collective efforts to ensure the protection of current and
future generations.

Israel does not comply with international instruments
protecting the human rights of women in detention,
thus Palestinian women in prison are subjected to the
worst forms of violation. I will not speak at length, as
the record of such violations has been well-documented
by bodies of the United Nations. However, we call on
the Security Council not to remain silent in the face
of these violations but to take action so as to bring the
perpetrators to justice — those who claim democracy
and respect for human rights while exhibiting a flagrant
disregard for human conscience.

In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm Botswana’s
support for international efforts aimed at protecting the
lives of innocent people, women and girls in particular.

The President (spoke in Spanish): The representative
of the Russian Federation has asked for the floor to
make a further statement.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Saudi Arabia.

Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like very briefly to respond to the
statement made by the representative of Ukraine.

Ms. Radwan (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
I would like to thank you, Sir, for having convened
this important meeting on the protection of civilians,
especially women.
Israel, the occupying Power, cannot speak about
human rights or the protection of civilians, especially
the rights of women, in any form and should not try
to whitewash its infamous record of well-documented
crimes against women and children. How can a Power
conducting an occupation and implementing a policy
of settlement address such issues? My delegation
condemns all of these violations, which run counter to
international law, international humanitarian law and
international human rights law.
What attention was paid to the protection of
civilians during the aggression committed by Israel
recently in Gaza, indiscriminate attacks that resulted
in the killing of more than 2,000 people, most of them
civilians, making no distinction between men, women,
children or the elderly? What about the systematic
policies of demolishing homes, displacing and killing
people, or the consequences of the siege against Gaza
in terms of violating children and women and putting
extreme restrictions on the daily lives of Palestinians
there?
Israel has persistently violated the rights of
Palestinian and Arab women in such a way as to
constitute war crimes. It has committed the epitome of

Such attempts yet again to place all of the blame
for what takes place in that country onto the Russian
Federation come as a surprise to no one. Even the
reports regarding the shelling by the Ukrainian army
of residential areas, in violation of international
humanitarian law — reports coming from a variety
of sources, which cannot in any way be regarded as
Russian propaganda — provoke no response from Kyiv
other than yet further accusations against the Russian
Federation. Quite clearly, our Lithuanian colleagues
also take a selective attitude to such sources as well.
The reality is that on 13 April 2014, our delegation
initiated the convening of an emergency meeting of the
Security Council (see S/PV.7154) in order to attempt
to prevent the Ukrainian authorities from using armed
force in south-eastern Ukraine. We were unable to do
so. The so-called anti-terrorist operation was launched,
claiming civilian victims in its very first week. We
have called again and again for an end to the violence
and for the initiation of a full-fledged national dialogue
that would avert further civilian casualties in Ukraine.
Such an appeal was made to the authorities in Kyiv
as recently as today by the Russian Foreign Ministry.
Unfortunately, those calls have gone unheeded to date.
In conclusion, I recall that the topic of today’s
meeting is the protection of civilians. Nadiya Savchenko,
a Ukrainian military officer, is not a civilian. However,

15-0265281/82

S/PV.7374

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

the Russian journalists were definitely civilians, and
she is accused of helping to kill them.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The representative
of Ukraine has asked to make a further statement. I now
give him the floor.
Mr. Tsymbaliuk (Ukraine): I apologise for taking
the floor again. I will try to be very brief.
First of all, I should like my Russian colleague to
read very closely the latest reports of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe on what is going
on in Ukraine. I also wish to reiterate once again that
Nadiya Savchenko was a member of the Parliamentary
Assembly of the Council of Europe, so her case is
totally applicable to the theme we are discussing today.
At the same time, I would like once again to ask the
Russian representative, if possible, to avoid misleading
the Security Council on the current situation in
Ukraine and to stop using this forum as a tool of simple
propaganda.

82/82

30/01/2015

The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
Before adjourning the meeting, I would like to
express the sincere appreciation of the delegation of
Chile to the members of the Council, especially my
colleagues the Permanent Representatives and their
respective staffs, and to the secretariat of the Council for
all the support they have given to us. Indeed, it has been
a busy month, and one in which we rallied to consensus
on several important issues within our purview. We
could not have done it alone and without the hard work,
support and positive contributions of every delegation
and the representatives of the Secretariat, as well as all
relevant conference service officers.
As we end our presidency, I know I speak on behalf
of the Council in wishing the delegation of China good
luck in the month of February.
The meeting rose at 6.05 p.m.

15-02652
