A/RES/72/78

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
14 December 2017

Seventy-second session
Agenda item 52

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 7 December 2017
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/72/446)]

72/78.

Declaration on the fiftieth anniversary of the Treaty on Principles
Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of
Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies
The General Assembly
Adopts the following declaration:

Declaration on the fiftieth anniversary of the Treaty on Principles
Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of
Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies
We, the States Members of the United Nations, in observing the fiftieth
anniversary of the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the
Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial
Bodies, 1
1.
Reiterate the importance of the principles contained in General Assembly
resolution 1962 (XVIII) of 13 December 1963, entitled “Declaration of Legal
Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer
Space”;
2.
Recall that the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in
the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial
Bodies, was adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 2222 (XXI) of
19 December 1966, was opened for signature in London, Moscow and Washington,
D.C., on 27 January 1967, and entered into force on 10 October 1967;

__________________
1

17-22104 (E)

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 610, No. 8843.

151217

*1722104*

A/RES/72/78

Declaration on the fiftieth anniversary of the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States
in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies

3.
Note that, as at 1 January 2017, 105 States had become parties to the
Treaty and an additional 25 States had signed it;
4.
Reaffirm the fundamental role played by the Treaty in maintaining outer
space for peaceful purposes and in furthering the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, in the interest of maintaining international peace and
security and promoting international cooperation and understanding;
5.
Are convinced that the Treaty and its principles, as reflected in its
articles I to XIII, will continue to provide an indispensable framework for the
conduct of outer space activities, which continue to hold immense potential to
deliver further advancements in human knowledge, to drive socioeconomic progress
for all humankind and to contribute to the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals by 2030;
6.
Recognize that the achievements made in space exploration and the
development of space science and technology for the benefit of all huma nkind, and
international cooperation initiatives to those ends, have exceeded all expectations
existing at the time of the adoption of the Treaty;
7.
Acknowledge that there has been a significant rise in the importance to
States of space science and technology applications, which enable greater
understanding of the universe and of the Earth and contribute to advances in, inter
alia, education, health, environmental monitoring, the management of natural
resources on Earth, disaster management, meteorological forecasting, climate
modelling, the protection of cultural heritage, information technology and satellite
navigation and communications, and to the well-being of humanity through
economic, social and cultural development;
8.
Are deeply convinced that strengthening the long-term sustainability of
outer space activities requires efforts at the national, regional, interregional and
international levels;
9.
Emphasize the constantly evolving and increasingly multifaceted nature
of international cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space, with fundamentally
complex scientific and technological advancements in the space field and an
increasing variety of actors in the space arena, and therefore encourage the building
of stronger partnership, cooperation and coordination;
10. Recognize the need for further promotion of international cooperation in
the peaceful uses of outer space, taking into account the particular needs of
developing countries;
11. Call upon all States parties to the Treaty conducting outer space activities
to work under the principles of cooperation and mutual assistance, paying due
regard to the corresponding interests of other parties to the Treaty;
12. Are inspired by the prospects that continue to open up before humankind
as a result of human activities in outer space;
13. Encourage States that have not yet become parties to the Treaty, in
particular those States that are members of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space, to consider becoming party to it;
14. Emphasize, in this regard, that the benefits arising from adherence to the
Treaty, as part of the legal regime of outer space, are significant for all States,
irrespective of the degree of their economic or scientific development, and that
being party to the Treaty would enhance the ability of States to become part of
international cooperation efforts in the exploration and use of outer space for
peaceful purposes;
2/3

17-22104

Declaration on the fiftieth anniversary of the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States
in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies

A/RES/72/78

15. Reiterate the role of the Treaty as the cornerstone of the international
legal regime governing outer space activities and that the Treaty manifests the
fundamental principles of international space law;
16. Affirm that the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, together
with its Legal Subcommittee and Scientific and Technical Subcommittee , has a
distinguished historical record in the establishment and further development of the
international legal regime governing outer space activities, that under that regime,
outer space activities by States, international intergovernmental organizations and
non-governmental entities are flourishing and that, as a result, space science and
technology and their applications contribute immeasurably to economic growth and
improvements in the quality of life around the world;
17. Call upon the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and its
Legal Subcommittee to continue, with the support of the Office for Outer Space
Affairs of the Secretariat, to promote the widest adherence to the Treaty, and its
application by States, and to foster the progressive d evelopment of international
space law;
18. Request the Office for Outer Space Affairs to continue fostering
capacity-building in space law and policy for the benefit of all countries and to
continue providing assistance to developing countries, at their request, in the
development of national space policy and legislation, in conformity with
international space law.
66th plenary meeting
7 December 2017

17-22104

3/3
