S/PV.7035

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7035th meeting

Thursday, 19 September 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Quinlan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Australia)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Oyarzábal
Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Bertoux
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Sul Kyung-hoon
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Menan
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2013/535)

13-48007 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1348007*

S/PV.7035

The situation in Afghanistan

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2013/535)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Afghanistan, Canada, Estonia,
Germany, India, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy,
Japan, Slovakia and Turkey to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Ján Kubiš,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Franz-Michael Mellbin, Special Representative of
the European Union for Afghanistan, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2013/535, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.
I now give the floor to Mr. Kubiš.
Mr. Kubiš: Last week, Afghanistan’s first
international football victory in the South Asian
Football Federation Championship triggered exuberant
celebrations of a historic achievement, in a display of
national unity and national pride, and I congratulate
our Afghan friends. That achievement is in a way a
signal of a gradual return to normalcy in Afghanistan.
The three months since I last appeared before the
Council have seen progress in Afghanistan’s political
and security transitions. Considerable challenges
remain and the situation is volatile, but efforts are on
track.

2/32

19/09/2013

Since that time, security incidents have increased
compared with 2012, but not to the record levels of
2011. The campaign of bloodshed by anti-Government
elements has targeted mostly Afghans, both those
in uniform and civilians, including in previously
calmer districts. However, they have failed to achieve
a significant military victory. The majority of the
violence has taken place away from populated areas.
The Afghan army and police have shown courage
and an increased capability in rising to the challenge
of the security transition. They increasingly trust
themselves and work to earn the trust of the population,
despite heavy casualties in their ranks. We are requested
to trust them as well.
Yet the Afghan security forces’ capabilities are
not yet fully developed or completely sustainable.
International Security Assistance Force Commander
General Dunford recently stated that international
support would be required for at least the next five years
in order to enable entirely independent operations.
I welcome the numerous bilateral partnership
agreements that now underlie the multilateral
commitments from Chicago. Those are a demonstration
of the seriousness and long-term nature of international
support.
The 2014 elections remain at the forefront of political
life in Afghanistan. More broadly, a stable leadership
transition through timely elections in accordance with
the Constitution is central to everything else to be
achieved.
President Karzai recently emphasized once again
that polls would be held, recognizing that “retaining
power without elections will raise questions about the
system’s legitimacy”.
The last three months have seen significant progress
in technical preparations. That includes the passage of
two key laws, appointments to the two independent
electoral management bodies and the rollout of the
district-level voter registration update. A six-week
extension of the registration effort will help ensure
maximum participation, including that of women.
The acceleration in registration that has taken place
since Ramadan means that more than 1 million new
voter cards have been issued, nearly 30 per cent of those
to women. The numbers continue to grow steadily.

13-48007

19/09/2013

The situation in Afghanistan

I welcome the attention that Afghan authorities are
giving to securing the elections. Improved coordination
of security institutions; robust security assessments;
planning and implementing risk-mitigation measures;
and instilling greater confidence through public
awareness are necessary now. Again, President Karzai
has recognized that “any election is better than no
election. We cannot delay elections for security
considerations”.
With the launch of candidate registration earlier
this week, the political contest is formally under way.
Clear visions for the future of Afghanistan need to
be articulated to allow voters to make their choices.
Direct or indirect appeals to narrow ethnic or factional
interests must be avoided. The democratic transfer of
political authority should contribute to national unity.
A level playing field, including equal access to
State resources as well as balance in media coverage,
will be important aspects of a fair process. There is
increasing concern over the slow progress in creating an
appropriate legal framework for the media, especially
in this election period, and over violence against
journalists, which is seen to be on the rise.
Across the region, there is a growing recognition
of the need for a constructive bilateral and multilateral
engagement with Afghanistan. The transnational
nature of the challenges, including instability,
terrorism, population displacement and narcotics, as
well as the opportunities — in trade, infrastructure and
connectivity — seems to be understood.
I welcome the positive initial signals and
engagements from the new leaderships in Iran and
Pakistan.
President Karzai’s visit to Islamabad was of
particular significance. A new tone in relations seems
to be emerging, narrowing the trust deficit. That was
confirmed by the statements made by Sartaj Aziz, the
Pakistani Prime Minister’s adviser, in which he placed
emphasis on genuine efforts to facilitate an Afghanled and Afghan-owned peace process. He stated that
Pakistan has no favourites in Afghanistan and that
the policy is one of non-interference. Afghan officials
are also reasonably hopeful, as they say, of better
cooperation with the new Government of Pakistan.
Confidence-building measures, including in the area
of economic development, can help build trust through
shared interests and prosperity.

S/PV.7035

The Istanbul Process remains a valuable regional
effort, placing Afghanistan at the very heart of Asia. I
welcome the People’s Republic of China’s preparations
to host the 2014 ministerial summit. Beijing’s
seriousness of intent was highlighted during my recent
visit. The Shanghai Cooperation Organization is also
positioning itself to play an increasing role in support
of Afghanistan. At this month’s Heads of State summit,
there was clear interest in moving beyond anxiety and
expressions of concern about the situation post-2014.
The emphasis was rather on shared responsibilities, with
Afghanistan and the broader international community,
in ensuring durable solutions, including through the
increased engagement of regional countries.
Indeed, throughout my regional travels, it was
clearly understood that political solutions will be
the key to sustainable peace, security and economic
prosperity in Afghanistan and the region. Most
immediately for Afghanistan, this means elections
resulting in a legitimate and peaceful transfer of power.
More broadly, this must include early dialogue on
peace and reconciliation, as was stressed in many of my
discussions with the neighbouring countries. The United
Nations continues to support the need for dialogue. We
hope that new, mutually accepted modalities for such
a dialogue on peace and reconciliation can be swiftly
agreed and implemented.
Narcotics remain a key problem in Afghanistan and
beyond. The annual survey conducted by the Ministry
of Counter-Narcotics and the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime found that there was a reduction in
cannabis cultivation in 2012, although higher yields still
saw increased production. I am extremely concerned by
assessments that this year will see a significant rise, yet
again, in opium cultivation and a continuing drop in
poppy-free provinces.
The United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, Ms. Navi Pillay, was in Kabul this week meeting
with President Karzai and senior officials, as well as
with civil society representatives and human rights
activists. Ms. Pillay noted commendable progress in
some areas of human rights and the commitment of
President Karzai and other key officials. However, she
stated her concern that the momentum of improvements
in human rights may not only have peaked but may even
be waning. She urged additional efforts on the part of
the President and the Government to ensure that justice
and human rights — in particular women’s rights — are
preserved and consolidated rather than undermined

13-480073/32

S/PV.7035

The situation in Afghanistan

or sacrificed to political expediency. Issues of human
rights and accountability need to be mainstreamed
across all lines of effort — political, development and
security-related.
The rise in civilian casualties — the vast majority
of which are at the hands of anti-Government elements
and rogue or criminal armed groups — is of deep
concern. The targeted killings of civilians and the use of
improvised explosive devices are increasingly frequent
tactics. Deaths during this period include the head of
the Kunduz appellate court, the chief electoral officer
in Kunduz, a district education head in Parwan, and a
young woman taking part in vaccination campaigns in
Jawzjan, to name but a few.
Indeed, increasing attacks on women are of major
concern. Only last Monday, a courageous female
police officer in Helmand, Lieutenant Nigara, was
gunned down, as was her predecessor, Islam Bibi,
earlier this year. The Taliban movement continues to
assert in its public statements that anyone associated
with the Government or seen to support it constitutes
a target. This includes educators, judicial officials
and civil servants, in clear violation of international
humanitarian law.
A further effect of heightened uncertainty and
violence has been increased population displacement.
Half a million individuals have been internally
displaced, over 100,000 during the first seven months
of the year. At the same time, the number of refugees
returning to Afghanistan decreased by 41 per cent
compared to the same period in 2012. I am happy to
note that there is now agreement and commitment
from the international donor community to support a
common humanitarian fund for Afghanistan, which
should become operational in early 2014.
Clear progress has been made in vital elements
underpinning Afghanistan’s transition processes.
At the same time, challenges persist in the security
and narcotics sectors in particular. More needs to
be done in meeting mutual commitments under the
Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework. A focus on
election preparations must not draw attention away
from such issues as combatting corruption, the rule of
law and economic growth. They are what will ensure
Afghanistan’s ultimate institutional and financial
sustainability.
I welcome the signals of positive support to the
region and the ongoing commitment of the international

4/32

19/09/2013

community in ensuring continued momentum in
strengthening Afghan institutions, Afghan sovereignty,
and Afghan solutions.
The President: I thank Mr. Kubiš for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Afghanistan.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): I would like to offer you,
Sir, my sincere congratulations on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month. We are
very grateful for the role Australia is playing as the
penholder on Afghanistan under your leadership and
for its capable work in the Security Council. I thank my
good friend Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Kubiš for his very comprehensive briefing,
and more broadly for his leadership of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. Let me
also express a warm welcome to our new colleagues,
the Ambassadors of the United States of America and
the People’s Republic of China, to today’s debate.
We are now at the beginning of the sixty-eighth
session of the General Assembly, which has turned this
city into the epicentre of world dialogue. Today’s debate
is convened ahead of a number of events with a broader
focus on Afghanistan: the International Contact Group,
the senior officials meeting of the Istanbul Process, a
number of ministerial meetings, and the opportunity
for the Afghan delegation to meet with our friends and
partners at a high level. Meanwhile in Afghanistan, the
campaigns for the third presidential elections are about
to begin. At the same time, we are envisioning the end
of the mandate of the International Security Assistance
Force — a mission that started 12 years ago and then
became the backbone of international stabilization
efforts in Afghanistan — by the end of 2014.
On 18 June, the final phase of security transition,
the fifth tranche, began in Afghanistan. Over the past
several months, the Afghan National Security Forces
have been at the forefront of difficult combat. They
have largely proved themselves capable of defending the
country and providing security. The transition will take
us into a new decade — the decade of transformation
characterized by strengthening sovereignty and the
normalization of the situation. It is a leap in the right
direction, and a proud new chapter in our history.
But while this is a new chapter, it is also remarkably
familiar. Throughout our long history, our country
has consistently risen up from the ashes, defiant after
tragedies, and has re-emerged from war, conflict and
13-48007

19/09/2013

The situation in Afghanistan

destruction. Today, backed by the collective efforts of
the international community, we take responsibility
for our security and our defence, as we have done time
and again, and we meet that challenge with confidence,
courage, and responsibility.
At the beginning of his second term, President
Karzai outlined a new vision for Afghanistan’s future.
He called for full Afghan responsibility for security,
a move towards a self-reliant economy and a political
solution to end the war. Since 2010, Afghanistan and
its partners have solidified those commitments through
constructive conferences in London, Lisbon, Istanbul,
Bonn, Chicago and Tokyo.
In Lisbon and then in Chicago, the international
community committed itself to long-term support after
2014 to train, advise and support the Afghan National
Security Forces. Our international partners pledged
financial support and equipment necessary for our
armed forces to function independently, a goal furthered
through strategic partnerships signed with a number of
countries including the United States. We signed the
Enduring Partnership Agreement with NATO, which
will be realized through its post-2014 role, namely,
Operation Resolute Support. We are also in the final
phases of negotiating the Bilateral Security, Defence
and Cooperation Agreement with the United States.
Other countries outside NATO have also committed
to provide long-term support to Afghan forces. Those
agreements are not aimed at fighting wars, but rather
at ensuring the security of our country, protecting
its people and safeguarding the democratic order we
created so painstakingly over the past 12 years.
In addition to progress on security, the
transformation decade aims to move Afghanistan’s
economy from aid-dependency to self-sufficiency.
In Tokyo, international donors pledged $16 billion to
support Afghanistan’s economic transition through
2017 by adopting the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework. The Framework links aid directly to
Afghan commitments in sectors such as human rights
and governance, and commits donors to strengthen
aid efficiency and sustainability while channelling
their commitments through Afghanistan’s core budget.
The senior officials’ meeting of the Tokyo Conference
looked critically into those obligations in July in Kabul.
Our neighbours are vital to Afghanistan’s future
prosperity and peace. Yet, as President Karzai explained
at the Shanghai Summit last week, our vision is not
simply to better Afghanistan’s future, but also to enable

S/PV.7035

us to be a constructive, friendly and dependable partner
to our neighbours and to countries in the region. To
that end, we are now part of many regional cooperative
frameworks. We are at the centre of the Istanbul Process
initiative. We hope that this process will become an
important forum for all countries in the region to build
more trust, counter shared threats to stability and peace
and focus on steps needed for the prosperity of all
countries in the region. We are very happy to see that
our brotherly country the People’s Republic of China is
going to lead the ministerial conference next year.
We are preparing for our third-ever presidential
elections, an accomplishment that demonstrates
the increased maturity of Afghanistan’s emerging
democracy. The past decades were characterized by
decisions made with violence, problems solved through
war and power solidified with weapons rather than
votes. Electing a new President is an important symbol
that the bloody struggle for power in our country
belongs to the past.
Our enemies want to derail the process, as
made evident by the assassination of the head of the
Independent Election Commission office in Kunduz
province. But let it be known that no such acts will
prevent a successful electoral process from taking
place.
The coming elections are seen by all as crucial to
the success of the transformation decade, the trust of
Afghans and the continuing support of the international
community. Afghans know that deeply, which is why
Afghans from all walks of life are actively engaged
in the process and debate before the elections. A
robust electoral framework has been established. New
members of the Independent Election Commission
and the Independent Election Complaints Commission
have been appointed. A chairman of the Independent
Election Commission has been elected. A national
security strategy for elections has been arranged. And
two new pieces of legislation have been signed into law.
As Afghanistan looks towards a brighter future,
the enemies of Afghanistan — the enemies of
peace — continue their violent campaign against
civilians, soldiers, civil servants, men, women,
children and foreign forces. If they see brutality as the
measure of their power, they are wrong; it is a measure
of their weakness. It is not brave to kill a police officer,
particularly if she is a woman protecting and serving
her country. It is time for the Taliban to stop the killing,
renounce the violence and heed the call to peace.

13-480075/32

S/PV.7035

The situation in Afghanistan

The first attempts at peace negotiations were
undermined by the Taliban’s determination to take
Afghanistan back to the past. But the Afghan people do
not want to return to the past. They want the violence to
end. That is why, despite the atrocities, Afghanistan’s
leadership has not lost faith in a political solution.
Countries in the region, particularly Pakistan, play
an important role in supporting this process. We are
encouraged by the outcome of President Karzai’s recent
visit to Islamabad, and reassured by the new Pakistani
Government’s guarantees of support for the process.
We look forward to working together towards enhanced
cooperation.
As we approach the transformation decade, we
must secure the gains made in the past 12 years, despite
the difficulties, vulnerabilities and risks. In the years
ahead, we must build upon our achievements and enable
Afghanistan to stand on its own feet, with a strong voice
and as a full partner of the international community. In
this period of change, we will go into the elections in
search of a solution, in a spirit of national unity and
coherence, together with our international partners,
to further our struggle for democracy, prosperity and
peace.
The President: I shall now give the floor to the
members of the Security Council.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I would like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Ján
Kubiš for his briefing. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2013/535) on
the situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security, as well as our colleague
Ambassador Tanin for his statement, which amplifies
clearly the position and views of his Government on the
ongoing processes in Afghanistan.
We underline the importance of the continued
engagement of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in promoting peace and
stability in the country through increased support for
the realization of the Government’s objectives. We
agree that UNAMA’s role in the country should evolve
to strengthen national capacities, and that its activities
should be closely aligned with national priorities.
Therefore, UNAMA must be equipped with adequate
resources in order to effectively carry out its core tasks.
The reported period was marked by a number of
significant developments, which further solidified

6/32

19/09/2013

Afghanistan’s continued progress towards meeting the
objectives of the transition period. The 18 June launch
of the fifth and final phase of the security transition was
a milestone achievement that has put Afghan security
forces in the lead and demonstrated their determination
to fully assume security responsibilities across the
country.
The year 2014 will signify another milestone event
in further consolidating Afghanistan’s sovereignty and
national unity — namely, the presidential and provincial
council elections. We note that important steps have
been taken in the run-up to the elections, including
the adoption of legislative acts and key appointments,
as well as other measures to ensure greater public
activeness and involvement in the pre-election process.
We welcome the outcomes of the first senior
officials meeting on the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework, held in Kabul on 3 July, which provided
an important opportunity to assess the status of the
implementation of commitments under the Framework
one year after its adoption and to discuss further ways
for moving forward. It is noteworthy that the meeting
recognized the progress achieved by the Government
of Afghanistan and the international community in
meeting their respective commitments, and called for
resolute actions by both sides to address areas of the
Framework where further progress is required.
Ensuring national peace and reconciliation
constitutes a fundamental element of durable stability
and unity in Afghanistan. We welcome the continuous
efforts of the Afghan Government to advance this
process, including by the High Peace Council and the
implementation of the Afghan peace and reconciliation
programme. We underline the imperative of respecting
the Constitution of Afghanistan and preserving the
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned character of the
reconciliation process. Any attempt to undermine
Afghanistan’s independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity and reverse its years-long democratic
achievements is unacceptable and must be averted.
Stronger relations and cooperation between
Afghanistan and its immediate neighbours and
other regional counterparts on a wide range of
issues — including peace and reconciliation, regional
security challenges, development and humanitarian
assistance — are essential for the peaceful and stable
future of the country and the region. We welcome

13-48007

19/09/2013

The situation in Afghanistan

Afghanistan’s increased interaction with its various
partners within bilateral and multilateral frameworks.
The Istanbul Heart of Asia process is a unique
regional platform for dialogue and partnership aimed
at promoting security, confidence and cooperation,
with Afghanistan at its core. After the adoption of
the implementation plans for all confidence-building
measures (CBMs) at the Almaty ministerial conference
in April, the main focus has now shifted to the realization
of concrete practical activities within each CBM. We
look forward to the next senior officials meeting of
the process to be held in New York next week. We also
thank the Government of China for having offered to
host the ministerial meeting next summer.
My country has been a part of international efforts
in Afghanistan and will remain so in the post-2014
period. We shall continue our active engagement
within the Istanbul Heart of Asia process, and are
ready to participate in other regional initiatives. As
international security forces prepare to withdraw
next year, my country is determined to strengthen its
cooperation with Afghanistan by providing capacitybuilding assistance and training programmes in the
areas of civil service, law enforcement, mine action,
border and customs control, health and rehabilitation.
Most recently, our bilateral relations have become
remarkably dynamic, in particular due to a number
of ministerial visits from Afghanistan to Baku. We
are very pleased with the increased interest of the
Government of Afghanistan in benefitting from
Azerbaijan’s experience in other spheres, such as
energy, the exploitation of mineral resources, emergency
management and e-Government. We are determined to
actively contribute to that end.
Azerbaijan strongly supports Afghanistan’s
sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity, and will
stand by the brotherly Afghan people in their legitimate
aspirations to become a secure, self-reliant and selfsustaining State.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Ján Kubiš for his briefing on
the situation in Afghanistan and his introduction of the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/535), as well as
to the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan for his
very comprehensive statement.
The alarming situation in the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan remains at the centre of the international
community’s attention, especially as the country is

S/PV.7035

nearing a watershed — the year 2014 — that will largely
determine the dynamics of the situation, not only in
Afghanistan, but in the region as a whole. We have
repeatedly underscored our vision of Afghanistan’s
future as that of an independent, peaceful, neutral and
prosperous State free from terrorism and drug-related
crime. That concept was reflected in the Bishkek
declaration, adopted by the Heads of State of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization on 13 September.
We are closely following the transition process in
Afghanistan, a key element of which is the transfer to
Afghans of responsibility for security in their country.
We cannot fail to note the efforts of the Afghan leadership
to strengthen the capacity of national security forces to
effectively counter the security challenges facing the
country.
At the same time, we must note that the political
and military situation in Afghanistan remains far from
stable. We are especially concerned by the fact that the
conclusion of the transfer of responsibility for security
from the International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) to Afghans is taking place against a backdrop of
increased subversive extremist activity, including along
the northern perimeter of Afghanistan. The level of
the terrorist threat originating in Afghanistan remains
critical. Unfortunately, benchmarks for the transfer of
authority process are diverging from ISAF’s optimistic
plans.
A number of issues related to ISAF’s mandate
remain unresolved, including those related to the supply,
equipping and training of the Afghan armed forces,
among which there is increasing inter-ethnic tension.
The drawdown of the international military presence in
Afghanistan is frought with the risk of further negative
developments and could complicate the holding of the
presidential election in 2014.
What also remains unclear are the international
partners’ plans with regard to the format, objectives
and legal basis of the remaining military presence in
Afghanistan. We are not in favour of maintaining a
long-term presence in the country. It is important that
there be clear temporal and legal frameworks; efforts
to make the presence open-ended gives rise to serious
questions about its real objectives.
The projection of force in the region does not
only concern us alone. Absolute clarity is necessary
with regard to the troop numbers and objectives of a
possible NATO operation in Afghanistan, which can be

13-480077/32

S/PV.7035

The situation in Afghanistan

established only after ISAF has fully reported to the
Security Council with regard to its implementation of
the current mandate. Any new international military
presence in Afghanistan must be based on a clear legal
framework. Reformatting ISAF into a new international
mission without a corresponding United Nations
mandate would create serious legal problems for any
logistical support in this field.
A major concern is the alarming situation of illegal
drug production and trafficking from the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan. It is a threat to international
peace and security. Suppressing drug trafficking would
enable us to more effectively counter terrorism financed
by drug trafficking.
We remain deeply concerned about numerous
cases of civilian deaths as a result of indiscriminate
and disproportionate use of force by combatants.
Furthermore, the report does not mention the civilian
deaths caused by unmanned aerial vehicles — so-called
drones. We recall that responsibility for ensuring the
population’s security and strict compliance with
international humanitarian law lies with all sides,
including the international forces.
An orderly process of national reconciliation is a
precondition for improving the situation in the country.
The participation of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) must be subsidiary
in nature. A dialogue with the armed opposition could
have a positive impact only if a leading role is played by
Kabul and the combatants comply with the principle of
national reconciliation, including by laying down their
weapons, recognizing the Constitution of the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan, and breaking their ties with
Al-Qaeda and other extremist organizations once and
for all.
A clear confirmation of this necessity was the
failure of attempts to launch the national reconciliation
process through the Taliban contact office in Doha.
It merely introduced additional complications and
exposed the true intentions of the Taliban, who
have no interest in talks with Kabul but are seeking
political legitimacy for using force to take power
after the international forces’ withdrawal. We have to
learn the lessons of this undertaking, rid ourselves of
illusions about the Taliban’s true goals and take a more
responsible approach to the issue in the future. The
price of an agreement with the Taliban cannot be the
erosion of the achievements the country has made over
the past 11 years. In that regard, the task of increasing
8/32

19/09/2013

the effectiveness of the Security Council’s sanctions
regime, a crucial anti-terror tool, is particularly urgent.
The role played by regional cooperation is more and
more important. Strong cooperation between the United
Nations, the SCO and the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO) is a significant contribution
to settling Afghanistan’s problems. We welcome
UNAMA’s intention of stepping up collaboration with
those organizations, something that cannot be said about
NATO, which is stubbornly ignoring the CSTO’s calls
for improving bilateral cooperation on Afghanistan,
particularly in the area of the fight against drugs. Even
the few incidences where ISAF has conducted various
successful operations to destroy heroin laboratories on
the basis of information from their Russian colleagues
show that combined operations could be achieving
much more.
In the context of the expected rise in the profile
of the United Nations in regulating Afghan issues
after ISAF’s departure, we believe that UNAMA will
remain the chief coordinator of international efforts
to stabilize the situation in Afghanistan. We expect
that, in providing assistance for the preparation and
conduct of the 2014 presidential elections, the Mission
will act strictly within its mandate’s guidelines and will
maintain a neutral position. Russia has consistently
and respectfully supported the Afghan Government’s
efforts to create the conditions conducive to the rapid
stabilization of the country and the region. We will
continue to help the Afghan army by supplying it with
certain types of arms and munitions and by training
specialists in Russia’s senior military academies, and
so forth. We are open to partnering with all concerned
States in the work of implementing projects meaningful
for Afghanistan, including in the areas of energy and
infrastucture. We also continue to provide humanitarian
assistance to the brotherly Afghan people.
Finally, I would like to tell our Afghan friends
that we wish the Afghan national football team every
success in the World Cup competition to be held in
Russia in 2018.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ján Kubiš, for his briefing
today and for his work as Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I would
also like to thank the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, Ambassador Tanin, for his statement.

13-48007

19/09/2013

The situation in Afghanistan

Luxembourg fully associates itself with the
statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union.
I would like to begin by recalling an obvious fact,
which is that the efforts of the international community
to help the Afghan people will never truly be crowned
with success unless the progress made over the past
12 years becomes irreversible. That progress is not
insignificant. To cite only a few examples, it has ranged
from establishing a collective infrastructure, to creating
out of nothing an army that will henceforth be in charge
of the country’s entire territory and an education
network with a current enrolment of 6 million children,
including 2 million girls.
How can we ensure that those achievements will
last? First, as the Secretary-General recommends in
his report (S/2013/535), we should clearly spell out
the international community’s long-term commitment
of support, in order to cut short any speculation about
a political and security vacuum after 2014. Then we
must help the Afghan authorities to succeed with
their political transition. There is no doubt that the
presidential and provincial elections to be held in April
2014 will be crucial to the country’s future. If they do
not appear credible in the eyes of the people, the goal
of creating a stable, peaceful society in Afghanistan
will be compromised. We therefore call for the holding
of transparent and inclusive elections. We take note
of the efforts already made by the Afghan authorities
to ensure that their conduct will be secure. It is a
considerable task, as the assassination yesterday by
the Taliban of the head of the electoral commission in
Kunduz province has unfortunately already proved.
We welcome the establishment of a legal framework
regulating the elections. We regret, however, that the
framework gives women an insufficiently prominent
role, and we call on the Afghan authorities to do more to
ensure women’s participation in the electoral process,
both as candidates and voters.
Another decisive piece of the political transition is
national reconciliation. In order for it to succeed, the
peace process must be largely carried out by the Afghans
themselves, since it is clear that only inter-Afghan
reconciliation can create a path towards a lasting end
to the violence. Where negotiations take place matters
little; what is important is that they be launched and that
they can rely on the support of regional stakeholders.
Making the gains permanent is not all. The
country must also make progress in a number of other

S/PV.7035

areas, starting with human rights. In that regard, we
are worried about the resurgence in the number of
civilian victims of the conflict, particularly women
and children. We are also concerned about the lack of
ambition in improving the condition of women. On this
issue, it should be made very clear that the international
community expects the Afghan authorities to live up
to their international commitments and ensure respect
for the principle of equal rights for men and women as
enshrined in the Constitution.
No society can make progress if it deprives itself of
the contribution of half of its population. It is therefore
essential that the law banning violence against women
be applied and that steps be taken to promote women’s
participation in every area of public life, including the
forces of law and order. It is unacceptable that women
in leadership positions should be targeted through
intimidation and assassination. In that regard, I would
just like to cite the example of police Lieutenant
Negara, the highest-ranking female officer in Helmand
province, who was assassinated in cowardly fashion a
few days ago. When women are threatened, they should
receive the same protection accorded to their male
colleagues.
Lastly, I would like to reiterate the importance that
Luxembourg attaches to the fate of children in conflict.
We welcome the fact that, in cooperation with UNICEF
and the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
the Afghan Government has drawn up a road map
aimed at giving new momentum to the Action Plan on
Underage Recruitment in the Afghan national security
forces. We believe it is crucial that UNAMA continue
to give effective support to the Afghan authorities in
implementing the Action Plan and the activities laid
out in the road map. We urge that UNAMA continue
to maintain adequate capacity for the protection of
children, in accordance with the provisions of resolution
2096 (2013).
In conclusion, I would like to ask the Special
Representative to convey our appreciation to the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan for the
remarkable work it is doing in what are often difficult
conditions.
Mr. Oyarzábal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first like to thank Special Representative Kubiš
for his presentation of the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2013/535), and Ambassador Tanin for his
valuable contribution.

13-480079/32

S/PV.7035

The situation in Afghanistan

The Secretary-General’s report provides us with
a complete picture of the circumstances surrounding
the transition in Afghanistan, the progress made and
the difficulties that still have to be dealt with. With the
leadership of its Government, the determination and
drive of its people and the support of the international
community, Afghanistan has come a long way and is
preparing to enter into a new stage of independence
and sovereignty. In that regard, the success of the
2014 elections is crucial to strengthening peace and
reconstruction in Afghanistan and completing the
political and security transition.
For that reason we would like to highlight the
progress made in preparing for the elections and
in passing legislation establishing the electoral
framework, with independent electoral institutions.
At the same time, we believe it is important that the
elections be carried out in an adequate security climate
that will enable the Afghan people to freely exercise
their rights. In particular, we urge the Government and
the international community to ensure the presence
of female police and security agents so as to enable
Afghan women to exercise their right to elect their
representatives. We hope that this aspect will be taken
into consideration as part of the upcoming renewal of
the mandate of the International Security Assistance
Force.
With respect to the security situation, we are deeply
concerned at the increase in civilian casualties caused by
terrorist attacks, among them a high number of women
and children who have either been killed or injured. A
particularly disturbing development in that regard is the
regrettable increase in the attacks on women in public
office or the security forces. All parties must respect
international humanitarian law, and those responsible
for these attacks must be prosecuted for their deeds.
While recognizing the significant progress that
has been made over the past decade in terms of gender
equality in Afghanistan and the empowerment of
Afghan women, thanks to the priority that the Afghan
Government has given to the issue, and as was also
recognized by the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women in June 2013 when the
first national report on the matter was being presented,
we nevertheless feel that it is possible to continue
building on those successes. We understand the
challenges that persist but we feel that it is essential that
women participate fully in the peace and reconciliation
processes. As we have said on other occasions, we

10/32

19/09/2013

feel that this should also be a strategic priority for
the transition. In other words, the full participation
of women at all levels and in all sectors of economic
activity is essential to building strong economies and
to consolidating stable and just societies.
With regard to the process of reconciliation, as is
the case for other members of the Security Council and
in other situations, we understand that the stability of
the country cannot be achieved exclusively through
military means. In that respect, we believe that the
reconciliation of process as well as the process of
strengthening the institutions of the country should
be led by the Afghans themselves so that peace and
development will be sustainable. The challenges facing
Afghanistan are interrelated, That is why sustained
progress in the area of strengthening the rule of law
and institutions, national reconciliation and social and
economic development are mutually reinforcing. In that
respect, we believe that the international community
will continue to support the people and Government
of Afghanistan in its efforts in the area of economic
development and social inclusion.
Under the leadership of its Government, the
determination and drive of its people and the support of
the international community, Afghanistan has come a
long way and is preparing to embark on a new stage of
its independence and sovereignty. Due to its presence
and its ability to interact with all sectors of Afghan
political and social life, the presence of the United
Nations through the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan has been fundamental and will be even
more so as the transition progresses. That is why I
would like to reiterate the commitment of Argentina to
the Afghan people, to democracy, to human rights and
to the development of the country.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Once again, we would like to welcome Mr. Ján Kubiš,
whom we thank for introducing the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2013/535). We would also like to
thank Ambassador Tanin for his statement.
I have four comments. First, we hope that the
year 2014 will see the holding of credible presidential
elections that will be accepted by all and conducive to
providing viable and sustainable solutions to the social,
economic and political problems of Afghanistan. As
Mr. Kubiš pointed out to us, we cannot underestimate
the importance of the elections for the future of the
country. They constitute the best basis for establishing
internal legitimacy. They are key to maintaining
13-48007

19/09/2013

The situation in Afghanistan

international commitments. They confer on Afghans a
feeling of ownership with regard to their democracy.
They also test the viability of a peaceful transfer of
power between the leaders of the country and ensure
that the democratic process is accountable to the
Afghan population.
We pay tribute to the authorities of the country
for the recent progress they have made in their
preparations for elections, which seem to be moving
in the right direction, particularly with the adoption
of the legislative electoral framework and the recent
appointment of the commissioners of the Independent
Election Commission and the Independent Electoral
Complaints Commission. Nevertheless, we must
express our disappointment at the fact that the
legislation adopted has reduced the quota for women’s
representation from 25 per cent to 20 per cent.
That leads me to my second point. We continue to
be concerned at issues relating to the protection and
representation of women. The recent attack in Helmand
province against a senior police officer as part of a trend
of violence against women officers in high-ranking
positions is alarming. We condemn those attacks,
particularly at a time when the Afghan Government is
assuming full responsibility for security throughout the
country. For that reason, it is important that we firmly
defend human rights and that the Government redouble
its efforts to ensure the participation of women in the
electoral and reconciliation processes, and that they
continue to join the Afghan armed forces in order to
promote trust among the population.
Thirdly, I would like to refer to the security situation
in the country. On the one hand, we welcome the
completion of the transfer of security functions to the
Afghans. At the same time, however, we note the upsurge
in terrorist attacks and we regret the new statistics
according to which the number of civilian casualties
continues to rise. In addition, two predominant factors
are undermining security efforts and will persist after
2014. I refer to international terrorism, on the one hand,
and to drug trafficking, on the other. The ongoing
support of the international community for the Afghan
security forces and the strengthening of cross-border
cooperation will be indispensable to eradicating those
phenomena.
Finally, in July, we had the opportunity to hear
an informative briefing from the Deputy SecretaryGeneral on his visit to Afghanistan. That high-level
visit from the Organization seemed to us to be timely

S/PV.7035

and relevant. We associate ourselves with the key
message delivered by Mr. Jan Eliasson during his visit,
encouraging all Afghans to preserve the progress made
to date and to continue to work for peace, development
and human rights.
In that regard, the United Nations is playing a
fundamental role in Afghanistan, particularly at the
critical juncture of the transition and in the elections
to be held next year. Guatemala will continue to
support a robust United Nations presence to ensure
that Afghanistan will be able, with the support of the
international community, to successfully face the year
2014 and the challenges that will follow.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank Special
Representative Ján Kubiš for his comprehensive
briefing. His dynamic leadership and the presence
and effective role of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) contribute to the
stabilization in Afghanistan. As we look ahead, the
United Nations is likely to play an even greater role
in consolidating the gains made in the past decade in
Afghanistan and assisting it in negotiating political and
security transitions.
The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/535) outlines the way forward. Earlier, Deputy
Secretary-General Jan Eliasson’s visit to Afghanistan
was extremely important in assessing the overall
situation and extending United Nations help to the
people of Afghanistan in fulfiling their aspirations
towards peace, justice and development.
We are also pleased to hear Ambassador Zahir
Tanin, who has shared with us the Government of
Afghanistan’s perspective and the challenges it is
facing. His remarks today are inspiring and forwardlooking. We congratulate the people of Afghanistan on
winning the South Asian Football Federation match.
We appreciate Ambassador Tanin’s message to the
Council. Afghanistan and Pakistan will work towards
enhanced cooperation.
Recently, there has been renewed momentum in
Pakistan-Afghanistan relations. Shortly after assuming
office, Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif sent his Adviser
on National Security and Foreign Affairs, Mr. Sartaj
Aziz, to Kabul on 21 July to convey our sincere hope
of further deepening and broadening our bilateral
relations. He underscored that a peaceful, stable and
united Afghanistan was in the vital interests of Pakistan.
We also said clearly and emphatically that we had no

13-4800711/32

S/PV.7035

The situation in Afghanistan

favourites and we would not interfere in the internal
affairs of Afghanistan. President Karzai warmly
reciprocated the Prime Minister’s sentiments and said
that his Government’s engagement with Pakistan would
help consolidate the ties between our two countries.
President Karzai visited Pakistan in late August. On
that occasion, while sharing his vision for a peaceful and
prosperous neighbourhood, Prime Minister Sharif said
that the people of Pakistan and Afghanistan were bound
by unbreakable ties of kinship, faith and history. That
vision is a legacy of Prime Minister Sharif’s sincere
attempts to promote peace in Afghanistan during his
first term in office, which contributed to the formation
of a broad-based Government in Afghanistan in 1992.
We are also thankful to the Secretary-General for
his positive evaluation of the discussion between Prime
Minister Sharif and President Karzai last month and his
own supportive statements during his visit to Pakistan
in mid-August.
Strong bilateral ties, especially trade and
economic partnerships, are important for our two
countries. Productive engagement between Pakistan
and Afghanistan would reinforce connectivity and
regional economic cooperation. We will continue
to work on trade, energy and communication links
through transnational initiatives. In that context,
communication, power and rail projects are extremely
important.
There is movement on other fronts, too. At the
request of the Afghan Government and the Afghan High
Peace Council, we have released another batch of seven
Taliban detainees and announced the release of Mullah
Abdul Ghani Baradar, in addition to the earlier release
of 26 other detainees. We are doing this to facilitate the
Afghan reconciliation process.
Progress in the peace process can be attained only
if all stakeholders share the goal of reconciliation. We
need to pursue that goal together, with unity of purpose.
Pakistan’s military and civilian personnel have made
unprecedented sacrifices to foster peace in the region.
Those sacrifices must not go to waste. It will mean
success for all of us, when the people of Afghanistan
succeed.
It is regrettable that the initiative for dialogue
through the Taliban Office in Doha sputtered, but
we must not lose hope. Dialogue is indispensable.
The Afghan Government, Taliban and other Afghan

12/32

19/09/2013

political forces must continue to explore ways to find a
formula for Afghan reconciliation.
We are glad to hear from the Secretary-General
that Afghan security forces have demonstrated
increased capabilities and determination in assuming
security responsibilities. Filling gaps and addressing
deficiencies, we understand, are priorities for
the Afghan Government. It is also important that
organized crime, narcotics trafficking and illicit arms
proliferation be stopped. We need more aggressive
policing surveillance of the border. That would help stop
the shelling across the Pakistan-Afghanistan border.
Terrorists and militants from both sides are pushing
Pakistan and Afghanistan towards escalation. We must
not allow them to manipulate the two countries.
The Secretary-General, in his visit to Pakistan last
month, called attention to the adverse consequences of
the use of armed drones. Drone strikes infringe upon
our sovereignty, violate international law, including
international human rights and humanitarian law, cause
civilian casualties and are detrimental to the combined
efforts to fight terrorism. We call for the cessation of
drone strikes. Urgent and intense dialogue can help
resolve this issue.
We agree with the Secretary-General’s observation
that representative institutions are the foundation of
stable transition processes. In that context, the 2014
elections will guarantee internal and international
legitimacy. While we wish the Afghan people success
in their security and political transitions, Afghanistan’s
economy should not be emaciated. The international
community must not abandon Afghanistan once
again. Pledges and commitments of assistance to
Afghanistan must be honoured even as progress is
being reviewed under the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework. Pakistan for its part, notwithstanding its
limited resources, has been extending support through
contributions, primarily to education, health and
infrastructure projects, worth $330 million. During
the visit of President Karzai, we also reiterated our
commitment to helping Afghanistan on energy and
infrastructure projects.
Our decision to extend the legal authorization of
Afghan refugees in Pakistan until 31 December 2015 is
another manifestation of our continued to commitment
to supporting our Afghan brothers and sisters in distress.
Early, honourable and voluntary return of refugees must
continue. The continued support of the United Nations

13-48007

19/09/2013

The situation in Afghanistan

system and the international community is crucial in
that regard.
Drug money plays a major role in financing
extremism and terrorism. The Secretary-General’s
report states that Afghanistan accounted for 74 per
cent of the world’s illicit opium production in 2012. We
are trying to develop a regional approach to tackle that
problem. We participated in meetings of the Triangular
Initiative in Kabul last month. Pakistan organized a
regional ministerial conference on counter-narcotics
last year, attended by high-level representatives of
13 countries. We are working to establish a regional
contact group on counter-narcotics. We believe that
UNAMA should support the activities of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to counter the
menace of narcotics production and trafficking.
Pakistan’s own stability and prosperity depend
on peace and security in Afghanistan. This shared
destiny drives our relationship with Kabul. We are
endeavouring to strengthen bilateral cooperation in
all spheres, including the economic, political, military
and intelligence fields. We assure the Government and
people of Afghanistan of our continued commitment to
a peaceful and prosperous Afghanistan. As our Afghan
brothers and sisters move towards a bright future, they
will always find us to be steadfast partners by their
side. Keeping faith in each other and a common future
remains our best hope.
Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kubiš, and the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, Mr. Tanin, for their statements.

S/PV.7035

civilian cooperation. Moreover, the contours of the
future international missions to support the Afghan
security forces are being defined, in response to
requests from the Afghan authorities and in accordance
with the decisions that have been taken .
This is thus the beginning of a new, promising era
for Afghanistan that is also fraught with risks. Everyone
around Afghanistan and inside the country is closely
following developments in the situation. But, as pointed
out by the Secretary-General in his report (S/2013/535),
Afghanistan now also has a number of assets, in the
midst of a volatile environment. We must build on these
pillars and continue to strengthen them.
First, the Afghan electoral process must be
exemplary. On 5 April 2014, Afghans will elect a new
president. This election will be an important milestone
for the international community and its long-term
support to Afghanistan, according to the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework. These elections should be
held as scheduled. They must be credible, inclusive,
transparent and peaceful.
We note with satisfaction the legislative measures
adopted during the summer, which bode well for the
election preparations. We welcome the opening on
Monday of the registration period for candidates. We
encourage all parties to take ownership of the electoral
process and to use the public forum to make their voices
heard. Deep differences remain in the vision of what
Afghanistan should be. They must be integrated into
the political process.

Secondly, the quality of the Afghan security
forces must be further strengthened. The resurgence of
I align myself with the statement that will be made​​ fighting has led to an increase in casualties among the
by the observer of the European Union.
security forces and civilians. But the Afghan National
Security Forces are standing firm and showing that the
On 18 June, Afghanistan entered the final phase of
efforts of the international community to train them are
the transition, which will come to an end in a little over
beginning to bear fruit.
a year. Afghan security forces are now responsible for
security throughout the country, highlighting the fact
We are shocked by the murders of women police
that Afghanistan’s sovereignty has been restored. This officers. An increase in the number of female Afghan
success was made possible by the international forces, police and their protection are vital to allowing Afghan
who will continue to support their Afghan counterparts women to feel as protected as men are. We welcome
until the end of 2014.
in this respect the development plan of the Ministry
of Interior to increase their numbers. The deployment
The international community’s presence alongside
of female police personnel to polling stations will also
Afghanistan will not end with the transitional period.
be crucial to enabling women to participate in the
International partners in Afghanistan, such as France,
presidential election.
have formalized or are in the process of formalizing,
with the Afghan Government, a framework for different
Thirdly, the commitment of all international
bilateral relations based on strengthened military and partners to Afghanistan must be reaffirmed. We
13-4800713/32

S/PV.7035

The situation in Afghanistan

welcome the dialogue undertaken with the partners of
the region who have a vested interest in the stability
and development of the country, including through
the Istanbul Process. We emphasize in this regard
the importance of the regional context in the fight
against the production and trafficking of drugs and the
mobilization of the international community within the
framework of the Paris Pact.
The international community will continue
to support Afghanistan during this period of
transformation. The commitments of Afghanistan’s
international partners, particularly donors, must be
clearly laid out. France will therefore soon release
€2 million for the Independent Election Commission
through the United Nations Development Programme.
Furthermore, we believe that the United Nations
should be called upon to shoulder greater responsibility
in Afghanistan and strengthen the political role of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), which is in our view imperative to facilitating
the implementation of the political processes. To this
end, we believe it particularly important to simplify
the Mission’s mandate and to strengthen its capacity
to coordinate the funds, programmes and specialized
agencies of the United Nations. Finally, we support the
continued presence of the Mission in every area of the
country.
I would conclude by saying that only a genuine
and inclusive inter-Afghan political process will ensure
the emergence of a stable and peaceful Afghanistan.
The dialogue must be led by Afghans, in accordance
with the principles set by them and endorsed by the
international community in Bonn in 2011, and by the
Security Council.
Many uncertainties remain, and efforts should be
pursued. However, we can collectively contain the risks
by relying on an Afghanistan that is stronger today than
it has been at any time during the past 30 years.
Mr. Sul Kyung-hoon (Republic of Korea): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Ján
Kubiš for his briefing. We fully support the dedicated
work of the Special Representative and his staff. I also
thank the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
Ambassador Tanin, for his insightful statement.
Afghanistan now finds itself at a critical juncture
as it undertakes the steps necessary for a political and
security transition in 2014. In this context, I would
like to focus on three key challenges confronting
14/32

19/09/2013

Afghanistan: the elections, the security situation and
human rights.
First, the successful holding of the presidential and
provincial elections in 2014 is essential to ensuring
a peaceful political transition and to sustaining
international support. In this regard, we welcome the
adoption of key electoral laws, which will establish
sound legal frameworks to guarantee fair and credible
elections. We also welcome the timely appointment of
the members of the two electoral commissions.
Against this backdrop, we condemn the targeted
killing of the senior Afghan election official that
happened yesterday. Such acts of violence seriously
undermine the ongoing efforts of the Afghan people to
achieve a peaceful political transition. With only seven
months remaining until the elections, ensuring a safe
environment for the electoral process must be a priority.
Enhancing the participation of women is another
area that requires more effort. The continued support of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) will be crucial in consolidating the
legitimacy and integrity of the process.
Secondly, a stable security environment is of
paramount importance in order to ensure that the
Afghan transition is irreversible and sustainable. With
the launch of the fifth and final phase of the security
transition in June, the Afghan security forces are now
taking full responsibility for leading and conducting
all operations throughout the country. While efforts to
strengthen the capacity of the Afghan National Security
Forces are under way, a 23 per cent rise in civilian
casualties during the first half of 2013 shows that
grave security challenges remain. The recent attacks
on United Nations facilities and diplomatic premises
are another serious cause for concern. All parties must
take every feasible step to ensure the protection of
the civilians and comply with their obligations under
international law. Efforts must be stepped up to train
the Afghan National Security Forces and provide them
with the necessary support in order to effectively
protect civilians and ensure accountability.
Thirdly, the long-term support of the international
community is necessary for the Afghan Government
to make progress in key areas under the Tokyo
Mutual Accountability Framework. In that regard, we
welcome the constructive dialogue between the Afghan
Government and its international partners during the
first senior officials meeting, held on 3 July. At that

13-48007

19/09/2013

The situation in Afghanistan

meeting, it was reaffirmed that the Afghan Government
should deliver on its commitment, with an emphasis
on reinforcing the financial management system and
tackling corruption.
One of the key commitments made by the Afghan
Government under the Framework is the promotion of
human rights, especially those of women. We urge the
Afghan Government to enhance those efforts by fully
implementing the Law on the Elimination of Violence
against Women and ensuring the independence of
the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission,
among other measures.
UNAMA should continue to play a central role
in assisting Afghanistan as it moves forward with its
transition. The sustained support of the international
community will be vital to Afghanistan’s long-term
stability. In that regard, we welcome the convening of
the International Contact Group on Afghanistan, which
will be held tomorrow here in New York. We hope that it
will serve as a valuable opportunity to demonstrate the
international community’s commitment to Afghanistan.
The Korean Government, for its part, will continue
to support international efforts to build capacity in
Afghanistan, and I reiterate our pledge to provide
$500 million over the period 2011-2015. We will remain
committed to working with the Afghan Government
and its people in order to meet our shared objective of a
prosperous, stable and democratic Afghanistan.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this
debate on the question of Afghanistan. Likewise, I
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Ján Kubiš, for his briefing, as well as the
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, Mr. Tanin,
for his statement, as well as for the welcome expressed
to me.
Afghanistan faces an arduous task in restoring
stability and rebuilding the country. Recently, thanks
to the efforts made by the Government and its people,
Afghanistan has registered noticeable progress in
terms of building and reconstruction, and the transition
process has entered a critical stage.
In order to build an Afghanistan of stability
and prosperity in which different communities live
in harmony and, ultimately, realize the goal of an
Afghanistan governed by Afghans, we need to support
the long-term continuing efforts of Afghanistan and all

S/PV.7035

parties concerned. Continuing support and help from
the international community will be required.
I wish to emphasize the following points.
First, China welcomes the recent adoption of two
important laws, the electoral law and the structure
law; the appointment of the head of the Independent
Election Commission; and the fact that the country
has arrived at the stage of nominating candidates for
the presidency. We hope that all Afghan parties will
continue their dialogue and consultations, address their
differences appropriately and promote preparations for
the elections so as to ensure their success. That will be a
milestone in the process of a fully successful transition
and transformation in Afghanistan.
Secondly, with regard to the frequent occurrence
of security incidents in Afghanistan, which have
resulted in large numbers of civilian casualties, China
wishes to register its concern. We call on all parties
to observe international humanitarian law and related
international law.
The Afghan National Security Forces have entered
the final stage of preparations before they can take
over security responsibilities. We hope that all parties
concerned will adopt a responsible attitude, hand over
security responsibilities to the Afghan Government, and
focus on building the capacity of the Afghan military
and police so as to ensure the successful completion of
the security transition.
Thirdly, China supports an Afghan-led and Afghanowned national reconciliation process, with a view to
achieving peace and stability. We support the active
role played by the High Peace Council in the promotion
of national reconciliation and welcome the provision of
additional support by Pakistan and other countries of
the region. We hope that the international community
will support and work with the Afghan Government and
people in their efforts to create an enabling external
environment for the reconciliation process.
Fourthly, peacebuilding in and the reconstruction
of Afghanistan will require strong support from the
international community. The international community
must respect the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Afghanistan and honour its
commitment to support Afghanistan, in accordance
with the priorities set out in the national development
strategy for Afghanistan, and support the strengthening
of its capacity for autonomous economic and social
development.

13-4800715/32

S/PV.7035

The situation in Afghanistan

China supports the United Nations in general and
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
in particular with respect to its playing a leading role in
the coordination of international efforts to help resolve
the Afghan question and rebuild the country.
Fifthly, China supports Afghanistan in its efforts
to strengthen its friendly relations with neighbouring
countries, conduct regional cooperation and actively
tackle such common challenges as terrorism and
narcotics. China will host the fourth Ministerial meeting
of the Istanbul Process in Beijing next year, thereby
further strengthening efforts to promote cooperation
among the countries of the region and peace, stability
and development in Afghanistan and in the region.
At the same time, related regional cooperation
initiatives should respect the concerns of the countries
of the region; make full use of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization and other regional organizations; and be
conducted on the basis of consensus, through extensive
consultations.
China has long been committed to developing
strategic partnerships with Afghanistan. We follow
closely and have been actively involved in the peace
and reconstruction process in Afghanistan. China
will continue to provide assistance to Afghanistan
to the extent of its ability and to play a constructive
role in realizing peace, stability and development in
Afghanistan.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having scheduled today’s debate on
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.
I wish also to thank Ján Kubiš, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his briefing, and
Ambassador Zahir Tanin, Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, for his statement.
This debate gives us an opportunity to reflect
on the progress made towards a stable transition in
Afghanistan, be it in the political, security or economic
areas. Despite a number of challenges in the transition
process, mainly related to insecurity and to the usual
post-conflict reconstruction challenges, Rwanda
recognizes the tremendous progress achieved so far in
Afghanistan. It is important to note that Afghanistan
has an effective Government over the territory that is
geared towards national unity, reconciliation and the
promotion of democracy.
My delegation attaches great importance to the idea
of dialogue and political settlements in nation-building.
16/32

19/09/2013

It is in that context that we welcome the endeavours of the
Afghan Government to reach out to opposition groups,
including the Taliban. Any peaceful engagement should
be inclusive and transparent and should be accompanied
by early confidence-building measures. In that regard,
Rwanda reiterates its full support for the Afghan-led
and Afghan-owned peace and national reconciliation
processes. We also acknowledge the progress made
by the Government of Afghanistan in preparing for
the presidential and provincial elections scheduled for
next April. We welcome the adoption of the electoral
legislation, the legal framework for the Independent
Election Commission and for the Independent Electoral
Complaints Commission. Those institutions represent
the foundation of a vigorous electoral architecture
under mutually agreed rules by which the forthcoming
vote can be contested should the need arise.
We hope that all Afghans will participate in
that democratic exercise and that the Government
of Afghanistan will make every effort to ensure that
women participate in that electoral process and are
adequately represented in elected bodies.
My delegation expresses its deep concern over the
increasing attacks against officials and civilians in
Afghanistan, particularly attacks against prominent
women, as attested by the assassination by the Taliban
of Lieutenant Nigara, a senior officer in the Afghan
police. We also condemn the assassination of the head
of the Independent Election Commission in Kunduz
province. We hope that the Afghan Government will
ensure that the perpetrators of those crimes are held
accountable, and we call on the international and
regional partners to support the Afghans in averting
such heinous crimes. Rwanda reiterates its appeal to
the international community to equip the Afghan forces
commensurate with the regional realities and existing
security threats.
Afghanistan’s long-term stability and economic
development will also depend on its neighbours
and the role played by the region as a whole. We
welcome the continued efforts of President Hamid
Karzai to strengthen cooperation with neighbouring
countries, as demonstrated by his recent official visit
to Islamabad and Tehran. Rwanda expresses its support
for constructive engagement and cooperation between
countries of the region, which are essential in building
and reinforcing long-term stability. We attach great
importance to the general mutual commitment made at
the Tokyo Conference in July 2012, which should guide

13-48007

19/09/2013

The situation in Afghanistan

the cooperation between the donor community and the
Afghan Government. We encourage the Government to
honour its commitments in all fields, as stated in the
Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework.
In conclusion, let me express Rwanda’s deep
appreciation for the role played by the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. I also strongly
believe that as the International Security Assistance
Force plans to draw down by the end of 2014, the
United Nations will continue playing its crucial role
by supporting Afghan Government institutions as they
take on a greater share of the responsibility for the
socioeconomic development of their country.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Kubiš
for his briefing today. As always, we are grateful to
the staff of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and to the United Nations
country team for the hard and challenging work they do
in helping Afghans lay the foundation for a more stable
and prosperous country. We remain solid supporters of
the United Nations role in Afghanistan today and to its
enduring role beyond 2014.
We thank Ambassador Tanin for joining today’s
discussion. As always, we value his close cooperation
with the Security Council, and the United States is
of course committed to supporting a fully sovereign,
democratic and united Afghanistan.
Let me touch on four issues this morning: security
transition, political transition, human rights and what
the international community needs to do to help
Afghanistan be successful going forward.
First, I should like to recognize the continued
progress being made in Afghanistan’s security
transition. The Afghan National Security Forces have
successfully taken the lead in security nationwide, with
the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF)
moving into a support role this past June. I commend
the quick response of the Afghan and ISAF security
forces who secured our consulate and personnel in
Herat after the 13 September terrorist attack, and I
offer our condolences to the Afghan victims and their
families. We thank the Government of Afghanistan for
its support and ongoing partnership. Today, it is Afghan
forces who are defending the Afghan people and the
Afghan Government. That is at it should be, and it is
also appropriate that we continue to support them in

S/PV.7035

that role, especially with the onset of elections next
year.
That leads to my second point. We cannot stress
enough that the next few months will be critical to a
peaceful and constitutional political transition. A
transparent, credible and inclusive electoral process
is essential to Afghanistan’s stability and democratic
development, as well as to sustaining international
assistance to the Afghan Government, which has been
very clear about its intention to hold the elections as
scheduled and is already constructively engaged.
In that regard, we commend Parliament’s passage
of elections laws, which President Karzai signed at
the end of July, and the ongoing implementation of
those laws, including the seating of the independent
election commissioners and the Independent Electoral
Complaints Commission. The support and engagement
of the international community, both bilaterally and
through the United Nations, remain essential.
But these political and security transitions are
not happening in a vacuum. Human rights matter,
and my third point is that as we progress through the
transition period and beyond, it is imperative that
human rights — particularly the rights of women and
girls — be protected and promoted. The improvements
in human rights, especially the rights of women, made
since 2001 must not be reversed.
We are deeply disturbed, as others have indicated
as well, by recent reports of targeted and, in some cases,
deadly attacks on Afghan female police officers, civil
servants, Government officials and others. Afghan
women have a tremendous contribution to make to
the future of their country, and they must be part of
Afghanistan’s civic life as leaders and decision-makers.
The role and participation of civil society actors and
other women’s rights advocates in decision-making
processes is critical to ensuring peace and stability.
There can be no overall progress in Afghanistan without
women’s progress.
Regarding the appointment of commissioners to
the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission
in July, we want to stress how essential it is that the
Commission’s independence and integrity be upheld,
that the commissioners themselves be independent, and
that the Commission be seen as credible in the eyes of
the Afghan people.
Fourthly and finally, regional and international
support must be sustained even beyond the transition

13-4800717/32

S/PV.7035

The situation in Afghanistan

process to give Afghans a chance to build this better
future. We look forward to the International Contact
Group and Heart of Asia meetings in the next few
days here in New York. The United Nations must play
a central role as Afghanistan undergoes important
political, security and economic transitions. UNAMA’s
leadership should continue to provide support to the 2014
Afghan elections, including close engagement with the
Independent Election Commission on tranining, public
information campaigns and fraud mitigation efforts.
A pivotal period lies ahead for Afghanistan.
The United States remains committed to a lasting
partnership with Afghanistan as it goes through
transition and approaches its decade of transformation.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2013/535), his Special Representative Mr. Ján Kubiš
for his briefing, and Ambassador Tanin for his positive
remarks this morning.
Let me begin by condemning the recent attacks
in Afghanistan. Over recent months, we have a seen a
spike in civilian deaths and injuries, including among
women and children. As Mr. Kubiš noted, the killing
of Lieutenant Nigara — one of Afghanistan’s senior
policewomen — is the latest tragedy. These attacks
are reprehensible and a reminder of the significant
challenge to building peace in Afghanistan.
I will focus my statement today on five key
areas: security, the 2014 elections, the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework, peace and reconciliation,
and the United Nations future engagement in
Afghanistan.
First, on security, the Afghan National Security
Forces (ANSF) have now assumed the lead for
security throughout the country and continue to grow
in confidence and capability. This is a significant
achievement, but we must not be complacent. As the
Secretary-General highlights and Mr. Kubiš confirmed
today, this has been a challenging summer for the ANSF.
The number of casualties has risen, underscoring that
ongoing support from the international community will
be vital. The United Kingdom will continue to support
the ANSF, including through taking the coalition lead
at the new Afghan National Army Officers Academy.
Secondly, with respect to the 2014 elections,
Afghanistan is in a crucial phase ahead of presidential
and provincial elections in 2014. The window for

18/32

19/09/2013

candidate registration is now open, and we look
forward to broad participation, including by women,
as Afghans prepare to shape the future of their
country. A strong framework for the elections will be
essential. The Law on the Structure and Duties of the
Independent Election Commission and the electoral
law all represent significant steps towards delivering
transparent, credible and inclusive elections. For our
part, the United Kingdom will continue to support this
process, including through an additional $12 million to
the United Nations Development Programme ELECT II
programme.
Thirdly, as to the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework, the 3 July meeting confirmed that good
progress is being made, but neither the Government
of Afghanistan nor the international community
can afford to shift their focus. Progress in priority
areas, such as the role of women and human rights, is
essential for long-term development and to sustaining
donor funding. We encourage the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) to assist
in monitoring, coordinating and reporting on progress
over the coming months.
Fourthly, with regard to work towards a political
settlement, such a settlement remains the best way to
secure sustainable peace in Afghanistan. We welcome
continued efforts towards an Afghan-led peace process.
Over the coming months, we need to see early meetings
between both the Taliban and the United States and
the Taliban and the Afghan High Peace Council.
Afghanistan’s closest neighbours will also be central.
President Karzai’s visit to Pakistan last month delivered
tangible outcomes in the pursuit of peace and trade and
economic agreements. In addition, the United Kingdom
continues to support the Istanbul Process and other
initiatives that encourage trade, economic prosperity
and security.
Finally, let me turn to the future of the United
Nations after the elections and beyond. The partnership
between UNAMA and the Government of Afghanistan
is an important one. While that relationship will evolve
as the task facing the international community in
Afghanistan shifts its focus, UNAMA must retain the
right presence throughout the country. It must provide
the right level of support for the international community
to deliver on agreed commitments, in particular on the
human and women’s rights agenda. As the report of the
Secretary-General highlights, to achieve that it is vital
for UNAMA and United Nations agencies to adopt a

13-48007

19/09/2013

The situation in Afghanistan

“One UN” approach and better coordinate activities on
the ground.
We do not take the challenges ahead lightly. But
there is room for optimist and, together in support
of the Government of Afghanistan, we can meet our
shared vision of a stable, inclusive and prosperous
Afghanistan. The United Kingdom will continue to play
a committed and strong role in that shared endeavour.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan,
for presenting the report (S/2013/535) of the SecretaryGeneral. Through him, I should like to commend all
the staff of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the country team for their
support for the efforts of Afghanistan. I would also like
to thank Ambassador Zahir Tanin for his update on
the efforts undertaken by his country to face up to the
challenges it faces.
The Secretary-General’s report gives an account
of the genuine momentum on the political front as
witnessed by the preparations for the presidential and
provincial elections in 2014, which will be a prelude
to the launch of the transformation phase that will
begin with the end of the presence of the International
Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan. That will
be both a decisive stage in the history of the Afghan
people and a determining factor in the stability of the
entire region.
We welcome the progress made in the process
of organizing the elections, first and foremost the
appointment of the Chair of the Independent Election
Commission and the law governing the holding of the
elections. The Independent Election Commission’s
approval, on 31 July, of the operational plan for the 2014
elections and its endorsement of the United Nations
electoral support project are important steps that should
be welcomed. The international community should
support those efforts, not just during the electoral
process but also during the post-electoral stage and in
the course of the withdrawal of international forces in
2014.
Afghanistan continues to face security challenges,
including terrorist acts as witnessed by the 23 per cent
increase from 2012 to 2013 in the number of civilians
killed, including 78 children. The Government is
pursuing its efforts to build its forces, with a view

S/PV.7035

to assuming its responsibilities in this area. That is a
burdensome and demanding task. The establishment
of a community policing force, the putting in place of
a special trust fund to support an integrated approach
to justice and the rule of law in Afghanistan, and the
expansion of the community policing programme
are concrete measures conducive to contributing to
the peaceful holding of elections and improving the
security situation in the long term.
Afghanistan’s level of stability has an impact on
its neighbours. It is reassuring to see the development
of regional cooperation among the countries of the
region based on solidarity and with a view to helping
Afghanistan move towards stability, democracy
and development. Through Prime Minister Nawaz
Sharif, Pakistan has given an indication of goodneighbourliness and cooperation in addition to its
humanitarian gesture to continue to host on Pakistani
territory, until 31 December 2015, camps for registered
refugees.
The Kingdom of Morocco welcomes the efforts of
Afghanistan to integrate into the regional economic
landscape, as attested to by its joining the Energy
Charter Treaty on 7 July, thereby becoming the fiftyfourth member, as well as the progress made with regard
to the gas pipeline project involving Turkmenistan,
Afghanistan, Pakistan and India. This is a positive
step towards regional economic integration. That
commitment to regional cooperation and integration
was also reflected at the meeting of Council of Ministers
of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, which
reaffirmed its support for an independent, peaceful,
neutral and prosperous Afghanistan that is free from
terrorism and drug crime.
My country welcomes this dynamic of regional
cooperation between Afghanistan and its neighbours.
This is a major milestone in moving successfully after
2014 towards an Afghanistan that takes its destiny in
its hands and builds a democratic society where there
is reconciliation and respect for human rights. The
assumption of such responsibility by Afghanistan
nevertheless requires — as everyone who has spoken
before me has emphasized — support on the part of
the international community and the United Nations,
before and after the 2014, so as to make Afghanistan’s
stability permanent.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I would like
to begin by thanking Mr. Ján Kubiš for presenting the
report (S/2013/535) and for the work he is doing as

13-4800719/32

S/PV.7035

The situation in Afghanistan

19/09/2013

the Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I also thank Ambassador
Tanin for his very informative statement.

Secretary-General to report to the Security Council on
the state of the preparations for the elections to allow
the Council to consider the potential difficulties.

This is the Council’s third debate this year on the
situation in Afghanistan. We note that, in spite of the
efforts made, there continues to be uncertainty on the
political, security, humanitarian and human rights
fronts. We also note that cooperation continues to grow
between Afghanistan and the countries of the region.

The security environment in which the elections
are being prepared is reflective of the wider situation.
Security incidents have not abated, despite the continued
recruitment by Afghan forces and efforts to strengthen
the capacity of those forces. Acts of violence are
increasing, and United Nations staff and their partners,
as well as diplomatic missions are being targeted.
The insecurity is fuelled by the problem of drugs, the
cultivation of which continues to grow. We encourage
the Afghan Government to pursue and intensify its
fight against poppy cultivation in particular.

On the political front, the situation continues to be
dominated by the peace process and the elections of
2014.
With regard to the peace process, the announcement
of the opening, on June 18, of a Taliban office in another
country has dealt a blow to the process of inter-Afghan
reconciliation. The Government’s decision to suspend
talks and opt for an Afghan-led dialogue is the result
of the anxiety aroused by the opening of that office,
whose attributes were interpreted in different ways.
Faced with such a situation, we urge all Afghan parties
to resume dialogue. In that regard, we commend the
joint secretariat of the Afghan Peace and Reintegration
Programme on its work in connection with former
insurgents, to which UNAMA provides continued
support.
With regard to the 2014 presidential and provincial
elections, the preparation process has given a new
dynamic to political life in Afghanistan, with the
valuable support of the United Nations Development
Programme. The adoption of laws on the organization
and functions of the Independent Election Commission
and the Independent Electoral Complaints Commission
is part of that dynamic. Similarly, we welcome the
consultations that led to the appointment of members of
the Commission, while we also regret the lack of civil
society organizations represented among them.
The preparations for the 2014 elections are
unfortunately taking place in an atmosphere of
insecurity. Moreover, there are disagreements about
the holding of the elections themselves. At the same
time, negative campaigns are being organized to
discourage voters. This unfortunate situation calls the
attention of the international community to the fact that
Afghanistan will always need the help of all its partners
to complete the process under way.
With regard to the importance of the 2014 elections,
while Afghan forces are increasingly assuming securityrelated responsibilities, it would be appropriate for the
20/32

The human rights situation is also of concern
in Afghanistan. Irregularities in the procedure
for appointing new members of the Independent
Commission for Human Rights have been reported.
We urge the Government to preserve the status of the
Commission, as it has endeavoured to do.
The protection of civilians is also weakened and
civilian casualties are in the thousands because of
the use of improvised explosive devices and stepped
up ground fighting. With regard to the persistence of
torture and other mistreatment, we urge the Government
to continue to take the appropriate measures in order to
control such violations, particularly against women and
children.
Togo also condemns the use by the insurgents of
child soldiers and welcomes the progress made ​​in the
fight against that scourge through the Action Plan on
Underage Recruitment. In that respect, the support of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflicts and of UNICEF is
welcome.
The signing of agreements by Afghanistan with
neighbouring countries portends a promising future
in the relations between that and other States in the
region and beyond, as Mr. Kubiš and the Ambassador
of Afghanistan have just affirmed. In that context,
the continued hospitality of Pakistan towards Afghan
refugees should be commended. Furthermore, the
number of people needing assistance is estimated at
more than 135,000.
I conclude by stressing that Afghanistan needs the
support of the international community as a whole more
than ever to meet the challenges facing it, especially
in view of the withdrawal of international forces by
13-48007

19/09/2013

The situation in Afghanistan

the end of next year. In that regard, Togo would like
to again thank the United Nations, UNAMA, the
funds and programmes and Government partners for
the assistance they continue to provide to ensure that
Afghanistan can assume its place in the community of
nations.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity.
First of all, I should thank Special Representative
Mr. Ján Kubiš for his briefing and for his leadership of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), and all United Nations personnel in
Afghanistan for their dedication and efforts. I also
thank Afghanistan’s Permanent Representative,
Ambassador Zahir Tanin, for his update on progress in
Afghanistan’s transition and for his always important
engagement in New York.
Three months after the milestone 2013
announcements, significant progress has been made
on the security transition. The Afghan National
Security Forces are now in national security lead
and have demonstrated their increasing capacity to
deliver security and stability for the Afghan people
as Afghanistan progresses through its transition. But
although the insurgency is diminished, it is persistent.
Threats to law and order endure. Therefore, the continued
commitment of the international community to support
the Afghan armed forces and police will continue to be
essential for Afghanistan’s long-term security. Equally,
progress in accordance with commitments made in
Tokyo is vital if the legitimate expectations of the
Afghan people are to be met and the unprecedented level
of resources pledged by the international community
sustained. While there has been some progress on the
Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework, more is
needed. In particular, credible inclusive and transparent
elections will be vital for political and economic
transition. The passage of the electoral law and the Law
on the Structure and Duties of the Independent Election
Commission and the Independent Electoral Complaints
Commission provide a robust legislative framework, but
strong implementation will be critical. We encourage
work to fully implement those laws.
Strong and inclusive voter participation is
important to the credibility and acceptability of election
results. We applaud the public outreach efforts being
undertaken as fundamental to election preparations.
The United Nations, as supported by countries such as
Australia, is providing vital technical support.

S/PV.7035

We must build on the improvements in respect
for human rights in Afghanistan over the past decade,
including the rights of women and girls. Constitutional
and legislative commitments to gender equality must
be upheld. The Afghan Government must maintain
momentum in preventing and addressing violence
against women. While gains have been made, gaps exist
in the systematic implementation of the elimination of
the Law on the Elimination of Violence against Women.
Afghanistan’s successful transition will increasingly
depend on generating broad-based economic growth
that creates jobs and helps underpin fiscal sustainability.
That requires the Afghan Government to prioritize its
development agenda to reduce poverty and improve
livelihoods. Tackling corruption is an important
commitment under the Tokyo Framework.
As the Secretary-General notes in his report
(S/2013/535), Afghanistan continues to face significant
humanitarian challenges, including a worrying trend of
growing internal displacement. An increase in civilian
casualties, primarily caused by anti-Government
elements, is of grave concern. And we must condemn
in the strongest possible terms the recent increase in
attacks that have targeted civilians, including senior
female officials, female police, female members of
Parliament and election officials.
Military action alone will not end the conflict in
Afghanistan. A negotiated political solution is needed
to ensure lasting security and to lock in the gains of
the past decade. The process will be long, complex and
inevitably subject to set backs. But efforts at peace and
reconciliation must continue. The Council’s Taliban
sanctions regime was established in response to the
Taliban’s human rights violations and use of Afghan
territory for terrorist activities. The sanctions regime
will continue to be an important tool, which can operate
flexibly in support of the peace and reconciliation
process.
The Security Council’s support for Afghanistan’s
transition reflects the broader international community
commitment to Afghanistan’s future. Australia looks
forward to working with Council members in chairing
the negotiation of the the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) draft resolution, which is
due for adoption by the Council in the second week
of October. UNAMA will continue to play a vital
role in the active promotion and advocacy of human
rights, including the rights of women and girls, and
in coordinating the efforts of United Nations agencies

13-4800721/32

S/PV.7035

The situation in Afghanistan

and the international community in line with the
priorities of the Afghan Government. We look forward
to shepherding the negotiations on the renewal of
UNAMA’s mandate in March 2014, including on the
need for adequate funding.
In conclusion, as the Secretary-General notes in his
report, we now need to protect the gains of the past
decade. As the transition moves forward, the role of
the United Nations and its affiliated agencies remains
important. However, while the international community
remains committed to assisting Afghanistan to ensure
that those gains are sustainable, it is the Afghan
Government itself that has the ultimate responsibility
for seizing the opportunity before it to create a secure
and prosperous future. We are confident it will do so.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I wish to remind speakers to limit their statements
to no more than four minutes in order to enable the
Council to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations
with lengthy statements are kindly requested to
circulate the texts in writing and to deliver a condensed
version when speaking in the Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2013/535) and Special Representative Ján Kubiš for
his briefing. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Tanin for his statement today.
Italy fully aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union. I
would also like to add a few remarks in my national
capacity.
Afghanistan is about to enter a crucial phase of its
history. From now until the end of 2014 it will witness
a series of important moments involving the closely
connected political and security aspects of its transition.
I am referring to the presidential elections of April
2014, the subsequent handover from President Karzai
to his successor, the winding-down of the International
Security Assistance Force and the defining of the forces
that will take over from it.
In terms of security, the beginning of the fifth
and last phase of the transition process, on the basis of
which the Afghan national security forces will assume
full control of the territory, was accompanied by a
fighting season that produced an unending series of
22/32

19/09/2013

high-profile terrorist attacks and victims. This phase is
a source of concern, and we cannot let our guard down,
given the forthcoming critical transfer of responsibility
for nationwide security from NATO to Afghanistan.
Nevertheless, the Afghan armed forces have made clear
and steady progress in addressing the demanding daily
challenge of controlling the territory and ensuring the
country’s security.
At the political level, where security continues
to be a major issue, the lead-up to the presidential
elections has now begun in a symbolic way with the
presentation of candidatures. We would like to express
our appreciation for the Kabul authorities’ change
of pace in defining an institutional framework for
regulating the elections through the recently passed
election law. It is Italy’s hope that until the new Head of
State is proclaimed, the Afghan authorities will take all
action necessary to guarantee an inclusive, transparent
and credible election process and to promote universal
rules respecting and representing every aspect of civil
society and the various political parties.
In the upcoming elections, United Nations support
for the Afghan authorities through the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) will be
invaluable. UNAMA will of course play a crucial role
in helping to strengthen the legitimacy and integrity of
the elections. Equally important during the transition
period will be its support for Afghan institutions as
they gradually take on responsibility for the country’s
civic and economic development. These and other
issues will be the focus of the debate to be held during
the meeting of the International Contact Group in New
York on September 20.
I would like to make another point, which is that
there can be no prospect of stabilization in Afghanistan
without national reconciliation. Italy affirms its support
for the peace process, recognizing Afghanistan’s full
ownership of that process, and hopes that the transition
will not lead to any reversals of the gains that have been
made in the areas of democracy, civil rights and gender
equality, or to any concessions to terrorism.
In the regional context, Italy recognizes the
unquestionable progress that has been made through
the Istanbul Process, which we support, and wishes to
emphasize the importance of implementing the plans of
action adopted in Almaty in April. We look forward to
the outcome of the next meeting of senior officials in
New York. Lastly, we hope that the recent establishment
of a more cordial climate between Afghanistan and
13-48007

19/09/2013

The situation in Afghanistan

Pakistan woll bring positive developments in the areas
of regional cooperation and the inter-Afghan dialogue.
In closing, Italy wishes to reiterate the message
of the Tokyo Conference. As we look forward to the
transformation decade, the continued support of
the international community for Afghanistan will
be linked to conditions concerning Afghanistan’s
attainment of measurable results in areas such as the
democratic and electoral process, the fight against
corruption, administrative and economic governance
and the protection of human rights, particularly those
of women. Our assistance cannot ignore the principles
of reciprocity, conditionality and responsibility
that remain mainstays of the partnership between
Afghanistan and the international community on the
one hand and between Afghanistan and Italy on the
other.
I would like to take this opportunity to once again
express Italy’s appreciation for the role of the United
Nations in Afghanistan, starting with UNAMA.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Puri (India): I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your leadership of the Council
this month. I would also like to begin by thanking
Ambassador Zahir Tanin for his statement, and to
join you, Mr. President, in thanking the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ján Kubiš,
for his contribution and for his strong leadership of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA).
My full statement will be circulated; let me read
a few extracts. We commend the efforts of the Afghan
Government to ensure completion of all the technical
preparations necessary for holding a successful
presidential election. A peaceful and free election
process that elects an Afghan President acceptable
to the people of Afghanistan remains key. The
international community must strongly support the
Afghan authorities’ preparations in that endeavour, and
at the same time should strongly oppose any outside
efforts to derail the process.
The security situation in Afghanistan is fragile, not
because of the weakness or incapacity of the valiant
Afghan security forces, but because of the continued
threat presented by terrorist and extremist groups to
Afghanistan’s security. This was demonstrated most
recently in the deplorable attack on the Indian consulate

S/PV.7035

in Jalalabad on 3 August, which resulted in injuries
to several Afghan security personnel guarding the
consulate and the deaths of innocent Afghan citizens,
including 10 children.
India does not have an exit policy in Afghanistan
and will not be deterred by such attacks. We do not
see the attack as aimed only against India; it is also
directed at the efforts of the Afghan people to overcome
the tragic consequences of the last several decades
of war and conflict. The Secretary-General’s report
(S/2013/535) cites a figure of 3,500 Afghan servicemen
killed and wounded in action in the second quarter
of 2013. We salute the valour of the Afghan National
Security Forces personnel who have made that supreme
sacrifice. The recent merciless killing of Sayed Kamala
Sushmita Banerjee, a woman medical worker of Indian
origin who was married to an Afghan national, reflects
the intolerance of those who oppose Afghanistan’s
socioeconomic development as well as the challenges
that lie ahead for Afghanistan.
Many of the terrorist attacks in Afghanistan
have been coordinated by the Taliban and Al-Qaida
and their affiliates. They are clear indicators that we
must be unceasingly watchful for the designs of those
terrorist organizations. The Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities
must remain proactive and attentive in its listing and
delisting process of individuals and entities for targeted
measures. The international community should
continue to back the Afghans’ efforts to address the
security and terrorist challenges they face. Concerted
action is also needed to isolate and root out the
syndicate of terrorism, which includes elements of the
Taliban, Al-Qaida, Lashkar-e-Taiba and other terrorist
and extremist groups. It is therefore important that the
transition plan take into account the threats posed by
those terrorist organizations and factors them into the
security situation on the ground.
The international community must reassess the
role it wishes to play in Afghanistan’s internal political
processes, which brings me to the issue of the renewed
mandate we will be conferring on UNAMA. We
should define UNAMA’s political mandate to ensure
that it keeps its focus on supporting the institutions of
politics rather than the political process itself, which
must be left to Afghanistan’s own leaders. At the same
time, the new mandate for UNAMA must expand its
humanitarian and developmental role by aiming for

13-4800723/32

S/PV.7035

The situation in Afghanistan

better delivery of assistance in Afghanistan. To the
maximum extent possible, delivery of the humanitarian
and development services must be done through Afghan
State institutions, because it is not capacity-substitution
but capacity-building that we are seeking to achieve in
Afghanistan.
In conclusion, 2014 will be a watershed for
Afghanistan. The international community’s support
for Afghanistan will be critical in the transition. We
appreciate the good work being done by UNAMA in
often trying conditions, and assure the Council that
India will continue to stand by Afghanistan during this
period of transition and thereafter.
The President: I now give the floor to the UnderSecretary for Economic and Development Affairs of
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Estonia and Special
Representative of Estonia for Afghanistan and Pakistan.
Mr. Reinart (Estonia): Let me first join my
colleagues in thanking you, Sir, for organizing today’s
debate. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive report (S/2013/535) and Special
Representative Ján Kubiš for his briefing and the
tremendous work that the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) has been doing. I
also support and align Estonia with the statement to be
delivered shortly by the Special Representative of the
European Union for Afghanistan.
Although many challenges remain for Afghanistan
to become a wholly secure, democratic and prosperous
country, we recognize with satisfaction that the Afghan
people are successfully taking over responsibilities in
their own country. That is crucial, as without ownership
neither real transformation nor development will ever
be possible or sustainable.
This summer marks a significant milestone
in Afghanistan, as the Afghan National Security
Forces have taken the security lead across the
country. We have also seen positive progress in local
administrations assuming civilian responsibilities
and in the reconciliation process. It is important that
the preparations for the elections be on track and that
the necessary legal and institutional frameworks have
been adopted. Free and fair elections are paramount to
the political transition and to consolidating democracy
in Afghanistan. We hope that the Afghan authorities
shall continue to give priority to election preparations,
including ensuring inclusive participation of all eligible

24/32

19/09/2013

population groups and providing security during the
election period.
It is vital that the international community remain
engaged in supporting Afghanistan’s efforts throughout
the transition phase and after 2014, and that the Afghans
take due note of the long-term partnerships declared in
Tokyo and Chicago. In that regard, the continuation of
development cooperation and the full implementation
of the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework are
fundamental. After the withdrawal of the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) mission, the Afghan
National Security Forces will still need advice,
assistance and training. We hope that the modalities for
further cooperation between NATO and Afghanistan
will be defined in the coming months. Furthermore,
the role of the international community, in particular
that of the United Nations, in assisting the elections
preparation process is essential.
Estonia remains committed to supporting
Afghanistan during and after the transition period.
Estonia, as one of the highest per capita contributors to
ISAF, has been a long-term partner with Afghanistan.
In order to support the Afghan Government in
safeguarding the elections, our contingent will stay
on the ground until the end of the election period. Our
experts currently participate in the European Union
Police Mission in Afghanistan and NATO training
missions, and we are ready and willing to contribute
to training and financing Afghan security forces after
2014.
Afghanistan is also a priority country for Estonia
in development cooperation, as we believe that there
is no durable solution for Afghanistan involving only
a military component. As Estonia itself has been a
recipient of development assistance, we believe that we
can contribute with our knowledge and experience of
where aid is most needed and expected by the locals.
That is the reason why we focus mainly on the promotion
of health care, rule of law, the empowerment of women
and education in Afghanistan. For instance, Kabul
University is currently establishing three master’s
programmes in the field of information technology
with the support of University of Tallinn.
Estonia pays careful attention to the protection of
human rights, in particular to the rights of women and
children. Human rights awareness-raising campaigns
and education are instrumental in eliminating gender
stereotypes. We also call upon the Afghan authorities to
fully adhere to universal human rights and their pledge
13-48007

19/09/2013

The situation in Afghanistan

to continue balanced development and empowerment
of all social groups, with special focus on the most
vulnerable groups, namely, women and children.
It is hard to underestimate the role the United
Nations and its bodies have been playing in Afghanistan;
that role is only likely to increase as they continue to
support and strengthen Afghan capacities.
The President: I now give the floor to the Special
Representative of the European Union for Afghanistan.
Mr. Mellbin: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States. The
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Iceland, Serbia, Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Norway, Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Armenia
and Georgia align themselves with this statement.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive report (S/2013/535), Special
Representative Ján Kubiš for his briefing and
Ambassador Tanin for his encouraging remarks.
The EU acknowledges and supports the important
work of Special Representative Ján Kubiš and the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) in building a constructive relationship
with the Government of Afghanistan. The political
role of UNAMA in advising and assisting the Afghan
Government is of central importance, especially in the
context of the upcoming elections and in support of the
peace and reconciliation process.
We reiterate our firm commitment to Afghanistan
and the Afghan people and the long-term partnership
agreed between the Government of Afghanistan and
the international community in Chicago and Tokyo
last year. In the context of that long-term partnership,
the EU is working to finalize the negotiations on the
EU-Afghanistan cooperation agreement on partnership
and development. The EU and its member States
currently give more than €1 billion a year in development
assistance to Afghanistan.
The full implementation of the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework remains paramount to
achieving a successful transition in Afghanistan.
Good progress has been made in some areas, notably
in establishing a legislative framework for the
forthcoming elections. But more needs to be done
to tackle corruption, promote economic growth,
strengthen the rule of law and safeguard human rights.
The United Nations has a critical leadership role to play

S/PV.7035

in enabling the international community to work ever
more effectively together and with the Government to
fulfil commitments made in Tokyo. In our statement
today, we want to focus on the important role
Afghanistan’s institutions have to play in safeguarding
progress to date and providing the platform for growth
and development.
The presidential and provincial elections in April
2014 will mark a historic moment in Afghanistan. It
will be the first time that there has been a democratic
transition of power. Progress in establishing the
legislative framework for the elections has been
impressive, and we commend the relevant Afghan
bodies for the steps taken.
We welcome the selection and appointment of the
new members of the Independent Election Commission
and of the Independent Electoral Complaints
Commission. Those institutions will be important in
embedding democratic processes in Afghanistan. It is
vital that the needed technical and logistical elements
be put in place to guarantee their effective and
autonomous workings.
We urge the Afghan authorities to continue to
give priority to the preparations for presidential
and provincial elections. In particular, we stress the
importance of appropriate measures, both to ensure
security for voters and officials and to promote women’s
participation. Those elements will be instrumental for
inclusive and transparent elections with a legitimate
outcome. The European Union and its member States
will continue to engage fully with the process over the
coming months. Financial and technical support is being
provided through the United Nations Development
Programme’s electoral assistance programme, ELECT
II..
The EU believes that the rule of law is critical to
Afghanistan’s development. We are supporting the
creation of an effective justice system underpinned by
a civilian police force and other rule of law institutions.
Recently, the EU’s police mission, European Union
Police Mission in Afghanistan, was extended until the
end of 2014 and will continue supporting the Afghan
national police. But it is impossible for the institutions of
justice to contribute to the rule of law if the most senior
positions are occupied by officers whose terms have
long expired. We therefore call upon the Government of
Afghanistan to take action to appoint the Chief Justice
and other members of the Supreme Court, in line with
the provisions of the Constitution.

13-4800725/32

S/PV.7035

The situation in Afghanistan

The rule of law is also critical to the full
implementation of the statutory provisions relating to
human rights, and, in particular, the rights of women.
It is imperative that the Government of Afghanistan
address widespread discrimination against women and
girls.
Institutions have an important role to play in
promoting human rights. The Afghan Independent
Human Rights Commission is an important institution
in that respect. We welcome the commitment of the
Afghan Government to retaining the “A” status,
and trust that the Government will take appropriate
action based on the advice of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, provided during her
recent visit to Afghanistan, and the recommendations of
the upcoming review by the International Coordination
Committee of National Human Rights Institutions.
Making effective Government evident to all Afghans
is vital to retaining and increasing support for the State.
The transparent flow of public funds at the national
and local levels is the backbone of a functioning State.
Afghanistan needs to take action to both implement the
constitutional framework of Government at all levels
across the country and to clarify the responsibilities
of different levels of the State where some doubt
exists. This process is particularly important as the
provincial reconstruction teams gradually hand over
their responsibilities. Addressing these issues offers
the chance of strengthening the accountability of the
Government to the Afghan people and increasing local
peoples’ participation and involvement in all layers of
the State.
In addition to strengthening State institutions, we
all recognize the opportunity that would be provided by
an inclusive peace and reconciliation process. We call
on all regional Governments to use their influence to
encourage all groups to support an Afghan-led peace.
Increased regional cooperation has a key role to play
in supporting peace. We reiterate our support to the
Istanbul Process on Regional Security and Cooperation
and continue our active support to the Heart of Asia
process. We look forward to the Heart of Asia senior
officials meeting here in New York on Monday.
With the fifth and final tranche of the security
transition, Afghanistan formally assumed lead security
responsibility nationwide. The Afghan National Security
Forces have managed to retain control of key areas,
but gains are fragile and come at a price. The Afghan

26/32

19/09/2013

National Security Forces have sustained considerable
losses in 2013 and still experience high attrition rates.
We emphasize the importance of the ongoing efforts to
develop and put in place a mechanism which ensures the
financing of the Afghan National Security Forces after
2014. Such a mechanism must be coherent, transparent,
accountable, sustainable and effective while at the same
time fulfilling the principle of Afghan ownership and
sovereignty. We urge all parties, international partners
and the Afghan Government alike, to embrace and
advance this crucial work.
Afghanistan’s institutions have a critical role to
play in ensuring that the transition is successful and
that the progress made is safeguarded and forms a
basis for Afghanistan’s future peace, security, growth
and development. The EU and its member States will
continue to support this process in order to promote the
emergence of a fully self-reliant, peaceful, democratic
and prosperous society for the benefit of all Afghans.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Umemoto (Japan): At the outset, I thank
Special Representative Ján Kubiš for his informative
briefing today. I would further like to express my
highest respect to all the staff of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for their
deep commitment and dedication to their challenging
assignment. I also thank Ambassador Tanin for his
participation and for his statement.
Afghanistan has traveled a long and difficult
path leading up to the current three significant
transitions — political, economic and security. The
smooth transfer of power in a peaceful and transparent
manner is essential to a successful political transition,
which will serve as a foundation for the other two
transitions. In that regard, I wish to commend the
Government and the people of Afghanistan for the
tangible progress made towards the presidential and
provincial elections to be held in 2014. Among the other
concrete steps taken, the enactment of the two critical
electoral legal frameworks has particular significance
for conducting credible and inclusive elections.
We also hope that the current intensive discussions
among numerous political parties will create a good
environment for the process towards a fair Afghan-led
election, and look forward to seeing the outcome of
the nomination process of candidates. I would like to
express Japan’s serious intention to join in the efforts of

13-48007

19/09/2013

The situation in Afghanistan

the international community to lend its support in this
process through the ELECT II programme.
While improvements have been made, the security
situation continues to be of concern. In order to
encourage the full participation of all eligible voters,
security challenges must be properly addressed.
Japan encourages the Government of Afghanistan to
take appropriate risk-mitigation measures based on a
realistic security assessment.
Over the longer term, an Afghan-led peace and
reconciliation process, backed by good-neighbourly
relations, is the most important task for the legitimate
Afghan Government. In that regard, Japan welcomes
the recent summit meeting between Afghan President
Karzai and Pakistani Prime Minister Sharif. It was
encouraging to hear the positive messages from the
Pakistani leader regarding his support for the ongoing
peace process, which were followed by the release of
additional Taliban members. I would like to stress once
again Japan’s continuous support for Afghan-led peace
and stability.
In order to ensure smooth and successful political
and economic transitions, the timely implementation of
the commitments in the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework is of paramount importance. The senior
officials meeting in Kabul on 3 July provided us
with a valuable opportunity to assess the status of
commitments and refocus our efforts towards a stable
and prosperous Afghanistan. Japan expects the Afghan
Government to redouble its efforts, especially in the
areas of anti-corruption, public finance, the rule of law
and women’s rights.
As Japan has repeatedly expressed, the key is
mutuality. While the international community is
expected to provide Afghanistan with credibility and
predictability in terms of its future assistance, the
Afghan Government is strongly encouraged to further
its own efforts to improve governance and implement
faithfully its growth strategy. Japan will continue to be
engaged in the follow-up process until the final goal of
the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework is met by
both Afghanistan and its international partners.
Turning to the security situation, Japan condemns
in the strongest terms the brutal terrorist attacks that
have caused the tragic loss of innocent lives all over
the country, including assaults against international aid
agencies, as well as diplomatic facilities. As a strong
supporter of the protection and empowerment of women

S/PV.7035

in Afghanistan in various fields, Japan expresses
its serious concerns about the recent intimidation
and targeted killings of female Afghan Government
officials and public figures.
We welcome the Security Council press statement
(SC/11122) on the attack on the United States Consulate
in Herat last Friday and I join my colleagues in
condemning any acts of violence and expressing our
determination to fight terrorism.
The security transition is broadly on track and
we must not let any terrorist act divert it from its
path. As mentioned in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2013/535), despite this difficult security environment,
we have witnessed the increased competence and
confidence of the Afghan National Security Forces in
conducting most operations. Challenges continue to
exist, but the international community must remain
united alongside Afghanistan in combating by all
means the threats posed by any illegal armed groups.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): At the outset, I would like
to welcome the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Ján Kubiš. I extend my thanks to him for
his briefing and for his team’s dedicated work in support
of the Afghan people. I also appreciate Ambassador
Tanin’s presence with the Council today.
My Government aligns itself with the statement
just delivered on behalf of the European Union.
Afghanistan has taken major steps on its path of
political and security transition over recent months. At
the Tokyo Conference, the Government of Afghanistan
and the international community reaffirmed their longterm partnership and agreed on the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework. Germany considers
the comprehensive and timely implementation of
the Framework to be key in achieving a peaceful
and prosperous future for Afghanistan. It is also
paramount in securing the continued support of the
international community. Those mutual commitments
were reaffirmed at the senior officials’ meeting held in
Kabul on 3 July. Since then, further progress has been
achieved in many areas.
We particularly welcome the establishment of a
legislative framework for the presidential and provincial
elections to be held in April 2014. The appointment of
new members to the Independent Election Commission

13-4800727/32

S/PV.7035

The situation in Afghanistan

and the Independent Election Complaints Commission
has been another decisive step. We are now awaiting
the announcements of candidates who will run in those
historic elections, which will result in a peaceful transfer
of power. On the other hand, more remains to be done
to ensure that the elections are transparent, credible
and inclusive, in particular regarding the participation
of women in the election process. Germany will further
support Afghanistan in its continued preparations for
the elections and will contribute overall more than
$14 million to that end.
While focusing on the preparations for the elections,
we must not forget that there are many other challenges
ahead for Afghanistan. Preserving and consolidating
gains in the protection and promotion of human rights
is of the utmost importance. Sustained action to
implement statutory safeguards, first and foremost the
Law on the Elimination of Violence against Women,
is a key requirement in that regard. Furthermore, we
are confident that the Government of Afghanistan will
continue to ensure the independence of the Afghan
Independent Human Rights Commission according to
Afghan law and the Paris Principles.
The most recent visit of President Karzai to Pakistan
and the subsequent release of members of the Taliban
from prisons in Pakistan open up new opportunities in
the peace and reconciliation process. We encourage all
sides to further pursue the path of an Afghan-led and
-owned peace process, despite potential setbacks ahead,
as we believe that there is no reasonable alternative.
The Afghan security forces continue to face serious
challenges. That is demonstrated by the attack on the
United States Consulate General in Herat last Friday
and the killing of the chief of the Independent Election
Commission in Kunduz yesterday. Germany condemns
those heinous terrorist attacks in the strongest terms.
Germany remains confident, however, that, with
evolving but persistent international support, the
Afghan security forces will continue to prove capable
of responding to such challenges.
Let me conclude by underlining that Germany will
continue to support the Government of Afghanistan,
including after 2014. Our particular focus will remain
on the implementation of the mutual commitments
stemming from the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.

28/32

19/09/2013

Mr. Çevik (Turkey): I would like to begin my
statement by thanking Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Ján Kubiš for his comprehensive
briefing, and Ambassador Tanin for his words.
We continue to welcome the positive signs coming
from Afghanistan. The assumption of full security
responsibilities by Afghanistan, the momentum
achieved in preparation for the 2014 elections with
the agreement on key legislation, the positive signs in
terms of the country’s engagement with its neighbours
and the significant progress in the operationalization of
the Istanbul Process are promising developments. Yet,
we must remain cautious and vigilant.
Political, economic and security challenges remain.
The transition is marked by uncertainty. The number
of casualties among Afghan security forces and
civilians is rising. The future of the peace process is
unclear. Natural disasters, epidemic diseases, drought
and chronic poverty pose grave humanitarian threats.
The most vulnerable segments of society, especially
children, women, girls and elderly people, continue to
be at risk.
It is essential to remain in touch with those
realities on the ground. I would like to touch upon four
buzzwords that we deem important for the future of
Afghanistan.
The first is local ownership. We strongly welcome
recent announcements by Afghanistan indicating a
clear desire to assume responsibility for its own future
in security, the economy, electoral processes and human
rights.
The second, capacity-building, complements local
ownership. Achieving good governance and the rule
of law is key to a successful transition. Free, fair and
accountable elections in 2014 should be backed by
efficient institutions. An inclusive and comprehensive
peace and reconciliation process, owned and led by
Afghans, is also necessary.
International support to Afghanistan must
continue. As Afghanistan’s regional and international
partners, we should spare no effort to contribute to a
secure, peaceful and self-sufficient Afghanistan. That
is in our mutual interest.
Finally, transforming the heart of Asia into a
zone of peace, stability and prosperity requires strong
regional commitment. As international forces are
withdraw, regional cooperation gains have increased

13-48007

19/09/2013

The situation in Afghanistan

the importance of achieving sustainable peace, stability
and prosperity in Afghanistan and beyond. Further
connectivity will facilitate economic development,
stability and self-sustainability and help create a more
favourable business environment in Afghanistan.
The region must come together to transform common
problems into mutual interests. In that regard, we
welcome the momentum in the Istanbul Process and
appreciate China’s offer to host the next ministerial
conference next year. We are also grateful for the
pledges made by supporters of the Istanbul Process and
are convinced that their practical implementation will
help to operationalize the Process even further. We also
welcome trilateral and quadrilateral initiatives and the
constructive role played by the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization in support of Afghanistan.
Turkey will always remain in solidarity with the
Afghan people and continue to contribute to a safe,
secure and prosperous Afghanistan, as we have done
for many decades.
In concluding my statement, I would like to voice
our strong belief that the United Nations will continue
to play its crucial role during and after the transition.
I would particularly like to commend the valuable
efforts of the United Nations — and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in particular — and
express our heartfelt gratitude to Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Kubiš and his hard-working
team.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Ružička (Slovakia): Let me align myself with
the statement delivered by European Union Special
Representative Mellbin on behalf of the European
Union.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive report (S/2013/535), and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ján Kubiš for
his briefing. Both the statement and the report reflect a
number of important elements, many of which are of a
positive nature.
It is important for all of us not to lose sight of the
situation in Afghanistan, even as we face a complex and
dangerous security situation in Syria and the Middle
East. Past experience teaches us that when we leave
jobs unfinished, the next developments often bring
about very bitter and painful results.

S/PV.7035

While the overall security situation in Afghanistan
remains a concern, not only for citizens of Afghanistan
but also for the international community, we are
encouraged by efforts aimed at strengthening the
capabilities of the Afghan National Security Forces
in protecting the most vulnerable civilian groups. It is
essential to continue the training of Afghan security
and police forces to further reduce the number of
attacks from within the uniformed ranks.
The Slovak Republic is fully committed to assisting
the Afghan forces after the final stage of the security
transition. I am pleased to inform the Council that
the Slovak National Council renewed the mandate of
Slovak personnel in Afghanistan, which should create
the basis for our military engagement beyond 2014.
Security will be cardinal in Afghan-lead
preparations for the electoral cycle and the conduct
of presidential and provincial elections scheduled to
take place in April 2014. The progress made so far
by the Afghan authorities in terms of establishing a
legislative framework is significant. Further progress
in reconciliation is vital for any further success.
The complete inclusivity of talks reduces the risk of
compromising the integrity of the 2014 elections. That
risk would come at a high cost, bearing in mind the
positive momentum and historic opportunity for the
people of Afghanistan.
The process of peace and reconciliation must
be led by Afghans, who can rely on the assistance of
the international community and the good offices
of UNAMA. Among the many examples of the
extraordinary performance of this United Nations
Mission, there is another new element: the beneficial
influence of UNAMA on development in Afghanistan
through increased regional cooperation. Without a
doubt, the productive discussions between Afghanistan
and Pakistan and the opportunities presented by Iran
contribute to a promising future. All those activities are
fully in line with the debate of the Security Council in
August (see S/PV.7015) on the significance of regional
cooperation, which was chaired by Her Excellency
President Cristina Fernández of Argentina.
We believe that the central role of the United
Nations remains one of the key factors in promoting
peace and stability in Afghanistan. We fully support
UNAMA’s invaluable work in assisting Afghan-led
processes.

13-4800729/32

S/PV.7035

The situation in Afghanistan

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French):
I thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to
address the Council. Let me also thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for his report.
I also welcome Ambassador Tanin of Afghanistan.
In the months since our previous meeting (see
S/PV.6983), we have seen the Afghan people — everresilient in the face of ongoing instability — planting
their feet firmly on the path to democracy, prosperity,
stability and peace. They are working to move forward
into a better future for all Afghans. It is our fervent hope
that their Government will reflect that very aspiration.
(spoke in English)
The upcoming 2014 elections present a historic
opportunity to witness Afghanistan’s first peaceful
democratic transfer of power. It will be a vital step. The
free and fair election of a Government with popular
legitimacy is the best guarantor of stability in the
coming years. A stable democracy requires institutions
that are open, transparent and accountable to the
people. Over the past three months, the Government
of Afghanistan has taken steps to strengthen the
foundation for such institutions. We welcome the
passage of the electoral law and the Independent
Election Commission (IEC) structure law, which have
clarified the electoral process as well as the structure
and mandate of Afghanistan’s key electoral institutions.
We also welcome the appointment of commissioners to
the IEC and to the Electoral Complaints Commission.
As the campaign process gets under way, we expect the
Afghan Government to provide those institutions with
the resources and independence that they need to fulfil
their mandates, including the full vetting of candidates
and the investigation of all complaints of electoral
meddling or fraud. To succeed, it will be essential for
all eligible Afghans, especially women, to have an
opportunity to exercise their democratic rights.
A stable democracy also requires Government
institutions and a strong civil society that are committed
to protecting the rights of the most vulnerable, especially
women and girls, in Afghanistan. At the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework senior officials meeting in
July, Canada acknowledged the appointment of nine
commissioners to the Afghanistan Independent Human
Rights Commission (AIHRC). As the AIHRC prepares
for its review by the International Coordinating

30/32

19/09/2013

Committee of National Human Rights Institutions
in November, we urge the commissioners to remain
vocal in pressing for greater respect for human rights
throughout Afghanistan, including the rights of women
and girls, and greater protection for freedom of speech,
religion and belief.
The Afghan Government needs to work to uphold
its human rights commitments, which its people expect.
Two issues in particular will be critical this fall. First,
we urge the Government of Afghanistan to exert all
possible efforts to support the AIHRC to ensure it
retains its “A” status. Secondly, Afghan women and
girls continue to await progress on the implementation
of the Elimination of Violence Against Women
(EVAW) law and the publication of the Government of
Afghanistan’s report to its citizens on implementation
of the law, which is a deliverable under the Tokyo
Mutual Accountability Framework.
(spoke in French)
We recognize that there are those who seek to pull
Afghanistan back from the path it is on, as witnessed by
the relentless targeting of the Afghan National Security
Forces (ANSF). Yet the ANSF continues to demonstrate
its professionalism and preparedness in responding to
such attacks.
The past few months have also seen a marked
increase in the number of attacks on civilians, including
humanitarian workers, Government contractors and
politicians, particularly women. Even in the face of
such callous cruelty, however, the Afghan people have
remained strong and are committed to the goal of
rebuilding their country and ensuring that Afghanistan
will never again be a safe haven for terrorists, and resist
the proxy wars of its neighbours through terrorism.
(spoke in English)
There is no question that this path toward
democracy, stability and peace is a long road and that
there are many who would like to see Afghanistan
reverse course. But Canada continues to support those
who are working to build a better future in the face of
those ongoing risks. We remain committed to helping
move the country forward on this path towards greater
security, fiscal stability, economic growth, improved
governance and full respect for human rights. Canada
is proud to have stood by our Afghan partners on that
journey and we will continue to do so going forward.

13-48007

19/09/2013

The situation in Afghanistan

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to start by thanking Special Representative Ján
Kubiš for his briefing and comprehensive report on
the work of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and for his analysis of
the current situation in that country. I also thank
Ambassador Tanin for his informative statement to the
Security Council. I also express my appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2013/535).
I would like to focus my comments today on some
key areas related to the current situation in Afghanistan,
namely, regional cooperation and other issues related to
neighbouring countries, including Iran’s relations with
Afghanistan.
Turning first to regional cooperation, we believe
that it is critical for achieving long-term stability and
economic development in Afghanistan. The Islamic
Republic of Iran is engaged in a number of important
regional initiatives on Afghanistan that aim at greater
regional connectivity to promote economic and
commercial cooperation, as well as to root out the
scourges of illicit narcotics, terrorism and extremism.
We also welcome in particular regional initiatives such
as the Heart of Asia process and the adoption of plans
on confidence-building measures between Afghanistan
and its neighbouring countries, which surely could
serve as a good basis for further cooperation at the
regional level. The Islamic Republic of Iran is an active
participant in the Heart of Asia process and Istanbul
Process. In the economic field, international and
regional partners should concentrate their efforts at
laying the foundations for sustainable economic growth
and better conditions for livelihoods in Afghanistan. For
that purpose, there is a need for accelerated progress on
economic cooperation with regional and international
partners in accordance with the national objectives set
forth by Afghan Government.
The newly elected Government in the Islamic
Republic of Iran is determined to consolidate and expand
its relations with its neighbours, including Afghanistan,
with which we share religious, linguistic and cultural
commonalities. That provides an opportunity for
Afghanistan to count on Iran and other neighbouring
countries in dealing with challenges such as insecurity,
the lack of infrastructure, narcotic drugs and issues
related to refugees, which remain to be resolved.

S/PV.7035

We have continued our dialogue with the Afghan
authorities on bilateral cooperation, particularly in
relation to increasing cooperation on security matters
and counter-narcotics efforts. During President
Karzai’s attendance at the inauguration of President
Rouhani on 4 August, a memorandum of understanding
on strategic cooperation between Iran’s Supreme
National Security Council and the National Security
Council of Afghanistan was signed. The memorandum
covers issues of mutual interest, including
intelligence-sharing, in combating security threats
such as terrorism, narcotics and organized crime. We
welcome the Triangular Initiative on cooperation on
countering narcotics. The initiative provides the basis
for better coordination of joint operations among border
liaison offices, communications and the exchange of
information in combating narcotic drugs.
The World Drug Report 2013, released on 26 June,
highlights the rise in poppy cultivation by 15 per cent
in 2012 at the global level, an important part of which
is produced in Afghanistan. This makes it clear that
the narcotic drugs problem remains one of the serious
challenges that Afghanistan is facing. This menace
has hindered the advancement of the country towards
development and has placed the security of Afghanistan
and the region in danger.
As is rightly underlined in the report of the
Secretary-General, there is an interconnection
among the challenges regarding a successful transfer
of political authority through elections and peace
and reconciliation efforts, on the one hand, and the
impact of the increasing mobility of extremist groups,
the readiness of national security forces, and rising
narcotics production and trafficking, on the other.
Moreover, narcotic drugs trafficking, as the financial
source of terrorism, has provided a breeding ground for
terrorists, extremists and illegal groups that attempt to
destabilize the Afghan Government.
Undoubtedly, the increase in poppy cultivation
in Afghanistan in the past and this year plays an
important role in spreading terrorism and insecurity
in Afghanistan. The continued increase in poppy
cultivation and drug trafficking in Afghanistan
indicates that preventive measures have not yielded the
expected results and that the international community
has unfortunately failed to curb this menace so far. We
strongly believe that those who bear the responsibility
to combat narcotic drugs on behalf of the international
community should consider more robust projects

13-4800731/32

S/PV.7035

The situation in Afghanistan

regarding the elimination of poppy cultivation and
preventing narcotic traffic and the proceeds emanating
therefrom.
In that regard, my country hosted the seventh
regional Financial Intelligence Unit meeting on
July 2013 to enhance regional cooperation in
tackling money-laundering and suspicious financial
transactions. The aim of the meeting was to develop a
common instrument to improve information exchange
on suspicious transactions, and to address the problem
of profits of drug trafficking. A regional training
session on anti-money-laundering, illegal financial
flows and suspect cash transactions was also held in
Tehran from 30 June to 3 July, with the participation of
experts form the countries of the region. We hope that
such initiatives will bear fruitful results.
As our officials reiterated during their bilateral
meetings with Mr. Kubiš during his recent visit
to Tehran, there is a strong desire for constructive
engagement with the international community on issues
of mutual interest, including Afghanistan. The central

32/32

19/09/2013

role of the United Nations in coordinating international
and regional efforts to improve the situation in
Afghanistan, especially in the post-2014 era, was once
more reiterated.
In conclusion, we support UNAMA in fulfilling
its mission to provide assistance in promoting peace
and the reconstruction of the country within its
mandate and through the robust regional engagement
of neighbouring countries on issues such as border
security, immigration, refugees and drug control. The
role of UNAMA should evolve on the basis of the
situation on the ground, emerging realities and, above
all, the aspirations of the people of Afghanistan. We
wish every success towards an independent, stable,
peaceful and prosperous Afghanistan free from
terrorism, extremism.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

13-48007
