United Nations

S/PV.6320

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6320th meeting
Tuesday, 25 May 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Salam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Lebanon)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Long Zhou
Mr. Araud
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Heller
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Çorman
Mr. Rugunda
Mr. Parham
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 1883
(2009) (S/2010/240)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-37501 (E)

*1037501*

S/PV.6320

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
paragraph 6 of resolution 1883 (2009)
(S/2010/240)
The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Iraq, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al Bayati
(Iraq) took a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Ad Melkert,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Melkert to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
I should like to draw the attention of members to
document S/2010/240, containing the report of the
Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 6 of
resolution 1883 (2009).
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Ad Melkert, to whom I now give the
floor.

2

Mr. Melkert: The 7 March elections for Iraq’s
Council of Representatives marked a turning point for
Iraq, as the results will determine the Government that
is to oversee the withdrawal of United States forces in
the course of 2010 and 2011 and govern Iraq during the
next four years. This is an opportunity to further
strengthen the country’s sovereignty and to move with
more determination towards reconciliation.
Still, there are reasons for serious concern. I
regret to draw attention to the hard fact that a chilling
number of violent incidents in the year 2010 so far
have left over 2,000 Iraqis dead and 5,000 injured.
Yesterday, newly elected member of parliament Bashar
al-Aqidi was assassinated in a despicable act of crime.
It is imperative that the international community
condemn and isolate the perpetrators. That would be to
the benefit of an orderly transition towards a new
Government as a critical moment for creating a
political environment conducive to meaningful dialogue
and power-sharing.
Against this backdrop, I would like to share some
observations and concerns.
Following the vote recount in Baghdad and the
forthcoming ratification of the electoral results by the
Federal Supreme Court, the first full election cycle in
Iraq will be completed in a credible and successful
way. It is difficult to overstate the importance of this
milestone. It represents a firm rejection by the vast
majority of the Iraqi people of the violent forces and
their objectives.
Despite challenges often highlighted in the
media, what I observed in the post-elections period was
a genuine and shared understanding among all elected
leaders that there is no alternative to respecting the
constitutional basis for the transition to the next
Government. This shared political attitude is key in
assessing the ongoing process, including its timeconsuming features. The latter reflect the absence of
established procedures and customs, as well as
characteristics of the parliamentary system, which is
not unlike those of other countries of the world.
This is not to say that time does not matter, for
the Iraqi voters expect to see the results of their votes,
and destructive forces stand ready to derail progress.
However, the crux is in the determination of political
leaders, as well as of religious and civil society voices,
to establish the country’s future on a constitutional
basis in an open and inclusive spirit.

10-37501

S/PV.6320

As we speak, some signs are positive, others are
less so. From various sides, a round table format has
been suggested for the Government-formation process.
We have advised key leaders to embark upon this
without further delay.
In this context, it would be important for all to
recognize that the constitutional system requires
majority support for all Government positions and
policy agreements. In Iraq’s political system, the
election result alone is not a direct guarantee of the
choice of a Prime Minister. Hence the permanent effort
by the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) to encourage the winning parties to meet and
converge around agreements that, at this stage, could
be guided by three principles: first, a Government
coalition inclusive of all major winning lists; secondly,
a Government based on power-sharing principles; and
thirdly, a Government-formation process within a
tentatively agreed time frame.
Agreeing to such principles could demonstrate
commitment to a specific direction while allowing for
more time for the complex process of consensusbuilding to unfold without creating a political vacuum.
Democracy is not necessarily limited to the distinction
between a majority in government and a minority in
opposition. At this juncture, Iraq would probably be
better served by a broadly inclusive Government as a
radical
alternative
to
the
exclusion
and
disenfranchisement that many communities have
experienced in the past.
Another major challenge ahead is the need to
respond to high expectations that political and security
progress will translate into economic growth and
the creation of jobs, leading to a drastic improvement
of living conditions. The list of infrastructure and
services challenges is immense, with shortages
everywhere, varying from schools and health-care
centres to roads, sewers and electricity. In Iraq, life
expectancy at birth is 58.2 years, as opposed to, for
example, 73.6 years in Syria. The reintegration of
internally displaced persons — many living in appalling
conditions as squatters — and those refugees who want
to return demands far more priority attention and
resources.
The new Government can benefit from policy
directions offered by the National Development Plan.
Yet, it is hard to avoid the conclusion that
reconstruction and reform have often been piecemeal,

10-37501

suffering at times from leadership and capacity gaps. It
is also a concern that, in the current post-election
phase, attention to the economic and social policy
priorities seems virtually absent. Failure by the next
Government to address the needs and aspirations of the
population will predictably be a source of increasing
instability and undermine the gains of the democratic
process so far.
Let me say a few words on areas of United
Nations action. The signing of the first United Nations
Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) on
11 May marked a milestone towards longer-term
economic and human development planning for Iraq,
centring on the five national development priorities
outlined in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2010/240).
Resource mobilization to enable United Nations
agencies to play their part in implementing these
priorities will be necessary, as will finding the right
balance between increasing Iraqi contributions and
ongoing commitment from Iraq’s partners in the stage
of crucial transition to long-term development
assistance. Currently, the framework for a UNDAF
trust fund is under preparation for discussion among all
partners, with the aim to be operational by the
beginning of 2011.
The need for a vote recount in Baghdad made it
necessary for UNAMI to continue to dedicate
additional attention and resources to election
management support. The eventual confirmation of the
initial count was a moment of deserved pride for all the
United Nations staff who have tirelessly stood by the
Independent High Electoral Commission in the
delivery of an historic result. In the coming period, the
United Nations election team will work closely with
the United Nations country team to plan for future
electoral events and to strengthen support for relevant
constitutional and parliamentary processes, taking into
account many valuable lessons learned.
Whilst the Government formation process is
gradually evolving, there are opportunities to advance
some of the key outstanding issues more than was
possible in the pre-election period. This particularly
concerns areas crucial to reconciliation that require
action at different levels of engagement.
I am particularly pleased to report that UNAMI’s
impartial outreach, aimed at reconciliation between
different communities and interests in the province of
Ninewa, has generated a positive atmosphere and the

3

S/PV.6320

possibility of tangible results in the near future.
Building on Deputy Prime Minister Issawi’s initiative
of last year, UNAMI is facilitating meetings between
the Governorate of Ninewa and the Kurdistan Regional
Government as a basis for progress in four specific
areas: clarifying responsibilities and involvement in
security policies for Ninewa; facilitating the release or
transfer of Arab detainees held in the Kurdistan region;
strengthening support for and protection of minorities
that are suffering discrimination and attacks, including
the disturbing recent attack on a bus with Christian
students in Mosul; and ending the absence of
representatives from the Kurdish Brotherhood List in
the Ninewa Provincial Council and administration as a
step towards normalizing relations within the
Governorate.
I hope that these first signs of change in
atmosphere and determination bode well for taking up
the task to seriously address the outstanding issues
concerning all so-called disputed areas. These still cast
their shadow on the stability and future of Iraq. The
time has come for all parties to come to terms around
the relevant provisions of the Constitution. To this end,
we are exploring the possibility of expanding the work
of the high-level task force. Our advice to all parties
will be to focus the expanded agenda on, in particular,
principles guiding the management, development and
revenue-sharing of oil production throughout Iraq,
including the Kurdistan region and Kirkuk province; an
approach to achieving consensus on the future
arrangements concerning Kirkuk province; clarification
of the relevant administrative roles and responsibilities
with regard to disputed territories; and practical
modalities for joint security arrangements ensuring
long-term stability.
In many aspects, the effort to achieve
reconciliation has a strong regional dimension. The
future Government should reflect on building an
internal and external consensus on a regional policy for
Iraq. Security, stability and economic growth go hand
in hand, and Iraq and its neighbours would be well
served by capitalizing on the strengths of a region with
so much more potential for progress than we have seen
so far. Constructive engagement, rather than partisan
interference, would be of great benefit to all. The
United Nations should stand ready to facilitate bilateral
and multilateral processes if requested. Importantly,
hosting next year’s summit of the League of Arab
States in Baghdad will offer Iraq a unique opportunity

4

to reinforce a positive agenda of regional engagement
and cooperation.
Not least important in normalizing the position of
Iraq within the region and the wider international
community is the aim to exit Chapter VII as soon as
possible, as are consensus opinion and hope among all
parties in Iraq. I should not hide my concern that signs
of ambivalence seem to stand in the way of advancing
towards good-neighbourly relations with Kuwait.
UNAMI continues to convey the message that
reaffirmation by Iraq of the border demarcated in 1993
and affirmed in resolution 833 (1993) is indispensable
to bringing the resolution of other outstanding issues to
a close, counting on the reassurance of the Government
of Kuwait that normalizing relations is of mutual
interest and benefit.
Finally, reconciliation requires strong commitment
to upholding human rights, which in many ways are
still under tremendous pressure. We urge the authorities
in Baghdad and Erbil to take very seriously the alarm
sounded by the International Federation of Journalists
that violence against journalists in Iraq is again on the
rise, and its call for investigations in two recent
killings. UNAMI is also concerned regarding reports of
ill-treatment and torture in secret detention places.
Stemming the trend of ongoing violence that has hit
scores of innocent citizens yet again requires both
effective security forces and consistent application of
the law in order to avoid a vicious cycle of
infringement of elementary rights.
Allow me finally to draw the Council’s attention
to the conditions that should enable the United Nations
to play its mandated roles. At this particular moment,
we have to anticipate important consequences from the
reduction of support services by the United States
forces in light of the drawdown between now and the
end of 2011. Given high security risks to the United
Nations that will likely continue in the foreseeable
future, the ability to provide adequate protection to
United Nations staff remains key when determining the
level and extent of the future presence of the
Organization in Iraq.
We are working more and more with the Iraqi
security forces. It has been established, however, that
the provision by the Iraqi security forces of the full
range of security services that the United Nations
requires will be gradual and will take some time. That
will necessitate a combination of security options

10-37501

S/PV.6320

during this transitional period, including by improving
the United Nations own capabilities; gradually
increasing reliance on the Iraqi security forces;
additional support from Member States, especially
more United Nations guards; and, as a last resort,
judiciously outsourcing some security functions, in
accordance with principles outlined in General
Assembly resolution 55/232.
In that regard, the United Nations in Iraq will also
have to work towards becoming self-reliant in the full
range of life-support and logistical services. The ability
to deploy staff to Iraq is directly linked to the
availability of safe accommodation and offices,
together with security and air assets. As the Council is
aware, preparations for a new United Nations
compound in Baghdad are under way, following the
offer by the Government of Iraq of a construction lot
and payment of the initial contribution of $25 million
as part of a proposed 50 per cent share.
We count on the attention and support of Member
States in the framework of the forthcoming budget
process to enable the United Nations to continue to be
represented in Iraq with the current footprint and, if
possible and as requested by Iraq, more than that. The
alternative will be a reduction in presence with a
negative impact at a time when major tasks are still
ahead and the demand for United Nations support is
already more than can be supplied at the moment.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Melkert for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): Allow me at the outset,
Mr. President, to congratulate you on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council this month. I
would also like to thank your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Japan, for his efforts
during Japan’s presidency in the month of April. Our
thanks also go to Mr. Ad Melkert, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq, and
his team in Baghdad and New York for their vigorous
efforts to assist the Iraqi Government and people.
My delegation takes note of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2010/240) and the work of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI),
and would like to present the following comments.
On the political and security level, although
Mr. Melkert expressed some concerns about the delays

10-37501

in the political process of setting up an Iraqi
Government, we believe that there is effective
deliberation going on now between the various
political groups in order to reach a consensus regarding
that Government. Mr. Melkert also expressed concerns
about the security situation, especially the
assassination yesterday in Mosul of a newly elected
Member of Parliament, Bashar Al-Aqidi. We believe
that this was the result of terrorist activities in Iraq,
which have been aimed at trying to exploit the vacuum
created by the delay in forming a Government. With
regard to our relations with the brotherly and
neighbourly State of Kuwait, I can assure Mr. Melkert
and the Security Council that Iraq is committed to all
Council resolutions, especially those regarding
relations with Kuwait and the borders.
On 7 March, the Iraqi people took an important
step in building and structuring democracy in Iraq.
More than 12 million Iraqis inside and outside Iraq,
through their participation in casting their votes in the
Iraqi parliamentary elections, challenged all obstacles,
expressed their determination to select their
representatives, and signified their intention to
continue to have their say in the formation of the
Government that will run the country for the next four
years.
The success of the electoral process in its various
stages in Iraq is another achievement of the Iraqi
Government, the security forces and the Independent
High Electoral Commission. Through their meticulous
efforts, a safe environment was provided and voting
procedures were conducted with the highest level of
integrity and transparency. This was observed by all
the international and regional bodies that exercise a
supervisory role to ensure the integrity of the electoral
process. I would also like to commend the important
role that the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq provided in its advisory, assistance and logistical
support to the Independent High Electoral
Commission.
The judicial decision on the vote recount of
Baghdad province, due to a number of complaints
made by political entities, was an important step in the
successful completion of the electoral voting process.
As guaranteed by Iraqi law, the complaints regarding
the legitimacy of the elections and credibility of their
results were addressed so that the results could be
confirmed, especially in the wake of the political
controversy that followed the announced results. The

5

S/PV.6320

Independent High Electoral Commission implemented
the legal decision through a recount of the votes at
11,000 polling stations in the city of Baghdad. This led
to the discovery of minor differences that did not affect
the announced results for the Baghdad Governorate.
The political process in Iraq is ongoing and will
continue as political rivals turn to the law and the
Constitution to find solutions to political problems.
This process represents an important development in
the rule of law in Iraq’s political culture and a
momentous cornerstone of the peaceful political
process in the building of a State in which the
sovereignty of law and institutions, rather than
individuals and parties, rules.
The joint efforts of the central Iraqi Government
and the Kurdistan Regional Government in resolving
outstanding issues have produced fruitful results. On
17 May, the Council of Ministers approved the
implementation of the agreement between the Ministry
of Oil and the Kurdish Regional Government, which
will allow the export of crude oil produced in the
Kurdistan region and the payment of financial dues to
the oil companies.
In the context of the continuing development of
the capacity of the Iraqi security forces to gather
information and respond immediately to potential
threats, on 18 April, with the support of American
forces, our security forces carried out a successful
operation in the Al-Tharthar area in Salahaddin
province north of Baghdad that led to the death of the
Egyptian terrorist Abu Hamza al-Muhajir, Al-Qaida’s
military leader in Iraq, and Mohammed Khalil al-Zawi,
known as Abu Omar al-Baghdadi, alleged leader of the
Al Qaida-affiliated terrorist organization known as the
Islamic State of Iraq. The death of these terrorists was
a devastating blow to Al-Qaida’s network in Iraq,
which has carried out many of the terrorist operations
that have targeted innocent civilian lives. At the same
time, this represents a significant victory for the Iraqi
security forces in their continuing efforts to combat
terrorism.
In the context of successes achieved in security,
on 22 April Manaf Abdul Rahim al-Rawi, known as the
“governor of Baghdad” by the Islamic State of Iraq,
was captured. He was responsible for the perpetration
of deadly bombings in Baghdad, resulting in the
horrific loss of hundreds of innocent civilian lives. I
would like to emphasize here today that messages of

6

death and destruction sent by terrorist forces will not
hinder the democratic process and reconstruction of
Iraq, nor will they discourage the Iraqi Government
and people from moving forward on the path of
building a stable State based on law and civic
institutions.
The Iraqi security authorities apprehended Tarek
Abdelqadir al-Jazari and Abdullah Azam al-Qahtani,
known as Snan al-Saudi, who had made contact with
the number-two person in the Al-Qaida network,
Ayman Al-Zawahiri, and who were planning to carry
out acts of violence and detonate explosions at the start
of the World Cup in South Africa. Once again, the Iraqi
Government’s victory in its battle against terrorism is
in the interest of all States regionally and globally.
Under the auspices of His Excellency Prime
Minister Nuri Kamel al-Maliki and in the presence of
His Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Hoshyar Zebari, Iraq’s Foreign Ministry building
was reopened. Its reconstruction had been completed
after it was targeted by terrorist attacks on 19 August
2009, attacks in which 562 staff members of the
Foreign Ministry were injured and 42 lost their lives.
We are still seeing attacks and terrorist operations
being carried out, such as the assassination of the
newly elected member of parliament. However, I think
the security situation in general has improved
dramatically in the past few months.
The Iraqi Government continues its effort to
benefit from former cadres of the Iraqi army who are
innocent from shedding the blood of the Iraqi people.
The Ministry of Defence recently announced that, by
the end of 2009, around 13,000 former members of the
Iraqi army had been reassigned to serve and that
another 7,000 were to be reassigned soon. That makes
a total of 20,000 former army members reassigned to
the Iraqi army as part of the Iraqi Government’s
continuous efforts to resolve the issue of military
personnel who had served in the Iraqi army under the
former regime.
In the framework of the continued security forces
coordination effort between the Iraqi Government and
the United States Government, the United States forces
handed over the joint security command centre east of
Baghdad to the competent Iraqi authorities. This step
represents progress in the efforts of the Iraqi
Government to receive and fully operate all security
centres in preparation for the full withdrawal of United

10-37501

S/PV.6320

States troops in accordance with the time frame agreed
upon between the two countries.
The improvement of the security situation has
coincided with the Iraqi Government’s policy plans to
return displaced Iraqis within Iraq and abroad. This has
led to an increase in the numbers of Iraqis returning to
their homes, both from within Iraq and from abroad.
Reports from the Ministry of Immigration and
Migration on 31 March 2010 on the return of displaced
families indicate the return of 61,285 persons displaced
abroad and internally. Since that date, the figure has
increased by an additional 41,852 internally displaced
persons and 7,241 persons returning from abroad. The
Iraqi Government is still working in conjunction with
international specialized bodies to manage all of the
necessary requirements for the continuation of the
return of families — both from abroad and internally
displaced — to their homes.
On the economic and social levels, Iraq has
signed and the Council of Ministers has endorsed the
United Nations Development Assistance Framework
for Iraq for the period 2011 to 2014. The Framework
represents an update of the cooperation between the
Iraqi Government and the United Nations for the
coming five years. The agreement includes cooperation
on all aspects of human rights, the rule of law and
economic reform, as well as in the areas of basic
services and social and human capacity-building for
employees in ministries and State institutions.
Iraq’s oil exports have witnessed remarkable
stability over the past few months, as Iraq exported
around 2 million barrels per day. The Iraqi Government
continues to work to increase the amount of oil to be
exported during the current year, with projections of up
to 2,325,000 barrels per day. In the framework of the
Iraqi Government’s ongoing efforts to develop the oil
industry in order to reduce Iraq’s importation of oil
products, the Iraqi Oil Ministry called on the National
Investment Commission to hold a preparatory meeting
to develop mechanisms and a programme with a view
to convening a large conference of investment
authorities in the provinces so that Arab, foreign and
local companies could be invited to invest in oil
refineries in accordance with the Iraqi investment law
in order to develop the capacity of oil refineries in Iraq.
The Oil Ministry is now preparing for the third
round of bidding, which will focus on investment in
natural gas fields. The bidding will include three major

10-37501

fields — the Saybah field, the Mansourieh field and the
Akas field — and will focus on developing Iraqi gas
production to meet Iraq’s growing natural gas needs
and to develop the productive potential of these fields
to allow the export of natural gas to foreign markets.
In the context of the Iraqi Government’s efforts to
enhance economic openness between Iraq and the rest
of the world, on 13 May 2010 the Council of Ministers
took the decision to authorize the Minister of Transport
to negotiate and sign a draft air transport agreement
between the Government of the Republic of Iraq and
the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina. That is an
additional step in our efforts to open up to other
countries of the world, especially in fields of vital
importance, such as air transport.
In the framework of the gradual improvement of
the humanitarian situation in Iraq, in its Humanitarian
Action Report 2010, UNICEF mentioned the end of the
acute emergency stage of the humanitarian crisis in
Iraq and stressed the need for investments inside the
country to change from just the distribution of relief
and rehabilitation on a small scale to more durable
solutions to increase the strength of communities.
Some in the media have recently made an
exaggerated fanfare over the existence of secret prisons
in Iraq and the torture of detainees. On this issue, the
Minister for Human Rights, Her Excellency
Ms. Wijdan Mikhail Salim, held a press conference on
20 April 2010, at which she pointed out that the media
reports did not highlight the presence of any violations
but only distorted the truth and insulted the Iraqi
Government. Ms. Wijdan Mikhail Salim noted that the
Prime Minister had ordered the creation of committees
to investigate all the allegations referred to and a
number of legal proceedings to stop abuses, which
might occur in any prison or detention centre. The
Minister also pointed out that political objectives were
behind the distortions, which sought to undermine the
security achievements made by the Iraqi Government,
especially as they coincided with the killings of Abu
Omar al-Baghdadi and Abu Hamza al-Muhajir, the
most prominent symbols of Al-Qaida in Iraq.
At the regional and international levels, in the
framework of regional and international openness in
Iraq, the recent period witnessed a number of events,
including the following: the visit on 17 May 2010 of
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Assistant Secretary of State for
Near Eastern Affairs, who reviewed the work of the

7

S/PV.6320

committee to coordinate diplomatic and political
benefits between Iraq and the United States; the visit
on 11 May 2010 of His Excellency Mr. Arshad
Hermzlo, Special Envoy of the Turkish President; the
visit of His Excellency Mr. Christian Estrosi, French
Industry Minister; the visit on 25 February 2010 of the
Republic of Korea’s Minister of Knowledge Economy,
Mr. Choi Kyung-hwan, who attended the first
conference of the Iraqi-Korean Economic Cooperation
Forum; and the visit on 23 February 2010 of Swedish
Foreign Minister Carl Bildt, for the opening the new
headquarters of the Swedish Embassy in Baghdad.
The President of Iraq, His Excellency Mr. Jalal
Talabani, made a series of visits to other countries,
including Iran on 26 March 2010, where he met with
the Supreme Leader His Eminence Ayatollah Ali
Khamenei; the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia on 11 April
2010, where he met the Saudi King, His Royal
Highness Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz Al Saud; and to
Egypt on 8 May 2010, where he met the Egyptian
President, His Excellency Mr. Mohamed Hosni
Mubarak, and the Secretary-General of the Arab
League, His Excellency Mr. Amr Moussa.
His Excellency Vice-President Adil Abdul-Mahdi
made a series of visits, including to Syria on 3 April,
where he met Syrian President Bashar Al-Assad; the
State of Kuwait on 6 April, where he met with His
Royal Highness the Amir of Kuwait, Sheikh Sabah
Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah; and the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan on 7 April, where he met His Royal
Highness King Abdullah II. His Excellency VicePresident Tariq al-Hashimi also made a series of visits,
including to the United Arab Emirates on 3 April,
where he met His Royal Highness Sheikh Khalifa Bin
Zayed Al Nahyan; the State of Qatar on 5 April, where
he met with His Royal Highness the Amir of Qatar,
Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa Al-Thani; Bahrain on
6 April, where he met with His Royal Highness King
Hamad bin Issa Al Khalifa and Bahraini Prime
Minister Shaikh Khalifa Bin Salman Al Khalifa; the
State of Kuwait on 13 April, where he met Amir Sheikh
Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah; the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia, where he met His Royal Highness King
Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz Al Saud; and Turkey on
18 April, where he met a number of Turkish officials.
Iraq is still suffering from the sanctions imposed
upon it by Security Council resolutions on the
disarmament of weapons of mass destruction and
denying Iraq the use of technological advances and

8

research. The Ministry of Industry is being deprived of
technology necessary to rehabilitate the factories of
Iraq. The Ministry of Agriculture is unable to import
various types of fertilizers. The Ministry of Higher
Education and the Ministry of Science and Technology
are unable to procure the necessary laboratories for
scientific research. Lastly, the Ministry of Health is
denied many important services for the treatment of
many diseases.
In the context of Iraq’s efforts to implement its
obligations under Security Council resolutions on
dismantling weapons of mass destruction, Minister for
Foreign Affairs Hoshyar Zebari wrote, in a letter dated
17 February 2010 addressed to International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) Director General Yukiya
Amano, that, in accordance with article 17 of the
additional protocol signed between Iraq and IAEA on 9
October 2008, Iraq had declared that it would comply
provisionally with the protocol pending its entry into
force.
In its presidential statement of 26 February
(S/PRST/2010/5), the Security Council welcomed that
fact as consistent with Iraqi law. It also requested that
the IAEA inform the Council as soon as possible
regarding the quality of Iraq’s safeguards-related
cooperation with the Agency. In that connection, in a
letter of reply addressed to the Secretary-General and
contained in the annex to document S/2010/150, the
Director General stated that the Agency had been
receiving excellent cooperation from Iraq in the
implementation of its comprehensive safeguards
agreement. On that basis, my Government has renewed
its demand that the Security Council review the
restrictions imposed by resolutions 687 (1991) and 707
(1991), with a view to lifting them.
In conclusion, I would like to stress my
Government’s gratitude for UNAMI’s role in Iraq and
for the support provided by Mr. Ad Melkert at the
Government’s request.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.55 a.m.

10-37501
