S/2009/679

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 December 2009
English
Original: French

Letter dated 28 December 2009 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to paragraph 5 of Security Council resolution 1626
(2005) of 19 September 2005, by which the Council authorized the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) to deploy, from November 2005, up to 250 United
Nations military personnel to Sierra Leone to provide security for the Special Court
for Sierra Leone. Pursuant to that resolution, a 250-strong military guard force from
Mongolia was deployed in Freetown in January 2006.
In my special report on UNMIL of 10 June 2009 (S/2009/299), I indicated my
intention to review the deployment of the military guard force in line with the
timetable for the completion of the Special Court’s work. Since then, two important
developments have occurred: the transfer on 31 October 2009 of the eight prisoners
convicted to date by the Court to Rwanda, where they will serve out their sentences,
and the transfer on 16 November 2009 of the Court’s detention facilities to the
Government of Sierra Leone.
In the light of these developments, a team from the Secretariat and UNMIL
carried out a mission to assess the Court’s residual security needs in order to
determine whether the guard force should be maintained. In Freetown, the team
consulted the Sierra Leonean authorities, Court officials, the guard force
commander and representatives of the international community.
All the persons consulted judged overall security conditions in Sierra Leone to
be relatively stable but still very fragile. While they acknowledged that there was no
specific military threat to the Court, some concerns were expressed regarding the
possible impact on Sierra Leone of instability in Guinea, the risk of another
outbreak of violence between supporters of the two main political parties and the
potential for civil unrest as a result of the difficult economic conditions in the
country. It was acknowledged, however, that these factors will not directly affect the
security of the Court.
Notwithstanding the absence of a specific military threat, the Government, the
Court and international stakeholders have provided strong arguments for
maintaining the military guard force until the Court completes its work. They have
stressed that, in addition to guarding prisoners, the guard force also provides
security for the Court’s facilities, personnel and highly confidential records. Court
officials have expressed particular concern about the potential impact on the
ongoing trial of Charles Taylor of a drawdown of the Court’s international security
presence. While this trial is being conducted in The Hague, most of the preparatory
09-67064 (E) 311209 311209

*0967064*

S/2009/679

work, including investigations and witness management, is being carried out in
Freetown. The presence of the guard force is crucial for maintaining an atmosphere
of security in order to prevent the bribery of witnesses and enable them to access the
Court’s facilities without fear.
The Sierra Leonean Government has stressed the importance of maintaining
the integrity and international character of the Special Court, and has underlined the
fact that the Court is an international institution whose facilities should be
considered international territory. The protection of these facilities and their
personnel would therefore be the responsibility of the United Nations until the Court
completes its work. At this stage, Government officials consider that national
agencies do not have sufficient capacity to secure the Court’s facilities, personnel
and sensitive documents.
Accordingly, on the basis of the assessment team’s conclusions, I recommend
maintaining the military guard force assigned to the Special Court until its work is
completed in 2011. However, in view of the reduction in threats, I also recommend
that the strength of the guard force should be reduced by 100 soldiers, leaving a
150-strong military company, including infantry soldiers and support personnel, to
secure the Special Court’s facilities.
I should be grateful if the present letter could be brought to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

2

09-67064
