SECURITJ? COUNCIL
OFFICIAL
FORTIETH

RECORDS
YEAR

2633”

MEETING:

10 DECEMBER

1985

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2633) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..s..............

1

Letter dated 6 December 1985frdm the ChargC d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Nicara a to the United Nations addressedto the President of the
Security Council PS/17671) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

WV2633

‘,
.,

*:._
I

i

.,.
‘).

_I.

,
;
‘

.:

;-

NOTE

.

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the O@til Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and LkciGons of the
Securiry Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2633rd MEETING
Held in New York on T’uesday, 10 December
President: Mr. IRandre

BASSOLE

(Bu&a

Faso).

from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission
of Nicaragua to the United Nations addressed to the
President ‘bf the Security Council, issued as document
(S/17671).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark, Egypt, France,
India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Rermblic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kinidom bf Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Provisional
1. Adoption

1985, at 3 p.m.

3. Jwish to draw the attention of members of the Council
to documents SA7674, S/l7675 and S/17676, which contain
the texts of letters dated 5 and 6 December from the
Charge d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Nicaragua to the Secretary-General.

agenda (S/Agenda/2633)

of the agenda.

4. The first speaker is the representative of Nicaragua.

2. Letter dated 6 December 1985 from the Charge
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Nicaragua
to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/17671).

5. Mr. TINOCO (Nicaragua) (interpretation em Spanish): I wish to express to you, Mr. President, the appreciation of the Nicaraguan delegation for your having
convened this meeting, requested by my country to inform
the Security Council of the most recent events provoked
by the United States in Central America, which have
aggravated the already explosive situation there.

7&e meeting was called to order at 3.40p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 6 December 1985 froni the charge d’affaires
a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Nicaragua to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Sew
rity Council (S/17671)
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretarion from French): I
should like to inform members of the’Counci1 that I have
received letters from the representatives of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Mexico, Nicaragua, the ,Syrian Arab
Republic and Viet Nam in which they request to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item bn the Council’s
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the debate, without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

6. The Council and public opinion are -aware of the
criminal and mercenarywar that the United States Government has been waging against the Nicaraguan Govemment since 1981. In recent weeks there has been an
escalation of its involvement in that war of aggression, as
’ well as in the type of weapons and supplies provided to
the counter-revolutionary
forces. That escalation of the
war in Central America is chaiacterized by the following
factors.
7. In May the United States Congress, in yet another act
of defiance of the most fundamental norms governing
international relations, approved the appropriation of $27
million to finance activities aimed at overthrowing the
legitimate Government of my country. That humanitarian
aid, as it was euphemistically described in order to conceal
the real purpose of this a&t, was in fact intended to continue uninterrupted the flow of military supplies to the
counter-revolutionary
bands which, under the control and
leadership of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) of
the United States, are qperating from the territory of the
neighbouring countries of Honduras and Costa Rica.

At the invitation of the President, ME linoco (Nicaragua)
took a pIace at the Council table; MC Rajaie-Khorassani
(Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr Maya-Palencia (Mexico),Mr:
El-Fattal (Syrian Arab Republic) and MI: Bui Xiuzn Nhat
(Viit Nam) took the places resetved for them at the side of
the Council Chamber.

8. In the same context, further heightening tension in
the region, the Reagan Administration
announced only a
few days ago the holding of new joint military manoeuvres
in Honduras which will last without interruption throughout the first six months of 1986. During those manoeuvres,
called “Terensio Sierra”, the United States will continue :
to build a military infrastructure guaranteeing a rearguard
position for the mercenaries and providing them with

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpteration $vm French): The
Security Council will now begin consideration of the item
on its agenda. The Council is meeting today in response
to the request contained in a letter dated 6 December 1985

.
1

ies at the Las Vegascamp in the department of El Pa&so,
in Honduras. in the use of SAM-7 missiles.Those confidential sourceshave also confiied to us that, since midyear, the United StatesGovernment hasdelivered at least
30 such missilesto the forces encamped at Las Vegas.

facilities should they decide to unleash a direct invasion
of Nicaragua.
9. Similarly, during November -just a few days agothe United StatesCongressagain yielded tothe pressures
and blackmail of the Reagan Administration and approved a request by the President to provide his mercenaries with trucks, aircraft, fast launches, helicopters,
sophisticatedcommunications equipment and a constant
flow of intelligence gathered by the technical machinery
of the United States intelligence apparatus. To this worrying situation was added last week an event unpreeedented in the history of our continent-the use by the
counter-revolutionary mercenary forces of surface-to-air
missilessupplied by the United StatesGovernment. That
is clearly an unprecedented escalation of the crisis and
conflict in Central America.

16. It is useful to recall here the complaints we have
lodged in the past, to the effect that in the El Pa&so
department, in Honduras, in an area of approximately 40
kilometres along the border with Nicaragua, there are a
number of counter-revolutionary camps such as Las
‘Rojes, Gifuentes, Arenales, Las Vegas-the camp I have
already mentioned-and others, where some 2,000 mercenaries are encamped with the full knowledge of the
Honduran Government. The Las Vegascamp isone of the
largest concentrations of counter-revolutionary forces of
Fe ;yderlrat exist inside Honduran territory and along
.
.

10. There may be some people in this Chamber who
have doubtsabout the truth of the statement that the
United States Government supplied those surface-to-air
missiles to the mercenary forces attacking the Govemment of Nicaragua. In order to dispel some of those
doubts, I shall read some extracts from the press and
public st+ements by offtcials of the United StatesAdministration clearly showing that Government’s responsibility
for the supply of those sophisticatedweapons.

17. American television networks, some of which are
sympathetic towards the United States Administration
and the mercenary forces, have filmed those missiles in
the hands of the counter-revolutionary forces and shown
their films publicly.
18. If anyone were nevertheless’ to have any further
doubts as to the responsibility of the United Statesfor the
supply of those missiles to the counter-revolutionary
forces, it would be useful to point out that the American
Under-Secretary of State, Elliot Abrams, just a few days
ago,in statementsmade before acommittee of the United
StatesCongress,reported that the Nicaraguan helicopter
had been downed by a SAM-7 missile.That acknowledgement and confirmation by Under-Secretary Abrams occurred before the special committee appointed by the
Nicaraguan Government to investigate the downing of the
helicopter could confirm the use of those missilesby the
mercenary forces.

11. On 14 September this year the highest military
leader of the FDN [FrenreDemocraricoNicatagt2ense],the
ex-SomozistColonel Enrique Bermudez, told the media
that his organization would soon begin attacking Sovietmade helicopters with portable American-made, red-eye
rockets.
12. Later, on 31 October, the Honduran daily newspaper El Timpo reported:
“Recently some 200 cadres of the FDN were rewarded, after a course in their use,with SAM-7 missiles
supplied to the insurgents by the United Statesafter the
Sandiits had obtained modem Soviet helicopters.”

19. For his’part, the United States Secretary of State,
George Shultz,who in recent weeks has been characterized by his brazennessin acknowledging his interference
in the internal affairs of Nicaragua by supporting counterrevolutionary forces,,indicated, at an official conference
as he was leaving for Europe, that:

13. .On 13 November the counter-revolutionary leader
Indalecio Rodriguez publicly announced that the training
being given to the FDN mercenaries wasbased on the use
of surface-to-air missiles,and that someof them had been
photographed by the international press,thus showing the
world that it was true that his organization possessedthose
weapons. He said that in the coming weeks the Sandinists
would feel the impact of those weapons and see that the
defence of the “freedom fighters” was not passive, but
active.

“[The Contras]in some way obtained the missiles,and
we are pleased that they did so. . . . The fact that at the
present time the Contrasseemable to fire against those
helicopters could stem their use to some extent, and
that is very good. May the Contras have more of those
weapons.“,
20. The Nicaraguan Government considers it fundamental that the Security Council reflect on the significance of the introduction and supply of this type of
weapon to irregular forces, to mercenary forces, in the
Central American region.

14. Lastly, that samecounter-revolutionary, Rodriguez,
said that his forces had weaponsthat were adequate to the
task of counteracting the Sandinist forces, and that the
most important thing at that time was the arrival of those
,weapons from the United States.

21. First of all it must be pointed out that this is the fmt
time in the history of the American continent that an
irregular force fighting against an established Govemment has received this type of weapon. It must be recalled

15. SinceJanuary 1985the Nicaraguan Government has
known, thanks to confidential and reliable sources,that
United States experts are training counter-revolutionar2

’

that Latin America has a long tradition of guerrilla warfare, of political groups that have taken up arms against
established Governmerrts~ in the immense majority of
casesas a result of historical situations of oppression and
economic and political marginalization to which those
peoples have been subjectedby oligarchies and by Amerman imperialism. Such groups have existedvirtually since
the 1950s;some of them to this very day are still fighting
and carrying out military activities against various Governments in the Latin American region, but none of them
has obtained this type of sophisticatedweapon.
22. Furthermore it must be noted that this very dangerous weapon has been placed not only in the hands of an
irregular group but also in the hands of a terrorist and
mercenary group that has not precisely been characterized by its respect for human rights or for the physical
integrity of persons but that rather, on the contrary, has
in the past four and a half years dedicated itself to the
systematicmurder of farmers, teachers,the elderly, children, women and mothers, for which it has been denounced many times in the past. It is to persons of that
type that sophisticated weapons are being given.
23. In this respect, terrorists are being given unprecedented powers on this continent. This therefore brings us
to the conclusion that, given this situation, the very safety
of civil aviation in the Central American region is now in
jeopardy, Really, nothing-not even the very Government
of the United States,which has often recognized that the
Contrasare often out of control-can guarantee that those
terrorists are not going to use those missiles against a
civilian aircraft belonging to either Nicaragua or another
country, thinking or assumingthat some of these aircraft
may be carrying revolutionaryor Sandinist leaders, and of
thus making a spectacularstrike at the Nicaraguan revolution.
24. It is therefore a fact that if the legitimization of the
use of that type of weapon by the counter-revolutionary,
mercenary forces is permitted, the United Stateswill have
managed not only to strengthen those forces from the
standpoint of their military resourcesbut also in practice
to repeat the criminal action of the mining of Nicaraguan
ports in 1984,with the difference that in this caseit will be
mining Central American air space.If this situation continues not even the United Stateswill in the near future
be able to guarantee the safety of civil aviation in our
Central American region.
25. Without question, that act has raised the Central
American conflict to unprecedented levels of seriousness.
There is no doubt that this escalation, this new step in the
aggressionagainstNicaragua represented by the supply of
missilesto the counter-revolutionary forces gives the Central American conflict a dimension which will affect not
only the stability of Central America, but the very stability
of Latin America.
26. Moreover, this United States Government action
confii that Government’s disdain for international law
and for the 10 May 1984Order of the International Court
of Justice directing the United Statesto ceaseits aggres-

sion againstNicaragua. It explains the reasonsbehind the
United StatesGovernment’s decision to reject the binding
jurisdiction of the International Court.
27. We believe it useful to enquire into or reflect on the
reasoning behind the decision by the United StatesAdministratTon to provide such weapons to the counter-revolutionary forces. To understand that reasoning, it is
essential to be familiar with the ideas contained in the
United StatesGovernment’s official responseto the note
of protest sent to it on Thursday, 5 December, by the
Government of Nicaragua after confirmation of the
downing of an MI-S transport helicopter by a missile
launched by the mercenaries.
28. In that official message sent to the Nicaraguan
Charge d’affaires in Washington by Mr. Richard Melton
of the Central American office of the Department of.
State,we read the following:
“The act to which the Nicaraguan note refers was
carried out by the FDN, not by the United States. I
“Ihat act constitutes a logical responseto the introduction of highly-sophisticated Soviet attack helicopters.
“The escalationis a result of the introduction of those
helicopters, not of measurestaken by the opposition to
defend itself against them.
‘Those helicopters are used to causehigh casualties;
they are effective and have been used to carry out
genocide in Afghanistan.
“The SAM-7 missile is thus a purely defensive
weapon.
“The Government of Nicaragua has adopted a provocative stand in the face of political, civil and armed
opposition.”
The text I have quoted setsout precisely the reasoning and
arguments officially transmitted in Washington by the
Government of the United States to the Government of
Nicaragua on Friday, 6 December.
29. We think it is important to consider more deeply the
consequencesof that reasoning, of that official position of
the United States Government. First of all, a careful
reading of the text which I have quoted shows that at no
time does the United States Government see fit to deny
that it is responsible for the provision of those missilesto
the counter-revolutionary forces. In its official reply, the
United StatesGovernment does not deny having supplied
those missiles,but confines itself to saying that the act
itself was carried out by FDN forces and not by the United
States,despite the fact that the note of protest sent by the
Nicaraguan Government contains an accusationand clear
protest to the United StatesGovernment ‘for having sup,
plied the mercenaries with such weapons.

.
.‘.
_-:.
.-e
._

30.. Furthermore, in that document the United States
Government draws no distinction between the established
Government-the
revolutionary Government of Nicaragua, with which the United States maintains diplomatic
relations--and a mercenary group, the FDN. It confines
itself to reaffirming its continued support for the mercenary forces and to noting that the action taken by the
counter-revolutionary
forces was logical. That is a monumental example of the most utter disdain for international
law.

craft. That report also points out that Honduras has ordered and is about to receive F-5E aircraft produced by
the United States. There can be no doubt that all those
weapons are all effective instruments for tackling any sort
of insurgency situation that may arise inside Honduras.
We wonder if the United States Administration will follow
the logic applied in the case of Nicaragua and supply
anti-aircraft missiles’to the armed opposition groups in
Honduras so that they too can counteract the effectiveness of the aforementioned devices.

31. If we pursue our examination of this logic of the
United States Government we find the following.

37. Unfortunately, the tragedy of this official reasoning
by the United States Government, of this ONvellian inversion of reality, does not stop there. In the frenzied illogic
of the text quoted earlier we can also read, “The Govemment of Nicaragua has adopted a provocative attitude
towards the armed political opposition.” According to this
logic, Nicaragua is provoking the armed opposition, that
is, the CIA mercenaries, the counter-revolutionary
forces;
it is provoking them by defending itself against the activity
and the warfare in which they are engaging on behalf of
the Government of the United States. According to that
logic, the Government of Nicaragua is provoking the
counter-revolutionary
forces by defending itself against
the attempts by the United States to overthrow it. If we
try to follow such logic we will find ourselves once again
in a situation in which the Organization is seen to be
replete with provocative countries or Governments because such Governments, in one way or another, are
confronting and combating the action of insurgent groups
fighting under one flag or another.

32. On the one hand the United States Government
focuses its attention on the reasoning that the Sandinist
air force helicopters are effective and are intended to
produce high casualties. Then .it states that the FDN
mercenary group, which opposes the Government of Nicaragua, has the right to use missiles to defend itself against
the effectiveness of the Sandiist air force helicopters.
.Following that logic, we would conclude that any irregular
or insurgent group faced with the deployment of helicopters or any other type of effective aerial measures by a
legally established Government could possibly receive
such SAM-7 missiles from the United States Government.
33. If we continue from another standpoint to consider
the idea of the effectiveness of weapons possessed by a
legally established and internationally
recognized Government for its struggle against irregular or insurgent
groups, we will find that a great many countries have
effective means to carry out their counter-insurgency actidies.

38. That logic is the height of brazen shamelessness. It
is essentially, and ina word, the logic of a terrorist State.

34. To be brief, if we were to apply this United States
reasoning to the situation in Central America we would
find ourselves in a special situation. For this we can base
ourselves on data we consider to be reliable.

39. The statements of the United States Administration
and the ideas set forth in its official communication to the
Govermnent of Nicaragua would be truly laughable if
their consequences were not so unfortunate and so tragic
for the people of Central America. The logic we have just
examined is the logic the United States Administration
officially employs to justify having supplied SAM-7 missiles to the mercenary forces attacking the Government of
Nicaragua. That is the logic of the absurd. It is Orwellian,
and it distorts reality. It is the logic of irrationality. It is the
logic of State terrorism, of arrogance and of imperialist
policies. It is a logic that destroys international law and
makes it a dead letter. It is the logic of warfare and ofthe
spreading of the conflict in Central America, of the destabilization of Latin America. It is the logic of those who
have no interest& just,negotiated political solutions, who
have no interest in the Contadora process. It is the logic
of the Reagan doctrine on Central America and the third
world.

35. We can base ourselves on data supplied in the most
recent study of the International
Institute for Strategic
Studies, in London, which, in the 1985-1986 edition of 77re
MiIiaty Balance, shows that the armed forces of El Salvador have at their disposal the following airborne means
for counter-insurgency: 50 United States UH-1H helicopters, 4 Hughes 5OOMD attack helicopters, and 8 A-37
Dragonfly jet aircraft, which are bombers used in counterinsurgency operations. There can be no doubt in anyone’s
mind that such air mat&ieZ in the possession of El Salvador
is indeed effective in that Government’s struggle against
the insurgents. If we were to apply the American reasoning strictly, we would have to conclude that the United
States should also be prepared to assist the revolutionary
forces opposing the Government of El Salvador to counteract the effectiveness of those weapons by supplying
them with surface-to-air missiles such as those it has
supplied to the Nicaraguan counter-revolutionary
forces.

40. Nicaragua has appeared before this forum to denounce, to warn against and to fight the kind of reasoning
we have just describedbecause that logic and that doctrine
are now being applied in Central America with tragic and
harmful results, and because it is a reasoning that is now
being extended to other parts of the world--to southern
Africa and other areas where peoples are struggling for
their independence and their right to self-determination.

36. In the case of Honduras, the same London study
reports that the Honduran air force has the following
counter-insurgency
means: 22 UH-1H helicopters, 14
Super-Mysttre D-2 aircraft and 11 A-37 Dragonfly air4

There can be no doubt that the spread of that type of
thought and action on the art of the United States Administration, when applie B on a global level to various
hotbeds of tension, represents a real threat to world peace.

States through the free choice of the American people,
with the opposition having access to all the means and
media, something that has not been given to the people of
Nicaragua.

41. Nicaragua is confident, none the less, that the unity
of the international community will succeed in averting
that threat. The international community must unseat the
Horseman of the Apocalpse that is threatening Central
America and Latin America by supplying surface-to-air
missiles to mercenary forces. The international community-the peoples of the world-has already blocked and
defeated another damaging venture against the people of
Nicaragua, one that posed a threat because of tts repercussions on all the peoples of the world: the mining of
Nicaraguan ports on both oceans by the Government of
the United States.

46. At the heart of the Central American conflict is the
striving of the peoples of the Isthmus to realixe their right
to a voice in the affairs of their Government. Central
America is coming of age, moving strongly into the mainstream of Western democratic tradition. The hard-won
fruits of development have meant a better educated, better fed and better informed populace that has in recent
years asserted -with greater and greater clarity-its
desire to have a Government responsible to the will of the
people. The United States has consistently supported this
development, and, I might note, we have supported it in
Nicaragua as well. After the revolution of 1979, the
United States provided the Nicaraguan Government with
$119 million in economic assistance and supported Nicaraguan requests for many millions more in multilateral
financial institutions.

42. For their part, the Government and people of Nicaragua, faithful to their determination to defend their sovereignty, their territorial
integrity,
their political
independence and self-determination,
will continue to
defend themselves against the mercenary forces acting in
the service of the United States Government, notwithstanding the resources they enjoy and that may be supplied to them in the future. Wewill continue to fight those
enemies of the independence of Latin America; we will
continue to fight against the mercenaries. We do not
doubt that, sooner rather than later, our peo le will overcome even direct intervention by the United rstates, if that
happens.

47. With the exception of Nicaragua, this economic and
social development has been paralleled by marked progress towards democracy. Last Sunday Guatemala held a
runoff election, the final step before the inauguration of
a civilian president in that country, Honduras has just
completed elections. Costa Ricans will go to the polls in
February. Most recently, El Salvador held elections for its
Legislative Assembly in March of this year, the last in a
series of four democratic elections since 1982. All these
elections by Nicaragua’s neighbours had, or will have, one
ingredient essential to democratic process -until the
votes are counted, no one knows who is going to win. That
sweet mystery, how the people will finally speak, is the
essence of democracy.

43. Mr. WALTERS (United States of America) (interpretation j?om French): As this is the first opportunity I
have had, Sir, to speak before the Council since you
assumed the presidency, I should like to e ress the great
satisfaction it is for my Government, and ‘ipor me personally, to see you presiding over the Council. The Council is
indeed privileged to conduct its work this month under
your leadership. I should like also to express the gratitude
of my delegatton for the professional, judicious and fair
manner in which your predecessor, the representative of
Australia, Richard Woolcott, conducted the presidency of
the Council during his term.
[Thespeak-ercontinued

48. In contrast there was no mystery to the so-called
election held in Nicaragua in November of last year. As
sure as the Republic of Nicaragua’s flag is blue and white,
Daniel Ortega Saavedra, the candidate of the Frente
Sandinista de Liberaci6n National, the standard bearer of
the red and black flag, was destined to be anointed by
those elections. Any lingering wisp of mystery was systematically eliminated by the Sandiists as they excluded from
the elections the major opposition groups and structured
the proceedings to ensure their victory. As a result, on 4
November we sadly watched the clock turn back to the
days of the Somoza dynasty and the Nicaraguan people
were obliged to participate in another staged mockery of
democratic process, a facade to perpetuate in power those ,
who already ran the country. That election-which,
since
there was no real choice, defies the definition of an election-was but one step in the inexorable movement towards a single-party State in Nicaragua.

in Englirh.]

44. In presenting its complaint before this body, the
Government of Nicaragua continues to ignore the central
fact that it has a serious problem with many of its own
countrymen. Rather than accept this reality and seekways
to come to terms with the growing oppositionto Sandinist
policies through negotiation of a peaceful settlement, the
Sandmists have sought to crush all forms of domestic
opposition sentiment and to portray the democratic
armed resistance as a reactionary mercenary force organized by the United States. Unfortunately, the Nicaraguan
Government’s insistence on perpetuating this fantasy has
been the most serious obstacle to peace in the region.

49. Much was made two months ago of the 15 October
1985 announcement by Daniel Ortega Saavedra of a
“new” state of emergency. In fact, the official suspension
of all basic civil liberties -including freedom of the press,
freedom of assembly, freedom of expression and freedom
from arbitrary arrest -was merely the codification of what
have been the facts of life with which Nicaraguans have

45. The Nicaraguan representative has referred to the
Reagan Administration.
I would simply point out that the
Reagan Administration
is the Government of the United
5

lived for years. The decree was significant, not because
repression of civil liberties is new in Nicaragua under the
Sandinists, but because up until that time the Sandinists
had moved against the opposition with a certain care, with
the deft touch of political manipulators aware of the value
of a token independent sector to show off to the free world
and use to justify continued economic and political support from Western countries.

54. It is also ironic that-the Government of Nicaragua
laments that the use of a SAM-7 surface-to-air missile
represents an escalation of the Central American conflict
to new levels and labels the armed resistance a “terrorist”’
organization -this from a Government which introduced
into Central America the most advanced helicopter
equipment in the region. The MI-24, which the Govemment of Nicaragua began receiving from the Soviet Union
last year, is one of the world’s most sophisticated attack
helicopters. The Sandiits’
acquisition of MI-24s introduced a frightening new diiension’to
warfare in Central
America. They wish to intimidate not only Nicaraguan
opposition elements, but also their neighbours -Honduras, Costa Rica and El Salvador-which
are all within
reach of this “flying tank” and none of which has a comparable weapon.

50. What is new is not the state of emergency itself, but
the scope and intensity of the assault against virtually all
elements of the civil opposition. The fact that the
Sandinists chose to bear the international
cost of this
course of action indicates how deeply concerned they had
become with growing political dissent. The armed democratic opposition which the Sandiists had repeatedly
dismissed as a temporary irritant with no popular support -which was soon to be eliminated-lingered
on and
grew in strength, and again and again the Sandinists
moved back the deadline for their annihilation.
From
7,000 to 8,000 men in mid-1984, the armed resistance has
grown to some 20,000 men and women under arms -a
force to be reckoned with and many times the size of the
Frente Sandinista de Liberaci6n National itself when it
came to power in 1979. We have been told that revolution
cannot be exported; neither can counter-revolution. It has
to be indigenous.

55. Of course, I do not have access to the cotidential
sources to which the Nicaraguan representative referred.
The MI-24 was only the latest addition to what has been
a massive military buildup in Nicaragua, beginning immediately after the overthrow of Somoza in 1979. I might
add that no other Latin American country in history- except Cuba, of course-has ever received weapons so capable of killing people as the MI-24. The Sandinists, in
addition to increasing the size of the armed forces to the
unprecedented level of ll9,OOO troops, has amassed an
increasing inventory of tanks, artillery, helicopters and
other Soviet bloc equipment -including,
I might add,
hundreds of Soviet-made and supplied SAM-7 surface-toair missiles -which threaten and intimidate their neighbours and their own people. We estimate the Soviet bloc
arms shipments to the Sandinist Government have totalled some $500 million. These shipments have included
some 340 tanks and armoured vehicles, 70 long-range
howitzers and rocket launchers and 30 helicopters, including a dozen fast, heavily armed attack helicopters. The
Sandinists’ arms inventories dwarf those of the combined
forces of their Central American neighbours. As a matter
of fact and of interest, Nicaragua has three times as many
tanks as Mexico, which has 30 times the population of
Nicaragua.

51. The Sandinists present the struggle against their
attempt to impose a totalitarian regime as some vast
conspiracy organized by the United States. The heroic
Nicaraguan peo le continue to discredit this often-repeated charge. #l e Sandinists will never succeed in portraying thousands of Nicaraguan citizens who have taken
up arms to resist the perversion of their revolution as paid
mercenaries of a foreign Power. Can the Sandinists really
believe that some 20,000 members of the armed resistance
in Nicaragua would risk their lives by challenging the
largest armed force ever assembled in Central America
for anything less than patriotic motives?
52. The patriotism of these men and women is based on
two deeply felt emotions: hope and fear-hope that the
original democratic goals of the revolution can still be
realized; fear of a deepening repression not seen since the
worst days of the Somoza regime. These two powerful
emotions have contributed to the remarkable and consistent growth of the armed resistance. Despite the hardships
and the sacrifice, the disparate groups of the resistance,
most of whom fought bravely for the goals of the original
revolution, have come together in a struggle for liberty
against Sandiist repression.

56. Armed to the teeth, the Sandinists have hopeiessly
upset the military equilibrium in Central America, creatirig the major se&r&y problem for the region, a problem,
I might add, which the Government of Nicaragua seems
very reluctant to deal with in the Contadora process.
57. With regard to the reference to &International
Court of Justice, I might add that of the 15 judges on that
Court, 10 of the countries to which those judges belong
reject the compulsory authority of the International Court
of Justice, including some of Nicaragua’s closest friends.

53. It is worth noting that the rank and file of the resistance forces are for the most part young people in their
late teens and early 2Os, men and women whose only
political reality has been Sandinist rule. They can hardly
be attached to the past; they have only childhood memories of the Somoza dictatorship. Their political attitudes
have been formed since the revolution m 1979, and their
reaction over time has been to repudiate the grim totalitarian system that has been progressively imposed on
them.

58. In typical “Alice in Wond.erland” fashioa. the
Sandinists are now asserting, contrary to fact, that its
attack helicopter was downed by an “anti-air projectile of
the red-eye type, also known as a SAM-7”. The statement
is typical of Sandinist innuendo. By using the term “redeye”, it implies that the missile is of United States manufacture. “Red-eye”
means that the projectile
is
heat-seeking. Nicaragua knows that this projectile is not
6

of United Statesmanufacture. The United Statesis prohibited by law from providing lethal equipment to the
Nicaraguan resistance and it has abided strictly by that
law. The Nicaraguan armed resistancehas stated that it
has Soviet-manufactured SAM-7s acquired on the international market.

Nicaraguans complaining of the “Cubanization” of their
country. Not surprisingly, they believe the Cubans are
trying to impose on Nicaragua a systemwhich is not
applicabie to the current Nicaraguan reality. Recent defector information aswell asdebriefings of Sandinist prisoners of war have shown that Cuban officers have taken
over key positions in several of the Sandiit special
counter-insurgency battalions. The intelligence operations of the Nicaraguan resistancehave also determined
that the Cuban-advised Sandinist forces have infiltrated
impostors who, claiming to be resistance fighters, have
attempted to carry out assassinationsof key resistance
commanders. Multiple sources have confirmed that the
Sandinists, as part of their campaign to discredit the
armed resistance, have established clandestine guerrilla
units which pose as resistancebands and carry out attacks
on Nicaraguan civilians.

59. It is also ironic that the Sandinists should call the
democratic resistance a “terrorist” organization which
might constitute a threat to civilian aviation.‘This from a
r6gime which has opened its borders to the most notorious
international terrorist groups in the world, groups which
have’raised to irew heights of barbarity the practice of
terrorism against innocent civilians.
60. The reference was made to an Orwellian view of
things. That was a look in the mirror on the part of
Nicaragua.

65. The 10Nicaraguan requeststo convene the Security
Council continue to manifest a tedious regularity and a
transparency of purpose. On every occasion that Nicaragua has appeared before the Council, it has sought either
to forestall the progress of the Contadora process or to
interfere in the internal affairs of the United States by
seeking to influence our domestic olitical debate about
Central America. In either case,I! icaragua has deliberately misused the Council and converted it into a propaganda forum precisely at a time when its democratic
neighbours have attempted to work, through the Contadora process, to achieve a negotiated settlement to a
regional conflict.

61. In addition to aid to the Colombian M-19, which
carried out the recent assault on Colombia’s Palace of
Justice, the Sandinists have provided logistical, material
and moral support to other .Latm American terrorist
groups suchasthe Argentine Montoneros, the Uruguayan
Tupamarosand the Chilean MIR. In Central America, the
Sandinists have provided safe houses, communications
headquarters, arms depots,vehicles shops,training camps
and transport of military(supplies, including arms, to the
Salvadorian guerrillas. Sandmistinvolvement in Salvadorian guerrilla terrorism wasparticularly evident during the
recent kidnapping of President Duarte’s daughter, when
negotiations concerning her release were channelled
through Managua.

66. Most recently Nicaragua declined to attend meetings in Cartagena to discussthe future of Contadora, and
now it calls for a six-month suspensionof the Contadora
negotiations. Nicaragua was the only country to vote
against a recent resolution on Contadora in the General
Assembly of the Organixation of American Stateswhich
called for the Central American countries and the Contadora Group to persevere in their efforts to conclude the
negotiations to achieve a peace agreement. Contadora’s
most fundamental premise is that the regional crisis is a
Latin American crisisand that it can best be addressedby
Latin Americans themselves. The United Statescontinues to believe that the Contadora negotiating process
offers the best prospect for achieving peace in Central
America. We hope that Nicaragua will soon decide to join
its neighbours in working towards that goal.

62. Nicaragua’s other neighbours-Honduras
and
Costa Rica-have also suffered from Nicaraguan-sponsored subversion in the form of armed attacks,bombmgs,
attempted assassinations and other violence. Nor is
Nicaragua’s role’as a haven for terrorism confined solely
to Latin America. The Sandiists have also offered refuge
to terrorists from Europe and have assiduously’developed
contactswith terrorist groups from the Middle East.
63. Evidence of Cuban participation in combat activities
against the Nicaraguan people will not come as any surprise to this body. The increasingly important role Cuban
military advisers have come to play in combat against the
Nicaraguan resistancewasillustrated by the fact that there
were Cubans aboard the helicopter shot down by the
resistanceforces. My Government hascompiled an extensive list of reports from Nicaraguan citizens,most of them
former soldiers who have witnessed the growing Cuban
role in the Sandinist armed forces. These accountsdetail
the Cuban security and military network and the omnipresenceof Cuban advisers,trainers and techniciansfrom
command levels in the Ministries of Interior and Defence
down to individual combat platoons and from the operation of equipment, including Soviet-supplied helicopters,
in combat to the,disciplining of individual Nicaraguan
soldiers.

67. Now is not the moment to abandon Contadora. The
Government of Nicaragua would have us condone its
unilateral refusal to continue a negotiating processafter
more than two yearsof arduous efforts to narrow the areas
of difference in an extremely complex regional pattern.
We in this body are all well aware of the effort required to
build a lasting peace.Two years of negotiations seemvery
little, given the complexity of the issues,the necessityfor
adequate verification mechanismsand the requirement
that the final agreement comprehensively embrace the
full range of concerns of five different nations.
Contadora’s accomplishmentsare far from meagre.

64. According to former Sandiist officials, ‘themassive
Cuban presence has caused dissatisfaction, with many

68. Begun in January 1983, the Contadora negotiations
produced in September of that year the basis for an
7

.

systematicallyrefused to resumethe bilateral negotiations
with Nicaragua, which are crucial to any new peace initiative in the region. It has refused to respond positively to
Contadora’s request for the resumption of the bilateral
talks. And not only does it refuse under devious pretexts
whenever the Contadora Group proposes a resumption of
those bilateral talks,but it automatically produces a highlevel statement rejecting that approach.

agreement in the Document of Objectives [S/26041,
unncx]which all parties agreed to and which still servesas
a basrc framework for agreement. The process moved
from this framework document’to the discussionof draft
agreements,which were submitted in late 1984.During the
course of this year the areas of disagreement have been
drastically narrowed. Again, as progress towards a negotiated settlement gains momentum, Nicaragua balks and
comes before the United Nations, as it has many times
before, to divert international opinion away from its own
intransigence. Nicaragua refuses to negotiate further and
unilaterally proposes that the Contadora talks be suspended for six months.

76. I will give a concrete example.On 9 January 1985the
Contadora Group, for the first time,. called upon the
Governments of the United States and Nicaragua in a
declaration [S/16889,annex] to proceed in greater depth
with the Manzanillo talks to enable the Contadora negotiating process to make progress. On 17 January, just a
week later, the United Statesunilaterally broke off those
talks. That is the kind of support and backing that the
United Stateshas been giving the Contadora process.Its
backing amounts to disrespect for and ignoring of this
kind of appeal by the Contadora Group.

69. To what end, one must ask.Will Nicaragua use this
time to defuseviolent dissentwithin itsborders by opening
the political systemto the country’s opposition elements,
to implement its solemn obligation in the Contadora processto promote national reconciliation? The Government
of Nicaragua’s recent actions make it difficult for us to
imagine that it will pursue that wise course. Rather, it
would appear that the Sandinistswill continue to ignore
the reality of growing domesticopposition to theirpolicies
and will instead shrilly blame this phenomenon on external factors.

77. But the most serious matter here’is that the United
States has tried hard to create the. fiction in Central
America that it is possible to reach an agreement among
the Central American Governments without first halting
the United States war against Nicaragua. This has not
been done in private, diplomatic talks but as open rejection, amounting to a negation, of the Contadora process.
Secretary of State George Shultz, for example, in the
Cayman Islands on his way to the meeting of the Organization of American Statesat Cartagena, madestatements, I
which were published in the Los Angeles Times on 2
December 1985, in which he said outright that even ifthe
five Central American countries were to sign a peace
agreement the United Stateswould continue to support
the counter-revolution. That is the kind of support that
the United StatesGovernment has been giving the Contadora process.That is the reality of the systematicUnited.
Statespolicy towards Contadora and that is what has put
the Contadora processin its present difficult position, in
which it is impossible to make progress precisely because
of the total lack of willingness by the United. States to
come to an understanding with the-Nicaraguan revolution
and seek a negotiated, political way out of the Central
American crisis.

70. I reiterate my country’s firm belief that the
Sandinists bear the full responsibility for the consequencesof their aggressionagainstthe Nicaraguan people
and their neighbours. It is our fervent hope that this
incident will bring home to the commandanres in Managua the cost of their oppression and hostile actions. For
the sake of peace in Nicaragua and the rest of Central
America, the Sandinistsmust urgently take stepsto come
to terms with their own people.
71. The $RESIDENT (interprekrionfrom French): The
Acting Mrmster for External Relations of Nicaragua has
asked to be allowed to speak in exercise of the right of
reply, and I call on him;
72. Mr. .TINOCO (Nicaragua) (interpretation from
Spanish): I will be brief. I wish only to make some basic
clarification and a number of suggestions.

73. First, asregards Nicaragua’s position on Contadora,
it is surprising that a representative of the United States
Government should come here and pose asa defender of
a genuine Latin American effort, against which the
United StatesGovernment has been fighting for the past
two years.

78. With regard to another remark, Lwas struck by the
fact that in his statement the representative of the United
States seemed to be saying that his Government is prevented by law from giving weapons or missilesto mercenary forces and that the United States Government is
complying strictly with that prohiiition. If that is true, I
would suggestto that representative that he should suggest to Mr. Shultz that he in turn should suggestto the
Department of State that it send an official note to the
Government of Nicaragua denying that it has supplied
missiles to the counter-revolutionaries and confirming
that it has given no kindof help to those forces to acquire
that type of weapon. I think that would possibly be a
constructive result of United States participation in this
debate.

74. The United States Government is precisely; that
which.month after month has been refusing to respond in
practice to the request of the Contadora Group that it put
an end to its aggressionagainstNicaragua. On numberless
occasionsthe Contadora Group has called’for an end to
the policies that increase tension in the area, but the
United Stateshas done the exact opposite and continues
to step up its war of aggression.
75. It is the Government of the United States,which now
claimsto be defending and upholding Contadora, that has

The meeting tose at 5p.m.

8

’

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sates Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
Les publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous it : Nations Unies,
Section des ventes, New York ou Gentve.
KAK

HOJIYYHTb

H3&4HHJ-I

~3AaiiIiXOpraHH3aUwH
O6%eAHHCHHblX
HarCHTCTBaXBOBCCXpaftOH~MHpa.HaBOAHTCCnpaBKw
MKril3HHe
HJIH llHUlHTC
"9 aApCC)':
IlpOAalKe
H3AaHHti.
HbIO-hOpK
HAH

OPTAHM3AI&iH
OB’bEAHHEHHbIX
HAL&In
Hawh MOXCHO K)'lYHTbB KHHXCHblXMafa3HHaX
06 H3AaHUIXBBaUleMKHHBHOM
OpraHH3aUHX
06?.CAHHeHHbIX
Haunti, CCKUHK IlO
)ICCIiC.LIa.

COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONES DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS
Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas es& en venta en librerfas y cams distribuidoras en
todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirljase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United‘

Nations,

New York

90-61439-April

1991-2,050
