A/64/PV.120

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fourth session

120th plenary meeting
Thursday, 9 September 2010, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ali Abdussalam Treki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

Agenda item 77

I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Vuk
Jeremić, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, to
introduce draft resolution A/64/L.65/Rev.1.

Request for an advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice on whether the unilateral
declaration of independence of Kosovo is in
accordance with international law

Mr. Jeremić (Serbia): Allow me to introduce
draft resolution A/64/L.65/Rev.1, proposed by the
Republic of Serbia, which is co-sponsored by the
27 countries of the European Union.

Note by the Secretary-General (A/64/881)

My presence here today as Foreign Minister of
the Republic of Serbia signifies the paramount
importance that my country assigns to the issue that we
have met to discuss. As befits the General Assembly
and in accordance with established practice, we are
here to follow up after the advice of the International
Court of Justice, placing its opinion in an appropriate
international context that contributes to all-around
stability.

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.

Draft resolution (A/64/L.65/Rev.1)
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Serbia, on a point of order.
Mr. Jeremić (Serbia): I have a point of order. We
see representatives of Pristina in the Hall. They do not
represent an independent, sovereign United Nations
Member State, so could you please explain to us,
Mr. President, their presence in the Hall?
The President: I would like to inform Member
States that the representatives from Pristina are present
today in the General Assembly Hall as guests of the
delegations of France, Germany, Italy, the United
Kingdom and the United States. With that I think I
have answered the question of the representative of
Serbia.
As noted in document A/64/881, the individual
opinions, separate opinions and declarations appended
to the advisory opinion will be issued as an addendum
to the present note.

To that end, the Republic of Serbia has submitted
a draft resolution, co-sponsored by the 27 member
States of the European Union. Some of them continue
to respect the territorial integrity of Serbia, while
others have recognized Kosovo’s unilateral declaration
of independence. Nonetheless, common ground has
been reached by ensuring that the draft resolution is
fundamentally a status-neutral document.
The Republic of Serbia does not, and shall not,
recognize the unilateral declaration of independence of
Kosovo. The draft resolution receives with respect and
acknowledges the content of the Court’s findings in the
present matter. In addition, the draft resolution
welcomes the readiness of the European Union to
facilitate the process of dialogue between the parties,

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

10-51162 (E)

*1051162*

A/64/PV.120

which in itself would help to secure regional gains,
reinforce shared strategic priorities and improve the
lives of the people on the ground. We hope that the
draft resolution, if adopted, will help create an
atmosphere conducive to the establishment of a
comprehensive compact of peace between Serbs and
Albanians, achieved through good-faith dialogue. Only
such an approach can produce a legitimate and
sustainable result consistent with the fundamental
principles of the United Nations.
The Republic of Serbia believes that the draft
resolution before the General Assembly deserves the
full support of this body. We therefore propose that it
be adopted by consensus.
The Assembly should have no doubt that, come
what may, Serbia’s resolve shall not waver. We will not
tire, because we must not fail. Although our challenges
remain formidable, so do our strengths as we look to
the future with conviction in the justice of our cause.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): With regard to the
draft resolution entitled “Request for an advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice on
whether the unilateral declaration of independence of
Kosovo is in accordance with international law”
(A/64/L.65/Rev.1), Azerbaijan commends the efforts
aimed at finding mutually acceptable ways to continue
a dialogue between the parties for the purpose of
peace, security and stability in the region. At the same
time, I would like to reiterate Azerbaijan’s principled
position, according to which unilateral actions cannot
be an acceptable way of resolving armed conflicts and
territorial issues.
It is essential to emphasize that States are at the
heart of the international legal system and the prime
subject of international law, while the principle of the
protection of the territorial integrity of States is bound
to assume major importance. International law is
unambiguous in not providing for the right of secession
from independent States and in not creating grounds
and conditions for legitimizing non-consensual
secession in any sense. Such unilateral actions do not
involve the exercise of any right conferred in
international law, and hence have no place within the
generally accepted norms and principles of
international law, which apply within precisely
identified limits.
In paragraph 81 of its advisory opinion of 22 July
2010 (see A/64/881), on the accordance with

2

international law of the unilateral declaration of
independence in respect of Kosovo, the International
Court of Justice reaffirmed that the legality attached to
the unilateral secession stems from the fact that,
“they were, or would have been, connected with
the unlawful use of force or other egregious
violations of norms of general international law,
in particular those of a peremptory character (jus
cogens).”
Our firm position is that the only way to reach a
just and comprehensive settlement of conflicts and
disputes is an approach based on full and unequivocal
respect for the letter and spirit of international law. The
international community should therefore redouble its
efforts in rejecting any attempts at imposing solutions
based on the result of unilateral actions, the use of
force, the seizure of territory and ethnic cleansing.
As a country suffering aggression from a
neighbouring, State, foreign military occupation and
the ethnic cleansing of its territories, Azerbaijan
believes that the fulfilment in good faith of the
obligations assumed by States under the Charter of the
United Nations and international law is of the greatest
importance for the maintenance of international peace
and security.
Mr. Valero Briceno (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Government of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela believes that the
unilateral declaration of independence issued by the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government of the
autonomous Government of Kosovo violates Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999). That declaration does
not take into account the mandate set out in the
resolution to comply with the principles of sovereignty
and territorial integrity vis-à-vis the Serbian State. The
unilateral declaration of independence also contradicts
previous resolutions of the Security Council, including
resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998) and
1239 (1999), which also establish the same mandate.
The Government of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela maintains that the right to secession, which
is enshrined in the principle of the right of peoples to
self-determination, applies only and exclusively to
colonized territories, within the terms of resolution
2625 (XXV).
In that context, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela supports any initiative put forth by the

10-51162

A/64/PV.120

General Assembly with regard to preserving and
maintaining the principles of international law, whose
supremacy is unquestioned. We should therefore
emphasize the need to encourage the parties to find a
mutually acceptable resolution of outstanding issues on
the basis of dialogue, in the interests of peace and
security in the region.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela’s foreign
policy includes the principle that conflicts and disputes
should be resolved peaceably between parties, in line
with Article 33 of the United Nations Charter, on the
pacific settlement of disputes.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela supports
draft resolution A/64/L.65/Rev.1, which has been
introduced today in this world body by His Excellency
Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia.
Mr. Limeres (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation supports draft resolution A/64/L.65/Rev.1,
as we believe it necessary to promote a peaceful
dialogue between the parties that makes it possible to
reach a mutually satisfactory agreement.
In that regard, I should like to recall that
international peace and security constitute one of the
pillars of the United Nations system. The Security
Council is the main organ of the United Nations with
purview in that regard. The basis for the collective
security system established by the Organization is
predicated on United Nations Members being obliged
to adhere to the relevant resolutions of the
Organization.
A political solution to this issue should be based
on respect for the decisions adopted by the United
Nations. With regard to Kosovo, we should bear in
mind Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), which
clearly establishes the legal and political parameters
for achieving the political solution to which I have
referred. The validity of that resolution has now been
acknowledged by the International Court of Justice in
its advisory opinion of 22 July 2010 (see A/64/881).
The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
consult the General Assembly with a view to
proceeding immediately to consider the draft resolution
contained in document A/64/L.65/Rev.1.
In that connection, since the draft resolution has
only been circulated today, it would be necessary to

10-51162

waive the relevant provision of rule 78 of the rules of
procedure, which reads as follows:
“As a general rule, no proposal shall be discussed
or put to the vote at any meeting of the General
Assembly unless copies of it have been circulated
to all delegations not later than the day preceding
the meeting.”
Unless I hear any objection, I shall take it that the
Assembly agrees with that proposal.
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): Before we
proceed, I would like to notify members that technical
corrections are now being made to the Chinese and
French versions of draft resolution A/64/L.65/Rev.1.
The final version will include all those changes.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/64/L.65/Rev.1. May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt it?
Draft resolution A/64/L.65/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 64/298).
The President (spoke in Arabic): Before giving
the floor to speakers in explanation of position
following the adoption of the resolution, may I remind
speakers that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): The
United States welcomes this resolution, which responds
to the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice on Kosovo’s declaration of independence. We
fully support the resolution, and therefore joined the
consensus on it. The Court has answered the question
posed by the General Assembly. The Court’s answer
was clear. Kosovo’s declaration of independence did
not violate general international law or Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999).
Our consistent position has been that the situation
in Kosovo is a special case, and not a precedent for
other conflicts. Indeed, the Court’s opinion is quite
specific, namely, that Kosovo’s declaration of
independence had to be considered within the factual
context that led to its adoption. This included, as the
opinion described, the framework established by
resolution 1244 ( 1999) to resolve the humanitarian
crisis in Kosovo, the establishment of a transitional
administration and the United Nations-facilitated future
status process, which concluded that the negotiations

3

A/64/PV.120

on Kosovo’s status were exhausted and that further
talks on status would not produce a mutually agreeable
outcome.
Resolution 64/298 is consistent with the United
States strong support for Kosovo’s independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity. Now is the time
for the region to move forward and for Serbia and
Kosovo to open a new phase in their relations, focused
on their shared future within the European Union. We
therefore welcome the European Union’s offer to
facilitate a dialogue between Kosovo and Serbia to
promote cooperation, achieve progress on their
respective European integration paths and improve the
lives of people in the region, thereby enhancing peace,
security and stability in the Balkans.
The United States is prepared to lend its support
to a constructive, forward-looking dialogue. More
broadly, we remain fully engaged and committed to
helping Kosovo, Serbia and all the countries of the
region to realize their aspirations for full integration
into the Euro-Atlantic community.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): The advisory opinion of
the International Court of Justice on Kosovo’s
declaration of independence (see A164/881), which
was issued on 22 July, stated without any ambiguity
that the declaration, made in February 2008, did not
violate general international law. The advisory opinion,
which was clear and decisive, marks the end of the
legal process on Kosovo. In that respect, Turkey
welcomes resolution 64/298. We believe it is an
important step forward in the establishment of lasting
peace, stability and prosperity in the region. My
delegation is therefore in favour of it.
We appreciate the steps taken by Serbia to
introduce the resolution. Serbia is an important player
and partner in the region when it comes to addressing
core issues and ensuring lasting peace and stability in
the Balkans. We believe that the dialogue to be
established is the only viable way to reach a common
understanding, and that Serbia can and will contribute
to attaining the needed peaceful solution on all issues
of mutual concern.
Our position on Kosovo’s independence is well
known. Turkey recognizes Kosovo, upholds its
territorial integrity and sovereignty, supports its
democratic structures and Euro-Atlantic orientation
and advocates its inclusion in regional cooperation
schemes.

4

What now remains to be done is to look forward
and encourage Serbia and Kosovo to address their
future relationship through dialogue and mutual
respect. In that regard, I would like to express our
appreciation to both Belgrade and Pristina for keeping
diplomacy at the forefront with regard to the Kosovo
issue since 2008. Turkey enjoys friendly relations with
Serbia and Kosovo. We are committed to the
achievement of the objectives of peace, stability and
prosperity for the whole region. We firmly believe that
the common future of the region lies in European and
Euro-Atlantic integration. Turkey is ready to assist the
countries of the region to realize their aspirations in
that regard and to contribute to the establishment of a
constructive dialogue in our region.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): The resolution that has just
been adopted, as a result of the agreement reached
between Serbia and the 27 countries of the European
Union, is auspicious for the continuity of dialogue on
the question of Kosovo. We appreciate the role of the
European Union in the efforts to resolve the dispute at
hand. At the same time, we reiterate that any solution
must have the support of the entire international
community. Brazil believes that Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999) remains the foundation for
durable peace and stability in the region and for the
resolution of the question of Kosovo, based on
dialogue and respect for the principle of territorial
integrity.
Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): In view of the agreement reached between
Serbia and the European Union on the content of the
resolution just adopted by the General Assembly on the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
on the question of the legality of the unilateral
declaration of independence of Kosovo (see A/64/818),
the Russian delegation has joined the consensus.
Russia’s position of principle on the issue of
Kosovo remains unchanged. We firmly believe that
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) remains fully
in force and is still binding on all as the international
legal basis for settling the Kosovo question. The
Security Council continues to have a leading role in a
Kosovo settlement. We think it important that the
parties resume dialogue with a view to a settlement of
the Kosovo problem. An important role in facilitating
that process will continue to be played by the United
Nations Mission in Kosovo on the basis of the mandate
given to it by the Security Council.

10-51162

A/64/PV.120

Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Kosovo question is very complex and sensitive and has
a bearing on the peace and security of the Balkans and
of Europe as a whole. We have always believed that the
best way to solve the Kosovo question is for the parties
concerned to seek, through dialogue, a mutually
acceptable solution within the framework of the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council.
China takes note of the advisory opinion
delivered by the International Court of Justice on
22 July (see A/64/818). We are also aware of the fact
that different parties hold different views on this
matter. China has maintained all along that respect for
national sovereignty and territorial integrity is a
fundamental principle of contemporary international
law and the basis for the international legal order of
our times. The sovereignty and territorial integrity of
United Nations Member States should be respected by
all parties. The Court’s advisory opinion should not
prevent the parties concerned from finding a proper
negotiated solution to the problem.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): My delegation
joins others in welcoming the consensus that made it
possible for the General Assembly to unanimously
adopt resolution 64/298. India has consistently held the
view that the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all
countries should be respected by all States. Therefore,
the Government of India has so far not recognized the
unilateral declaration of independence by Kosovo. We
believe that the Kosovo issue should be resolved
peacefully through consultation and dialogue between
the concerned parties.
Mr. Gutierrez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): In
October 2008, the General Assembly requested the
International Court of Justice to render an advisory
opinion on whether the unilateral declaration of
independence by the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment of Kosovo was in accordance with
international law. In response to that, on 22 July, the
International Court of Justice delivered its advisory
opinion and concluded that the declaration of
independence by Kosovo did not violate international
law or Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) or the
Constitutional Framework of the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government of Kosovo.
The International Court of Justice is the only
universal international entity with general jurisdiction.
Its advisory opinions therefore contribute to

10-51162

developing international law — which, as a judicial
body, it interprets independently and impartially.
Peru was very pleased to join the consensus to
adopt resolution 64/298. We would have liked to have
been a sponsor of it, for we believe that it reaffirms the
primary role of international law and conforms to our
strong tradition of respect for that pillar, on which the
United Nations Charter is based. Likewise, we believe
that it properly recognizes the judicial work carried out
by the International Court of Justice.
My delegation believes it is important to
underscore and acknowledge the constructive spirit and
maturity shown by the Republic of Serbia, along with
its European Union partners, which have made it
possible for us to adopt this important resolution. We
are certain that it will make a contribution to building
peace and security in the region, thereby making it
possible to carry forward a constructive dialogue based
on cooperation that will clearly increase the well-being
of all peoples of the Balkan region.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): We are pleased with the
decision by the Republic of Serbia to withdraw the
controversial and disruptive text of draft resolution
A/64/L.65, which contained narrow objectives to
instrumentalize the General Assembly and hinder the
progress in international support for the Republic of
Kosovo. We support the wise decision to substitute that
text with a text agreed among the 27 European Union
member States, as embodied in resolution 64/298,
which has just been adopted.
On 22 July 2010, the International Court of
Justice delivered an advisory opinion on the
accordance with international law of the unilateral
declaration of independence in respect of Kosovo, in
response to the question put forward by the General
Assembly in resolution 63/3, of 8 October 2008,
namely, whether the unilateral declaration of
independence by the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment of Kosovo was in accordance with
international law.
As is known to the membership, the Court
concluded, by an overwhelming majority and in
unambiguous terms, that Kosovo’s declaration of
independence violated neither general international law
nor Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), nor the
Provisional Constitutional Framework of Kosovo,
adopted by the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo pursuant to that resolution. The

5

A/64/PV.120

Court’s opinion made it clear that Kosovo’s case is in
fact a unique one, that it has its own long historical
background and that it cannot and should not be related
to any other situation elsewhere in the world. Albania
welcomes this rendering of the world Court and we
believe that this opinion should be acknowledged and
respected. We are very pleased that the new resolution
welcomes the Court’s opinion with respect.
Kosovo’s independence is a reality and has
passed through many difficult phases, from war
atrocities to lengthy negotiations under the mediation
of the international community and the SecretaryGeneral’s special envoy. This reality has been
increasingly recognized by Member States. The Court’s
advisory opinion will certainly help many countries to
move towards recognition of the Republic of Kosovo,
as the opinion also offers the prospect of a new phase
in the relations between the Republic of Serbia and the
Republic of Kosovo within the perspective of their
integration into the European Union — a goal shared
by the whole region.
Albania is attentive to the difficulty of some in
the Government of Serbia to come to terms with this
new reality. What happened today at the General
Assembly was a clear illustration of that. But despite
this, we note with satisfaction that the text adopted
today has clearly nothing in common with what we
have seen in recent weeks. That is the reason that the
Republic of Albania decided to support it.
Albania expresses its deep appreciation for the
efforts of the European Union, along with those of
other countries that have recognized Kosovo, to bring
Serbia to a reasonable position by presenting this new
resolution. Indeed, it is very positive that, rather than
calling in vain for renewed talks on the status of
Kosovo, a process already fully exhausted and a
chapter definitively closed, the new text supports
efforts under way and encourages Serbia and Kosovo
to engage in a cooperation process on practical matters,
in the interests of both countries and in the spirit of
good neighbourliness. Albania will lend its full support
to such a process.
Mr. Thomson (Fiji): The Fiji delegation
welcomes the consensus spirit that has allowed us to
carry through the revision of the Serbian resolution on
the unilateral declaration of the independence of
Kosovo. We welcome in particular the readiness of the
European Union to facilitate a dialogue process

6

between the parties. This occasion allows us to
reaffirm our belief that the principle of peaceful
dialogue is fundamental to international relations. In
the place of conflict and punishment, the words
peaceful engagement and positive dialogue are those
we need to hear more often in our daily work.
As a member of the United Nations Special
Committee on Decolonization, Fiji continues to give
careful consideration to the International Court of
Justice advisory opinion on the unilateral declaration
of independence of Kosovo. This is so because there is
often a fine line to be identified between the United
Nations stated purpose of respect for the selfdetermination of peoples and the Charter’s principle of
the territorial integrity of Member States.
For the Member States of the Organization, our
overriding purpose is the maintenance of international
peace and security. The implications of the Court’s
advisory opinion must therefore be addressed
responsibly and vigilantly in order to avoid the
perception of the opinion as a green light for other
unilateral declarations of independence around the
world.
Fiji is located in the region of Melanesia. The
recent history of our region demonstrates that we must
be sensitive to active and latent separatist tendencies.
We recognize that our region is not alone in that
regard. We therefore reiterate the need for careful
consideration of the possible broader implications of
the Court’s advisory opinion, at all times with full
respect for international law.
In conclusion, we reiterate that Fiji welcomes the
consensus achieved today and trusts the revised
resolution’s commitment to dialogue directed at peace,
security and stability in the region concerned.
Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): Resolution 64/298, which
has just been adopted, clearly reflects the commitment
of all concerned parties to find a solution to the
question of Kosovo through dialogue. It is also in line
with the preference consistently expressed by
Indonesia to follow the path of dialogue and diplomacy
to resolve the question of Kosovo and to find a
mutually acceptable solution. This path alone will
guarantee that the region achieves the path of stability,
peace, security and prosperity. This has been true in
other regions; it shall also be true in the Balkan region.
This is the time for us to devote our full political and

10-51162

A/64/PV.120

diplomatic energies to finding
sustainable solution to the issue.

a

suitable

and

The International Court of Justice has discharged
its task. Unquestionably, the advisory opinion will
raise a host of new ramifications. We are also acutely
aware that this opinion will have a dynamic life of its
own. We will therefore rigorously examine the contents
of the opinion.
In addressing the matter at hand, we wish once
again to emphasize the importance of faithfully
maintaining the sanctity of key international law and
principles, in particular upholding of the principles of
the peaceful settlement of conflicts, territorial integrity
and political independence. That has been our steadfast
position; it shall be our time-honoured principle.
Finally, we hope that the intention and readiness
to undertake a process of dialogue, which is clearly
reflected in the resolution, could be commenced in the
immediate future — a process that will hopefully lead
to achieving a mutually acceptable solution and that
could contribute to the promotion of peace, stability
and prosperity in the region. For its part, the United
Nations should continue to remain engaged in the
political process to find a sustainable and peaceful
solution to this issue.

10-51162

Mr. Baghaei Hamaneh (Islamic Republic of
Iran): The Islamic Republic of Iran joined the
consensus on resolution 64/298, which is the result of a
compromise between Serbia and the European Union,
with the understanding that the resolution is a call to
relevant parties to resolve their dispute through
peaceful dialogue. My delegation reiterates its
principled position concerning the vitality of adhering
to international law and the principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations. The Islamic Republic of
Iran stresses that disputes have to be resolved through
peaceful ways and in accordance with international law
and with full respect for the lofty principles of the
United Nations Charter, in particular the sovereignty
and territorial integrity and political independence of
the Member States of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Arabic): We have heard
the last speaker in explanation of position following
the adoption of the resolution. May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 77?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 6:15 p.m.

7
