S/2006/157

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 March 2006
Original: English

Letter dated 10 March 2006 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated 2 March 2006,
which I received from José Ramos-Horta, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of Timor-Leste (see annex).
I should be grateful if the present letter and its annex could be brought to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

06-26950 (E) 160306

*0626950*

S/2006/157

Annex
Letter dated 7 March 2006 from the Permanent Representative
of Timor-Leste to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General
In reference to the letter dated 2 March 2006 from José Ramos-Horta, Senior
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Timor-Leste,
addressed to you (see enclosure), I have the honour to request that the present letter
and its enclosure be circulated among the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) José Luís Guterres
Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary
Permanent Representative

2

S/2006/157

Enclosure
Letter dated 2 March 2006 from the Senior Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Timor-Leste
addressed to the Secretary-General
I refer to the letter of 17 January 2006, whereby Prime Minister Mari Alkatiri
conveyed to you our request that the United Nations consider establishing in TimorLeste a “Special Political Office” in view of the political consolidation of which the
planned parliamentary and presidential elections in 2007 are part.
It is our understanding that our request is currently under consideration by the
United Nations Secretariat and Security Council members. In order to help facilitate
this process and following consultations with President Xanana Gusmão and Prime
Minster Alkatiri, I wish to shed some light on the context and scope of our request.
As indicated above, the main purpose of our request is to ensure that TimorLeste will continue to benefit from United Nations assistance in support of our
political consolidation process leading to the 2007 elections. As you are aware,
these will be Timor-Leste’s first elections since our nation attained independence in
2002. Since the success of our political consolidation efforts depends in part on the
success of the elections, it is crucial that the United Nations provide support for the
process leading to the elections in various aspects.
In this regard, I wish to clarify that the four components listed in our request,
which are not exhaustive but illustrative of the type of assistance needed to ensure
an environment that is conducive to a successful conduct of elections in TimorLeste, will be a function of many variables, including the overall security situation
and political climate. Fundamentally, therefore, Timor-Leste is looking to the United
Nations for sound policy guidance in electoral matters as well as support and
facilitation, as appropriate, in key areas relevant to our political consideration,
including in the areas of reconciliation and human rights.
Notwithstanding the progress achieved so far in building a democratic and
prosperous Timor-Leste, much remains to be done. Hence we hope that our modest
request will be positively considered. I am confident that with your support and the
steady commitment of our friends in the international community, Timor-Leste will
be able to advance on the path of political consolidation.
(Signed) José Ramos-Horta
Senior Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation

3
