Resolutions adopted on the reporta of the Third Committee

3246 (XXIX). lmportance of the universal realization of the right of peoples to self-determination and of the speedy granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples
for the eflective guarantee and observance
of human rights

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming it& faith in resolution 1514 (XV) of
14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the
Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, and resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October
1970, containing the programme of action for the full
implementation of that Declaration,
Recalling, inter afia, its resolutions 2588 B (XXIV)
of 15 December 1969, 2787 (XXVI) of 6 December
1971, 2955 (XXVII) of 12 December 1972, 2963 E
(XXVII) of 13 December 1972, 3059 (XXVUI) of
2 November 1973 and 3070 (XVIII) of 30 November
1973, and the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
Noting with appreciation the reports of the SecretaryGeneral,~5
Noting with satisfaction the assurances given by the
Government of Portugal that it will fulfil its obligations under the Charter of the United Nations and
comply with United Nations resolutions relevant to
the right of the peoples under Portuguese administration to self-determination and independence,
lndignant at the continued repression and the inhuman and degrading treatment inflicted on peoples
still under colonial and foreign domination and alien
subjugation, especially on individuals detained or imprisoned as a result of their struggle for self-determination and independence,
Reaffirming'that the independence of Southern Rhodesia should not be negotiated with the illegal régime
but with the authentic and recognized representatives
of the Rhodesian people,
Mindful of its responsibility to evolve all possible
measures which wiH enable oppressed peoples to attain
independence and self-determmation and, in this regard,
deploring the obstructive attitude of certain Member
States,
Recognizing the imperative need to put an early end
to colonial rule, foreign domination and alien subjugation,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of ali peoples
under colonial and foreign domination and alien subjugation to self-determination, freedom and independence in conformity with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and other relevant resolutions of the
United Nations;
2. Renews its call to ali States to recognize the right
to self-determination and independence or ali peoptes
subject to colonial and foreign domination and alíen
subjugation and to offer them moral, material and other
forros of assistance in their struggle to exercise fully
their inalienable right to self-determination and independence;
3. Reafjirms the legitimacy of the peoples' struggle
for liberation from colonial and foreign domination
and alíen subjugation by ali available meaos, including
armed struggle;
~:; A/9638 and Add.l, Add.1/Corr.l and Add.2-5, A/9667
and Add.l.

87

4. Demands full respect for the basic human rights
of all individuals detained or imprisoned as a result of
their struggle for self-determination and independence,
and strict respect for article 5 of the Universal Declaration of. Human Rights under which no one shall be
subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment, and their immedialle release;
5. Welcomes the recognition by the Govemment of
Portugal of the right of ali the peoples under its colonial administration to self-determination and independence, and the initiatives already taken in this regard;
6. Urges the Government of Portugal to continue
to ensure that the process of decolonization, which will
enable peoples still under its colonial administration
to achieve self-determination and independence, is accomplished without delay;
7. Strongly condemns ali Governments which do not
recognize the right to self-determination and independence of peoples under colonial and foreign domination
and alien subjugation, notably the peoples of Africa and
the Palestinian people;
8. Further strongly condemns the policies of those
members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and
those countries whose military, economic, sporting or
political relations with the racist régimes of southern
Africa and elsewhere encourage these régimes to persist in their suppression of the aspirations of peoples for
self-determination and independence;
9. Calls upan those countries to reconsider t•heir
policies and to sever ali links with the racist régimes of
South Africa and Southern Rhodesia;
1O. Renews its appreciation to Governments, United
Nations agencies and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations for their efforts in extending various forros of assistance to peoples in dependent
Territories and appeals to them to increase such
assistance;
11. Requests the Secretary-Ge~eral to continue to
assist the specialized agencies and other organizations
within the United Nations system in working out
measures for the provision of increased international
assistance to the peoples of colonial Territories;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a
report on the implementation of the present resolution
to the General Assembly at its thirtieth session.
2303rd plenary meeting
29 November 1974
3266 (XXIX). Report of the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3057 (XXVIII) of 2 November 1973 and 3223 (XXIX) of 6 November 1974
on the Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial
Discrimination and resolution 3225 (XXIX) of 6 N~
vember 1974 on the status of the lnternational Convention on the Elimination of Ali Forros of Racial
Discrimination,26
Having considered the report of the Cornmittee on
the Elimination of Racial Discrimination on the fifth
year of its activities, 27 submitted under article 9, para26 Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.
27 Official Records o/ the General

Se.s.sion, Supplement No. 18 (A/9618).

A.ssembly, Twenty-ninth

General ANembly- -Tw-1:,-ninth Seuion

88

graph 2, of the Intemational Convention on the Elimination of AH Forms of Racial Discrimination,
Noting with appreciation the interest of the Committee when performing its functions under the Convention and the direct involvement of its members in
contributing, as appropriate, to the achievement of the
objectives of the Decade for Action to Combat Racism
and Racial Discrimination,
Mindful of the undertaking of States parties to the
Convention to engage in no act or practice of racial
discrimination against any person, groups of persons or
national or ethnic minorities, and to ensure that ali
public authorities and public institutioos, national and
local, shall act in conformity with this obligation,
Noting the decisions adopted by the Committee at
its ninth and tenth sessions, 28
l. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination;
2. Takes note also of the part of the report of the
Committee conceming petitions and other information
relating to Trust and Non-Self-Goveming Territories
and to ali other Territories to which General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 applies;2•
3. Expresses its appreciation to the Committee for
the work it performs in pursuance of the provisions of
the International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination;
4. Expresses its satisfaction at the increasing participation of States parties to the Intemational Convention on the Elimination of AH Forms of Racial
Discrimination in submitting their reports to the Committee and by sending representatives to the Committee
when it considers their reports;
5. Calls upon all States parties to the Intemational
Convention on the Elimination of AH Forms of Racial
Discriminatlion to extend their fuHest co-operation to
the Committee, particularly in providing ali necessary
information in accordance with article 9 of the Convention and with requests by the Committee;
6. Endorses the Committee's decision to make its
contribution, in the context of the Decade for Action
to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination and the
Programme for the Decade, 'to the total and unconditional elimination of racism and racial discrimination
in ~ccordance with the powers vested in it by the Internat1onal Convention on tite Elimination of Ali Forms
of Racial Discrimination, especially by concentrating
its efforts, pursuant to articles 3, 9 and 15 of the Convention, on preparin1t recommendations with regard to
the most ftagrant and large-scale manifestations of
racial discrimination, particularly in areas which are
still under the domination of racist and colonial régimes
and foreign occupation;
1. Commends the practice of the Committee, inaugurated in its adoption of general recommcndation 111, 30 of welcoming information from States parties
to the International Convention on the Elimination of
AII F~rms_ of Racial. Discrimination regarding their
respective 1mplementat1on of the relevant resolutions of
c~mpetent U_nite~ ~ations organs concerning relations
w1th the rac1st reg1mes of southern Africa;
28 Jtd., chap.
2 9 /bid., chap.

3 0 /bid.,

VII.
V.

Twenty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 18 (Al
8718), chap. IX, scct. B, dccision 1 (VI).

8. Shares the Committee's concern voiced in its
decision 1 (X) of 22 August 1974,31 relating to the
situation in the Golan Heights, in which the Syrian
Arab Republic, party to the Convention, has been prevented from fulfilling its obligations under the Convention in part of its territory and, in this connexion,
recalls that in section III of General Assembly resolution 2784 (XXVI) of 6 December 1971 it endorsed
the Committee's decision 4 (IV) of 30 August 1971 ;11
9. Calls upon States parties t'o the lntemational
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination to observe fully the provisions of the
Convention. and other international instruments and
agreements to which they are parties conceming the
elimination of ali forms of discrimination based on
race, colour, descent or national or ethnic origin;
10. Makes an urgent appeal to States which are
not yet earties to the lnternational Convention on the
Eliminat10n of All Forms of Racial Discrimination to
ratify or accede to it and, pending such ratification or
accession, to be guided by the basic provisions of the
Convention in their interna! and foreign policies.

2311th plenary meeting
10 December 1974
3267 (XXIX). Elimination of ali forma
of religiou11 intolerance

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3069 (XXVIII) of 30 November 1973,
Noting that the Commission on Human Rights is
currently seized with the task of elaborating a draft
Declaration on the Elimination of AD Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion or
Belief and has established a Worlcing Group for this
purpose,83
Noting also the intention of the Commission on
Human Rights to give priority to the elaboration of
the Declaration at its thirty-first session, to be hcld
from 3 February to 7 March 1975,34
Desirous that the elaboration of the Declaration be
actively pursued,
l. Requests the Secretary-Genera-1 to transmit to
the Commission on Human Rights ali the opinions
expressed and suggestions put forward in thc coursc
of the discussion of this question at the twenty-ninth
sessiori of the General Assembly;
2.. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
subm1t, through the Economic and Social Council, to
the General Assembly at its thirtieth session a single
draft Declaration on the Elimination of Ali Forms of
Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion
or Belief;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirtieth se,;sion the item entitled "Elimination of ali
forms of religious intolerance" with a view to assessing
31 /bid .. Twenty-nintl, Session, S11pplement No. 18 (A/9618),
chap. VIJ, scct. B.
32 /bid., Twenty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/8418),
chap. VII, s-ct. B.
3 3 Sce Of}icial Records o/ the Economic ·and Social Council
Fi/ty-sixtl, Session, Supplement No. 5 (E/5464), paras. 56-58. •
34 Sec Economic and Social Council decision 14 (LVI) of
17 May 1974.
