UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1997/310
14 April 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 14 APRIL 1997 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to convey the attached communication dated 11 April 1997
from the High Representative, Mr. Carl Bildt, on the implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina (see annex).
I would appreciate your bringing it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.

(Signed)

97-10107 (E)

160497

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1997/310
English
Page 2

Annex
Letter dated 11 April 1997 from the High Representative
for Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina addressed to the Secretary-General

I have the honour to transmit to you my fifth report on my activities as
High Representative for Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina (see appendix). I would appreciate your making the present report
available to the Security Council.

(Signed)

Carl BILDT

/...

S/1997/310
English
Page 3

Appendix
Report of the High Representative for Implementation of
the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina to the
Secretary-General

I.

INTRODUCTION

1.
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1031 (1995) of 15 December 1995, in
which the Council endorsed my appointment as High Representative to "monitor the
implementation of the Peace Agreement and mobilize and, as appropriate, give
guidance to, and coordinate the activities of, the civilian organizations and
agencies involved" in the implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina. I submit hereby my fifth report envisaged by annex 10 of the Peace
Agreement and the Conclusions of the London Peace Implementation Conference of 8
and 9 December 1995.
2.
The present report covers developments in the areas listed below during the
period from the beginning of December 1996 to the end of March 1997.

II.

INSTITUTIONAL ASPECTS

Office of the High Representative
3.
My headquarters in Sarajevo and the secretariat in Brussels have, in the
period described, continued to maintain operational coordination of civilian
implementation activities inside Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as contacts
with the headquarters of the respective implementation organizations and
agencies, closely following, so far as possible, the various international
forums dealing with the Bosnian peace implementation.
4.
During the reporting period, the peace process in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
despite numerous difficulties, has been moving in a defined direction and there
have been a number of positive developments. The emphasis has been placed on
the implementation of the civilian aspects of the operation, these being
essential for the normalization of life in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Specific
attention has been given to two priority tasks: economic reconstruction on the
territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the establishment of functioning common
institutions. It is vital that the authorities start to assume joint
responsibility for the implementation of the peace process and I have proceeded
on this assumption.
5.
The award of the Arbitration Tribunal for Brcko on 14 February regarding
arrangements for the supervision of full implementation of the Peace Agreement
in the Brcko area represents a major challenge for my Office in 1997. A Deputy
High Representative was appointed on 7 March at the Brcko implementation
conference in Vienna to serve as Supervisor for Brcko operating within the
existing Office of the High Representative (OHR) structure in accordance with my
mandate under Annex 10 of the Peace Agreement. The period of supervision
started in early April. Concrete implementation measures will follow when the
/...

S/1997/310
English
Page 4

Supervisor decides that essential elements of the supervision structure are in
place.
6.
Regional coordination and monitoring the situation on the ground, in
parallel with supporting the new common institutions, has been a priority. A
regional office in Mostar was established in early January to cover southern
Bosnia and Herzegovina following the end of the mandate of the Special Envoy of
the European Union (EU). This will complement the existing regional office in
Banja Luka. The regional reach provided by the two offices will be crucial
during the consolidation period and will compensate for the cessation of the
regional Joint Civilian Commissions, whose mandates have been superseded by the
new common institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina. These offices will continue
to facilitate contacts at a local level, promoting inter-entity cooperation in a
variety of fields.
7.
My Office in Sarajevo has developed the capacity to conduct preventive,
proactive and follow-up action and to structure diplomatic efforts in a
concerted manner. As the peace implementation process moves into the
consolidation period, these progressive achievements need to be both preserved
and developed. Conditions for such continuity require countries that contribute
personnel to maintain their current level of commitment. Many of the seconded
staff who left at the end of 1996 have now been replaced; in response to the
London Conference conclusions, I have received seconded staff from the European
Commission and the World Bank. However, in view of the size of the tasks for
1997 and 1998, and the need to establish an effective office in Brcko, further
secondments may be necessary.

Peace Implementation Council
8.
The Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council met monthly at the
level of Political Directors.
9.
The discussion at the meeting in Brussels on 21 January focused on the
preparations for municipal elections, with representatives of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) participating in the discussion.
Financial issues were also discussed and it was decided to extend the 1996
financial period until the end of May 1997.
10. The 19 February meeting in Brussels dealt primarily with the implementation
of the Brcko Arbitration and preparations for an extraordinary Steering Board
with the parties. The United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH), including the International Police Task Force (IPTF), was represented
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General. The Steering Board also
discussed regional stabilization issues with the Personal Representative of the
OSCE Chairman-in-Office.
11. Following the meeting, a special Steering Board session took place in
Vienna on the implementation of the Brcko arbitration. Representatives of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and its entities, of the Republic of Croatia and the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia also attended. United Nations and other key
implementation agencies or organizations contributed to the Conference.
/...

S/1997/310
English
Page 5

III.

COORDINATION OF CIVILIAN IMPLEMENTATION
Overall coordination

12. Regular meetings of the key implementation agencies were held at my office
in Brussels, on 23 January, 20 February and 9 April, in order to assess the
efforts undertaken by the different international agencies and organizations
involved in the implementation of the Peace Agreement, and inform them of the
conclusions of the meetings of the Steering Board.
13. I have continued extensive consultations with representatives of
Governments and organizations. Since the beginning of the year, I have met,
inter alia, with the OSCE Chairman-in-Office and the authorities of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO).
14. In Sarajevo, I have continued to convene, on a regular basis, principals'
meetings with the participation of the Special Representative of the United
Nations Secretary-General, the IPTF Commissioner, the Special Envoy of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the
Commander of the Stabilization Force (SFOR) and the OSCE Head of Mission. These
meetings have proved helpful and effective in coordinating efforts of the key
implementation structures on the ground, particularly in facilitating the work
of the new common institutions and in defusing potentially dangerous situations
in the zone of separation. I expect that this format will be maintained through
the consolidation period.
15. The Economic Task Force, which meets on a regular basis in Sarajevo, is now
operational and proves to be a useful tool to ensure coordination of principles
and priorities of international reconstruction assistance.
16. At the end of January, I initiated the establishment of the Reconstruction
and Return Task Force, composed of my Office, UNHCR, the European Community, the
World Bank, the International Management Group and the Property Rights
Commission. After the first high-level session of the Reconstruction and Return
Task Force at Geneva, a series of meetings have been held in Sarajevo with the
aim of presenting a policy paper to the international community by early April.
17. The Freedom of Movement Task Force, mandated at the London Conference and
consisting of representatives of my Office, IPTF and SFOR and interested
countries, was established on 20 December. The Task Force has met a number of
times since its establishment and is exploring various implementing mechanisms
to promote freedom of movement for people, goods and mail.

Common institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina
18. The Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina provides for six common
institutions in annex 4 of the Peace Agreement: the Presidency, the Council of
Ministers, the Parliamentary Assembly, the Constitutional Court, the Central
Bank and the Standing Committee on Military Matters.

/...

S/1997/310
English
Page 6

19. Following my activities in late 1996 to implement the results of the
September elections, my Office worked hard to ensure that the key bodies of the
common institutions - the Council of Ministers and the Parliamentary Assembly were operational from the beginning of January. Progress has been slow; they
are functioning, but have yet to become truly effective and self-sustaining.
Presidency
20. The Presidency held seven regular working sessions during the reporting
period. The Presidency nominated the Co-Chairs of the Council of Ministers of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, signed agreements with the European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF) and the World Bank and agreed to establish a Standing Committee on
Military Matters. The Presidency also signed the decisions on interim financing
of the Presidency and its offices; on interim accommodation for the members of
the Presidency and their offices, and on establishment and internal organization
of the Offices. The Presidency has also carried out some procedural tasks such
as accepting the accreditation of several Ambassadors to Bosnia and Herzegovina,
forming working groups and attributing tasks to the Council of Ministers.
21. The Presidency has a number of important outstanding issues on its current
agenda. The establishment of the Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina, for
example, could not be finalized by the Council of Ministers. The Presidency has
instructed the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to prepare a proposal for the
division of posts of ambassadors and other international representatives of
Bosnia and Herzegovina abroad. This proposal has not yet been submitted. The
London Conference conclusions refer to the responsibility of the Presidency for
appointing ambassadors, and urges them to appoint any new or replacement
ambassadors by the end of March 1997; however, this has yet to happen.
22. Given the crucial importance of international assistance to the
reconstruction of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the key role of the Council of
Ministers in helping to secure that assistance, my Office organized an Economic
Policy Forum on 12 January following the appointment of the Council of
Ministers. Organized in coordination with the International Monetary Fund
(IMF), the World Bank, the European Commission and the United States Treasury,
the event was used to clarify the necessary action for an agreement with IMF,
the principle precondition for holding the next donor conference. A joint
short-term action plan and mid-term structural reform programme were presented.
My Office's efforts in the subsequent months have centred on the passage of the
emergency economic legislation within the quick start package (foreign trade,
external debt, Central Bank, budget, customs policy and tariffs). This also
enabled my Office to inject some substance into the new institutions from their
inception.
Council of Ministers
23. The Council of Ministers met for its first session on 3 January 1997
following its appointment at the inaugural meeting of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
House of Peoples. From January to the end of March the Council met in formal
session on 14 occasions, and informally, or for "extraordinary" sessions,
3 times. Despite an increasingly cooperative atmosphere between the Council
/...

S/1997/310
English
Page 7

members, few decisions have been forthcoming. However, its work is improving
with each session and progress, although slow, is evident.
24. One of the more difficult issues in the first two months was the adoption
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure, which were eventually signed on
20 February 1997. The main point of contention concerned the role of the Deputy
Ministers and whether they should be full members of the Council, with the
accompanying decision-making powers. A compromise was reached through provision
for consensual decision-making within each ministry, with differences of opinion
forwarded to the full Council. While cumbersome, these procedures should assist
in overcoming residual mistrust and suspicion, and are designed to ensure fully
participatory decision-making.
25. The quick start package was formally presented to the Council on 16 January
and working groups were established to study the various laws. These working
groups met at my Office, assisted by my staff, throughout the remainder of
January, February and into March. Status reports, and eventually the laws
themselves, were brought to the Council at the weekly sessions. Either I or my
Principal Deputy have attended most of the Council sessions, and we have often
been able to assist in clarifying or arbitrating in disputes, usually involving
questions regarding the extent of the state authority provided in the
Constitution. Currently, the Council has concluded work on two of the laws, and
work continues on the remainder.
26. Little has been accomplished with regard to the common staff, structures or
organization of the ministries. While each of the Council members now has
offices in their respective entities, and a few personal assistants, neither the
"services" envisioned in the rules of procedure nor the individual ministries
have been established. The question of a permanent location for the common
institutions must also be resolved. To address these issues, and in keeping
with former practices, a Law on the Council of Ministers and Ministries, based
on a draft produced by my Office, will be presented. It will undoubtedly prove
contentious, as it will have to address issues regarding the competencies of the
ministries, their location, and the status of the extant state structures of the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina. These issues must take priority in the
coming months, concurrent with efforts to wean the common institutions from the
support provided by my Office.
House of Representatives
27. The House of Representatives held its constitutive session in Sarajevo on
3 January. At this session the Verification Committee verified the mandates of
all Members elected in the September elections. The House of Representatives
also adopted its provisional rules of procedure and selected from its members
one Serb, one Bosniak and one Croat to serve as its Chair and two Deputy-Chairs.
According to the rules and regulations, the post of the Chair will rotate every
eight months between them. At the same session, the House of Representatives
approved a nomination of two Co-Chairs and the composition of the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

/...

S/1997/310
English
Page 8

House of Peoples
28. The House of Peoples was constituted on 3 January 1997 in Sarajevo. At
this first session, the Verification Committee verified the mandates of all its
members. The House of Peoples has also adopted its provisional rules of
procedure and selected from its members the Chair and two Co-Chairs of the
House.
29. As progress with the quick start package has been slow, the Houses have not
met since their first session. My Office is currently facilitating meetings
between the Collegiums of Chair and Deputy-Chairs of both Houses to prepare for
the next session. Disagreements on the contents of the agenda have resulted in
the session being postponed a number of times; at present it is scheduled for
30 April 1997. The agenda should include the formation of the Committees of
both Houses, the adoption of the quick start package draft laws submitted by the
Council of Ministers and the ratification of international agreements signed by
the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Collegiums are also discussing
the organization of a secretariat for the Parliamentary Assembly.
Constitutional Court
30. All judges of the Constitutional Court have now been appointed. The judges
from Republika Srpska were appointed at the session of the National Assembly of
Republika Srpska on 16 March. The House of Representatives of the Federation
elected two Bosniak judges on 24 January and two Croat judges on 18 March.
Central Bank
31. The Board of Governors of the Central Bank has been appointed and is
meeting regularly and frequently, chaired by the international Governor,
Mr. Serge Robert. The Board has worked intensively on a draft law on the new
Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina and has resolved most technical problems
related to the establishment of the Central Bank. Disagreement still exists
with respect to the number of branches, the name of the currency, the design of
the bank notes and the duration of the interim period until a new currency can
be established.
Standing Committee for Military Matters
32. The Presidency has taken the first step in establishing a Standing
Committee for Military Matters, and endorsed its adoption at a recent Presidency
session. Work must now proceed to ensure that the Committee meets and begins to
function as a means of creating a confidence-building mechanism that promotes
stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in its relations with neighbouring
countries. Initially, this should involve the exchange of information and
strengthening of links between entity defence and military staffs. Thereafter,
greater transparency will be needed to define the Committee's civilian command
authority and its responsibilities within Bosnia and Herzegovina's
constitutional framework, and to correlate this with the entities' defence laws.
In due time, and before SFOR withdraws, the Committee should assume a number of
the functions of the Joint Military Commission.

/...

S/1997/310
English
Page 9

Essential legislation
Law on citizenship
33. Of the non-economic laws included in the quick start package, the law on
citizenship of Bosnia and Herzegovina is one of the most sensitive. The
Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina states that there is a citizenship of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, to be regulated by the Parliamentary Assembly, as well
as a citizenship of each of the entities to be regulated by each entity,
provided that all citizens of either entity are thereby citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It is therefore essential that the entity laws are identical to
the largest extent possible and are fully in line with the Bosnia and
Herzegovina law on citizenship.
34. One of the working groups appointed by the Council of Ministers has
considered the draft in close cooperation with my Office. At a recent meeting
at the Council of Europe in Strasbourg, the members of the working group,
representatives of the Legal Department of my Office and experts of the Council
of Europe were able to find some solutions; however, a number of disputed issues
remain. Of particular concern is the Republika Srpska's decision to extend
citizenship of the Republika Srpska to residents of the former Yugoslavia,
provided they register residence by the end of June 1998.
Law on passports
35. Closely related to citizenship is the issuing of passports and other travel
documents. It is essential that all citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in both
entities, have access to internationally recognized passports. The draft law on
passports, which is included in the quick start package, regulates the form of
the passports and the way they are issued. The draft is currently being
discussed by the working group.
Law on immunity
36. Included in the quick start package is also a draft law on immunity. The
draft has recently been agreed upon by the Council of Ministers and will shortly
be submitted to the Parliamentary Assembly. Members of the Presidency, the
Parliamentary Assembly, the Council of Ministers, the judges of the
Constitutional Court and the Governor and members of the Governing Board of the
Central Bank are granted immunity for acts performed within the scope of their
duties.

Joint commissions
37. Activities of the Provisional Election Commission (Annex 3), chaired by
OSCE, are referred to in the elections section of the present report.
Commission on Human Rights
38. The Commission on Human Rights (Annex 6), composed of the Human Rights
Chamber and the Ombudsperson, continued its work. To date, the Ombudsperson's
/...

S/1997/310
English
Page 10

Office has opened approximately 1,200 provisional files, registered nearly 500
cases and referred 29 cases to the Human Rights Chamber. More than 55 requests
for interim measures (under which the relevant Government is asked to refrain
from taking certain actions pending review by the Ombudsperson) have been
issued. The Human Rights Chamber began its first public hearing on
6 February 1997 and has now issued its rules of procedure.
39. The Human Rights Ombudsperson has recently issued final reports in several
cases, finding human rights violations by both the Federation and the Republika
Srpska, and has prepared a special report relating to violations of freedom of
expression within the Republika Srpska. The authorities have been given until
late April to respond to those findings. My Office will monitor the response of
the authorities closely, and will intervene as necessary to support the findings
of the Ombudsperson.
40. The response of the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina to these new
institutions remains substantially inadequate. Neither entity has taken the
concrete steps necessary to establish the Commission as an integral part of the
legal framework of Bosnia and Herzegovina; to ensure full cooperation with the
Ombudsperson and Human Rights Chamber by authorities at all levels; to establish
procedures for assisting with human rights investigations and responding to
requests or reports from the Ombudsperson and the Chamber; or to adopt
legislation providing for the implementation and enforcement of their decisions.
41. Both institutions require additional support from the international
community. On 25 February, the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina expressed
its support for the Commission and its commitment to fulfil its obligation under
the Peace Agreement to provide sufficient funding. Given current economic
constraints, the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina has asked the
international community to support a funding appeal by OSCE and the Council of
Europe on behalf of the Commission.
42. Many victims of human rights violations in Bosnia and Herzegovina remain
unaware of either their legal rights or the possible remedies available to them.
Human rights organizations are encouraging the referral of cases to domestic
human rights institutions and are assisting in publicizing their work. It is
essential that the Commission on Human Rights have an impact throughout Bosnia
and Herzegovina. To that end, additional steps should be taken to distribute
information concerning the Commission (in particular, the Human Rights Chamber)
beyond Sarajevo, especially in the Republika Srpska.
Commission to Preserve National Monuments
43. The Commission to Preserve National Monuments (Annex 8), coordinated by the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), has
established its working secretariat in Sarajevo and a back-up secretariat in
Paris. Both are currently financed by UNESCO; proper funding through the
entities' budgets has yet to be established. The Commission is studying the
lists of national monuments submitted by the parties, with the intention of
producing a consolidated list of designated national heritage sites. The
Commission intends to establish a mechanism for the preservation of the
designated cultural heritage of Bosnia and Herzegovina and, ultimately, to hand
/...

S/1997/310
English
Page 11

over to a state-level institution. The Commission held its third session on
31 January and intends to reconvene in April.
Commission on Public Corporations
44. Despite numerous meetings and proposals from its international members on
possible institutional structures for joint public facilities, the Commission on
Public Corporations (Annex 9) has not reached any agreement. Moreover, the
Commission has refused to give any guidance to the technical working groups that
have been created to examine specific operational problems in some areas. The
situation is particularly acute in the power and railway sectors and an
agreement to establish a transportation corporation has remained a dead paper.
I am, therefore, convening a meeting of the two Prime Ministers of the entities
to examine the overall problem of public corporations and to try to resolve the
evident political impasse.
Elections
45. The municipal elections this year will be of critical importance to the
future development of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Their preparation must be closely
correlated with the overall implementation of the Peace Agreement. Considerable
resources, both financial and in terms of experienced elections personnel, will
be required to supervise the preparation and conduct of the elections and to
ensure that the results are fully implemented.
46. The overall approach to the preparation of the elections should continue to
be as prescribed by the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council in
October 1996, namely, higher quality for the municipal elections than that which
prevailed for the general elections in September 1996; complete international
supervision of all of the polling stations and of every stage of the election
process; and that OSCE should have the structures for the likely re-runs as well
as for the installation of the elected officials.
47. At the London Peace Implementation Conference in December 1996 it was
agreed that the elections would be held by the summer of 1997. In its
21 January election plan for municipal elections, the OSCE Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina announced a target date of 12 and 13 July, which proved to be
untenable. Planning proceeded accordingly until the end of February. On
6 March, the OSCE Chairman-in-Office announced that, given the need for highquality elections and firmness after these elections, he had decided that the
elections should take place on 13 and 14 September. The decision to defer the
municipal elections has provided a realistic time-frame in which the elections
can be thoroughly prepared.
48. The Provisional Election Commission began its regulatory work in
mid-January, somewhat later than had been anticipated. It has adopted a number
of significant rules, in particular those which were necessary to accommodate
the November 1996 memorandum of understanding between OSCE and the Republika
Srpska, in which it was agreed that refugees may vote in an intended place of
residence. Given the gross manipulation that took place in the registration
process for the 1996 general elections, the Provisional Election Commission

/...

S/1997/310
English
Page 12

adopted specific rules stipulating the requirements should refugees decide to
vote in an intended place of residence.
49. A new affirmative voter registration has also been agreed by the
Provisional Election Commission. If well prepared and properly executed under
close international supervision, this registration should lead to a clearly
defined electorate, thus avoiding the confusion and disputes that arose in
September 1996. The challenges in registering voters remain considerable,
however. For registration to succeed:
(a) The local election commissions must be trained and fully functioning
well before the beginning of the registration process on 5 May;
(b) All those who are eligible to register must be able to do so in
conveniently located registration centres. The Provisional Election
Commission's 11 February decision to ensure international supervision of all of
these centres is a significant measure by which the potential for fraud can be
curtailed;
(c) The number and location of the polling stations must be carefully
correlated with the specific requirements of each municipality. There should
also be confidence that the number of polling stations currently envisaged,
2,300, is sufficient;
(d) A massive and effective voter education campaign will be required
because an active voter registration process is not part of local political
tradition.
50. The Provisional Election Commission has also adopted a number of other
rules, including those which provide for the participation of political parties
in the work of the local election commissions. It has also strengthened its
provisions regarding the media. The Commission should complete its regulatory
work soon and try to avoid preparing rules late in the electoral process, as
happened in 1996.
51. The municipal basis for the elections in the Federation needs to be
resolved, both with regard to those municipalities which were divided by the
inter-entity boundary line, and from the perspective of the calls for the
establishment of some new municipalities within the Federation. An Advisory
Commission, which worked under the auspices of the Council of Europe, was
established by the Federation Forum on 3 February to examine these issues. Its
opinion - in the form of a draft law prepared by my Legal Department and experts
of the Council of Europe - was communicated to the Federation Government on
3 March. The Federation Ministries of Justice and Urban Planning are currently
preparing a final text, which will be submitted shortly to the Federation
Parliamentary Assembly. An early decision is required to enable OSCE to proceed
in its planning with a clear vision of the Federation's municipal structure.
52. The London Conference conclusions stressed the importance of tackling the
crucial post-election issues. Recent events in Serbia have underlined that the
electoral process does not stop on polling day: officials must be able to take
office and perform their duties. As the London Conference had requested close
/...

S/1997/310
English
Page 13

coordination on the planning of the election process and the management of the
post-election period, my Office prepared a preliminary paper on those issues for
the 21 January meeting of the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation
Council. Considerable problems can be expected with the implementation of the
election results; OSCE has, therefore, recently established a post-election
planning group, in which my Office, IPTF, SFOR, UNHCR, the European Community
Monitoring Mission and the Council of Europe participate.
53. A sound electoral process is the essential ingredient in the peace
implementation process in 1997. Quality, determination and complete
implementation of the election results will be essential for the advancement of
the democratic process in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Federation issues
54. The implementation of the Federation remains one of the major fields of
activity of my Office. The first months of 1997 were characterized by
continuing mistrust between the Federation partners. In January, the Prime
Minister called publicly for the resignation of his Deputy because of some
alleged customs irregularities. At the end of the same month, the Croatian
Democratic Union (HDZ) froze its participation in the Federation Government and
the Federation Assembly until some unsettled issues were resolved, in particular
the formation of new municipalities.
55. At a Federation Forum on 3 February, my Office, in cooperation with the
United States Government, tried to bridge some of the most recent differences.
Agreement was reached on the establishment of an advisory commission, led by the
European Council, to address the question of municipalities. In addition, the
next steps on organizational questions regarding Sarajevo and Mostar, as well as
the new dates for the formation of the Federation police, were agreed.
56. However, none of the deadlines could be kept owing to an eruption of
violence in Mostar on 10 February, when West Mostar police officers shot at the
backs of Bosniak cemetery visitors. This was followed by a series of assaults
on travellers in the Mostar area and a wave of evictions in West Mostar. In
response, my Principal Deputy, together with the Commander of SFOR and the
IPTF Commissioner, assembled Federation leaders on 12 February, and reached
agreement on the decisions on Mostar, in which the Task Force was requested to
submit a report on the 10 February events. In its report of 24 February, three
police officers were clearly identified as perpetrators of the shooting. The
conclusions from the report, in particular the arrest and punishment of the
perpetrators, were endorsed by the Security Council on 11 March. As yet, there
has not been compliance. On 25 March, IPTF and my Office submitted a second
report on the situation in Mostar, from 1 January to 15 February, which
graphically illustrated that neither the political authorities, nor the police
of Mostar, had reacted appropriately to the human rights and security situation
in the city. It further outlined the consistent police failure to respond to
incidents involving victims of an ethnicity other than their own.
57. After international pressure and some intervention from Zagreb, the
situation in Mostar calmed down and the security environment improved in the
/...

S/1997/310
English
Page 14

aftermath of 10 February, some West Mostar gang leaders were arrested, amongst
them strongmen Mladen Tuta Nalctelic and Vinko Stela Martinovic, both of whom
are being held in prison in Zagreb. In the medium and long term, these arrests
may add to the stabilization of the situation in Mostar, but the crimes
committed on 10 February remain unpunished. On 4 April, the United Police Force
of Mostar started to function again, working in joint cantonal police uniforms,
an important step towards the unification of the police in the whole of the
Herzegovina Neretva Canton, possibly in late April.
58. In March, the HDZ returned to the Federation Assembly and Government. On
18 March, both Federation Houses elected the new Federation President,
Vladimir Soljic, and his Deputy, Ejup Ganic. On 20 March, the Government
adopted a draft law on the Federation Implementation Council, which will, if
adopted by the Federation Assembly, facilitate the removal from office of
officials who obstruct the implementation of the Federation. On the financial
side, the customs system was put back on track after some danger of falling
apart in January and February. On 20 March, the Government adopted the
Federation budget, which now awaits approval by the Assembly, scheduled for
16 April.
59. On 26 February, the Advisory Commission on Municipalities finished its work
on the splitting of municipalities and the first group of new municipalities,
and submitted a draft law to the Government. Owing to some of the proposed new
municipalities' being contested, in particular the Croat-populated Usora, the
Government has not yet agreed on the draft law, thus posing a considerable
problem to OSCE, which has to proceed with its planning for the municipal
elections.
60. On 27 March, leaders of the parties represented in the Sarajevo Canton
Assembly signed a comprehensive agreement on the implementation of the Sarajevo
Protocol. Precise steps were outlined to establish the City Council, elect a
mayor of Sarajevo and his deputies, and to amend the Federation and Canton
Constitutions. Bosniaks, Croats and Serbs will have guaranteed rights in the
governance of the city. If implemented, this would constitute a significant
step towards ensuring the multi-ethnic character of Sarajevo, facilitating
return, improving the climate in the Federation and ultimately providing the
possibility for all peoples and citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina to identify
with their capital.
61. At the end of the reporting period, the recent crisis in the Federation
appears to have been overcome, for the time being. It is clear that the
implementation process needs further international attention and assistance, in
particular regarding return of refugees and displaced persons. The relations
within the Federation also depend, to a considerable degree, on the relations
between the entities and within the common institutions.

Republika Srpska issues
62. The formation of the entity structures, as well as necessary legislative
framework, has continued in the Republika Srpska. The National Assembly of the
Republika Srpska held three sessions during the reporting period. The deputies
/...

S/1997/310
English
Page 15

to the National Assembly, elected on the territory of the Federation, were
allowed to participate fully in the work of the National Assembly without taking
an oath. In order to facilitate their participation, my Office and IPTF
provides technical support.
63. Since my last report (S/1996/1024), the reorganization of the structure of
the Government has been finalized. The National Assembly adopted at its
7 February session the Law on the Government of Republika Srpska and Law on
Ministries. These laws rationalized the structure of the Government and
decreased the total number of ministries. The main pillars of the programme of
the Government remain: defence of territorial integrity; organized settlement
of the population to areas close to the inter-entity boundary line; economic
reconstruction; and social protection of the people.
64. There are a number of issues, however, about which I am concerned. The
Republika Srpska continues the pretence of statehood; a number of its laws are
filled with references and terminology to this effect. The continuation of the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs is contrary to the Peace Agreement, as is the
reference to crucial issues of foreign economic policy in the newly adopted Law
on the Senate of the Republika Srpska. A Law on Foreign Exchange, while short
on specifics, gives wide powers to the National Bank of Republika Srpska to
legislate the operation of the foreign exchange market and refers to "new
dinars" as the domestic currency. The recent amendments to the Law on
Citizenship will further retard the process of agreeing on the quick start
package.
65. An agreement between the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and Republika
Srpska, establishing a "special parallel relationship", was signed in Belgrade
on 28 February 1997 and was subsequently adopted by the Assemblies of the
Republika Srpska and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. The agreement contains
similar elements as those included in the agreement concluded between Croatia,
the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Federation, in Paris on
15 December 1995. Though the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina allows for
"special parallel relationships" (Article III.2 a), my Office has considered the
agreements and found that both suffer from constitutional shortcomings.
Negotiations are also proceeding on the formation of a virtual customs union
between the Republika Srpska and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and I have
warned that this would be contrary to the Peace Agreement. We must insist that
all agreements be reviewed by the Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly
and brought into line with the Constitution.
66. I am also concerned about the apparent disrespect displayed by some leaders
in the Republika Srpska for the provisions and procedures of the Republika
Srpska Constitution. This was especially evident during the conclusion of the
above-mentioned agreement on a "special parallel relationship" with the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, which was signed on behalf of the Republika Srpska by
Momcilo Krajišnik, the member from the territory of the Republika Srpska in the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in violation of the Republika Srpska
Constitution.
67. While such legislative posturing continues, the Republika Srpska economy is
slipping further into decay. The initial boost from the return to peace was
/...

S/1997/310
English
Page 16

short-lived and there is still large-scale unemployment, low income levels and a
severely limited ability to care for the elderly and poor. My Office has made
strenuous efforts to redirect the flow of international aid to the Republika
Srpska in order to revitalize the economy and prevent inevitable social
tensions.
68. At the same time, such aid must be conditioned to cooperation with the
peace process. The authorities in the Republika Srpska must be convinced that
their activities could lead to a severe reduction in planned economic aid and an
increase in social turmoil, which would, ultimately, be to their own
disadvantage and that of the people they purport to represent.

Media
69. Events elsewhere in the region underline the vital role of independent
media in achieving democracy and stability. My Office is giving high priority
to entrenching and consolidating independent media in all parts of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
70. The London Conference conclusions gave a reinforced role to my Office in
coordinating international support to independent media projects: there are now
regular media roundtables in Sarajevo with all major donors. A detailed
database of existing and proposed projects has been set up, and an effective
instrument now exists for avoiding overlap between different donors and
agencies, and promoting cooperation between them.
71. My Office plays its most active role in assisting the Open Broadcast
Network, as Chair of the Governing Council and its Steering Committee. The
Network is the only true cross-entity broadcaster in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It
carries the programming of TV-IN to most areas of the Federation and to much of
the Republika Srpska in the area around Banja Luka. The project has had to
overcome a number of institutional and technical problems. It has also had to
endure much politically inspired public criticism designed to undermine what
remains a fledgling but maturing television network. As such it continues to
need the support, protection and nurture of the international community. The
Network is now embarking on Stage Two of its development, a $7.4 million
programme that will roughly double the audience for its programmes, set up a
full-fledged affiliate station in the Republika Srpska with its own local
identity and expand substantially the programming capacity both of the central
hub in Sarajevo and of the affiliates. Stage Two will aim to consolidate the
Network's operations over a two-year period, after which it should be selfsustaining.
72. The Republika Srpska is a crucial target in my efforts to promote
independent media. A proposal for an independent printing house in Banja Luka
is being finalized in conjunction with the democratization working group in
Banja Luka; funding is being made available from European Union (EU) sources.
As western Herzegovina is even more closed than the Republika Srpska to
independent media, my Office is also seeking a proactive strategy with other
international institutions and donors to promote the independent media in that
region of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
/...

S/1997/310
English
Page 17

73. At present, there is no comprehensive framework for the legal regulation of
media in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Federation does not even have a media law.
My Office co-chairs with the United States Embassy the Federation Forum special
group on media issues, and has given the Federation partners, as a possible
basis for discussion, draft laws on broadcasting prepared by the European
Institute for the Media. My Office is also in close touch with the Presidency
working group preparing draft legislation on telecommunications, which has some
limited implications for broadcasting. Our interest in the field of media law
is in ensuring basic media freedoms and protecting independent media. It will
be particularly important to ensure the position of cross-entity broadcasters
within this framework.

Return of refugees and displaced persons
74. The beginning of 1997 has signalled a major push to repatriate refugees.
Approximately 235,000 refugees and displaced persons are believed to have
returned to their homes during 1996, mainly on a spontaneous and individual
basis; the scene for 1997 promises to be more complex. Some host countries in
Europe have started to lift temporary protection status and have begun largescale organized repatriation. This is likely to create further disruption; the
influx of returnees in 1996 has already used up much of the housing capacity in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Additionally, the homes of the refugees are, by and
large, either destroyed or occupied by internally displaced people. A possible
influx of Serbs from Eastern Slavonia into the Republika Srpska would merely
exacerbate the problem.
75. Violent incidents, such as the shootings in Mostar on 10 February and the
deliberate destruction of houses and shelters in the zone of separation,
indicate the hostile environment minority returns can encounter. Nonetheless,
the process of normalization has provided some openings to individual and lowprofile minority returns. UNHCR estimates the number involved to be about
10,000, many more are signalling their wish to return to their homes across the
inter-entity boundary line in both directions.
76. Since my last report, my Office has concentrated its efforts in three
fields: the establishment of the Reconstruction and Return Task Force; support
for the Coalition for Return; the implementation of the procedure for return and
reconstruction in the zone of separation. Furthermore, my Office's overall
efforts towards the economic reconstruction of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
functioning common institutions and the improvement of the overall human rights,
policing and judicial situation can be expected to have beneficial effects for
the provision of durable solutions for displaced persons and returning refugees.
77. After consultations with UNHCR and other main actors, including the
European Commission and the international financial institutions, I called for
the inaugural meeting of the Reconstruction and Return Task Force on 4 February.
The Task Force has sought to develop links between economic reconstruction and
the return of refugees to maximize the impact of limited resources in supporting
sustainable returns. Among the conclusions of the Task Force have been the need
to focus resources in areas where there is both economic potential and expected
refugee return, and the need to identify loan mechanisms to overcome the major
/...

S/1997/310
English
Page 18

financing gap in the housing and relevant infrastructure sectors.
Force will submit recommendations to the donor community.

The Task

78. The Coalition for Return, a movement of displaced persons and refugees of
all nationalities and from all parts of Bosnia and Herzegovina, has continued to
grow during the reporting period. A number of refugee associations in third
countries have also joined. By jointly expressing their interests, those most
affected by the war and manipulation by the authorities are becoming a
significant political force at the grass-roots level. This was expressed by the
gathering of 270 members of the Coalition in Tuzla on 22 and 23 February. The
Coalition has promoted the creation of an information network between displaced
persons by organizing visits to communities throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Material support has been received to establish regional offices that will
further improve contacts; the first is planned to open in April. My Office will
continue to give technical and political support to the Coalition until such
support is no longer required.
79. Returns to the zone of separation, on the basis of the procedure
established in October 1996, have met a mixed fate. Violence directed against
the labourers and the destruction of the prefabricated provisional shelters in
the hamlet of Gajevi has hit the headlines. However, the successful
administrative integration of returned villagers by Republika Srpska
authorities, and joint police patrolling of Republika Srpska police and the
International Police Task Force in the Sapna and Doboj areas, do indicate a
changing attitude in some areas. Likewise, the Federation authorities have
recognized that cross-inter-entity boundary line returns into the zone of
separation have to be conducted in a civil and orderly manner.
80. Returns to the zone of separation have also been achieved in the Brcko
municipality; reconstruction efforts have been ongoing under the adopted
procedure for approximately nine months, with only some initial incidents of
destruction of property. Returns to contentious areas and the endorsement of
the procedure by the President of the Republika Srpska and the joint Bosnia and
Herzegovina delegation to the UNHCR refugee ministers' meeting of 21 and
22 March give rise to the expectation that phased and orderly return to the zone
of separation might become a more common and less disputed element of the
stabilization process in 1997. A focused international effort will be needed to
bring about the revitalization and normalization of this area through the return
of its original inhabitants.
81. My Deputy in Brcko, acting as the supervisor, together with two deputies,
to implement the arbitration award of 14 February 1997, will soon establish and
oversee the realization of a special procedure to enable the return of original
inhabitants to Brcko. Return is a core element of the arbitration award.
82. My Office will continue its task to coordinate the efforts of international
actors to facilitate return and repatriation and to exercise contingency
measures. After its recommendations to the donor conference, the Reconstruction
and Return Task Force will remain engaged in efforts to harmonize economic
reconstruction with return requirements. I will continue to press the
Governments in Bosnia and Herzegovina to fulfil their obligations to create

/...

S/1997/310
English
Page 19

conditions favourable to return, and will closely monitor other durable
solutions offered to the community of displaced persons and refugees.

Freedom of movement
83. Improvements in freedom of movement have been facilitated by the
elimination of checkpoints and the establishment of inter-entity bus lines
operated by UNHCR. Under the auspices of UNHCR and the International Police
Task Force, visits to graveyards or former homes in the other entity have
increased. However, freedom of movement is severely restricted by inappropriate
policing practices and the lack of telecommunications and infrastructure.
84. The Freedom of Movement Task Force, mandated at the London Conference and
consisting of representatives of my Office, the IPTF and SFOR and interested
countries, has met a number of times to explore various implementing mechanisms
to promote freedom of movement for people, goods and mail.
85. Police practices in both entities are the single greatest obstacle to
freedom of movement. The police engage in conduct that tends to make the
inter-entity boundary line a boundary, especially along the major arteries
crossing the line. Checkpoints, the confiscation of documents and arbitrary
fines act as a deterrent to the movement of individuals. My Office fully
supports the work of the IPTF to restructure and retrain the local police forces
and I welcome the commitment to provide a further 186 IPTF monitors, and 11
civilians, for the Brcko region.
86. Uniform driver documentation and vehicle number plates would considerably
facilitate freedom of movement. This issue has been raised within the Council
of Ministers, though at present it is only being considered for those Ministers
and bureaucrats who need to cross the inter-entity boundary line. The Freedom
of Movement Task Force will also be considering alternative methods to resolve
the issue.
87. The internal transit agreement signed earlier in 1997 has contributed
towards the free movement of foreign goods between the two entities. The flow
of domestic goods has however encountered problems similar to those experienced
by private cars. Uniform number-plates and the adoption of the customs laws in
the quick start package are essential if there is to be real progress in this
field.
88. The cross-inter-entity boundary line bus lines established by UNHCR have
become an effective tool in promoting freedom of movement between the two
entities for displaced persons, returnees and the local population. Under the
auspices of my Office, the Chambers of Commerce and bus companies of the two
entities have been meeting to discuss the registration of inter-entity bus
lines. UNHCR will be included in future talks. The implementation of locally
run inter-entity passenger traffic will be a vital step forward to the
realization of freedom of movement.
89. Inter-entity railway traffic should be established. In early February, the
Commission for Public Corporations established a railways commission and four
/...

S/1997/310
English
Page 20

working groups to address the different aspects of the problem. Progress has
however floundered on the differing concepts of the railways structure.
90. Exchange of information and regular contact between the citizens of the two
entities would contribute towards a climate conducive to movement. My Office is
working with the European Commission to establish inter-entity
telecommunications, but has encountered considerable reluctance from all sides
to share exchanges or management. A new structural approach may have to be
adopted; it is also essential that frequency control, management and
telecommunications will be covered by just one of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
ministries.
91. In the Brcko area, the supervisor will promote a series of steps to ensure
freedom of movement of people, goods and commerce. The announcement by Bosnia
and Herzegovina and Croatia of their intention to start immediate discussions on
the rapid opening of their common border, with customs procedures and controls
consistent with European standards, will be of particular importance for the
Brcko area.
92. As part of the economic rehabilitation of the Brcko area, the European
Commission, the World Bank and the United States Agency for International
Development (USAID) have agreed to make major investments to improve road and
rail structures of the area. Measures are urgently needed to upgrade the eastwest road through the area, as well as the key road and rail bridges over the
River Sava both in the immediate Brcko area and further to the west at Orasje
and Samac. This would improve north-south communications for the unhindered use
of both entities and all communities of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The supervisor
will also study the river traffic in cooperation with the parties.

Missing persons, mass graves
93. The issue of missing persons remains highly volatile after a year of
halting and inadequate progress. The exact number of missing persons is
uncertain; the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) has received
tracing requests for more than 19,000 persons; the Bosnian authorities estimate
the number of missing to be closer to 30,000. To date, the status of
approximately 1,000 missing individuals has been clarified. Owing to the lack
of progress, ICRC is currently looking at new ways to move its tracing process
forward.
94. Recognizing that the missing are - with very few, if any, exceptions deceased, the local authorities, my Office and other members of the
international community have focused efforts on the exhumation of mass graves
and the clearing of unburied mortal remains. After the winter delay, the
parties met on 31 March under the auspices of my Office and agreed to resume
inter-entity exhumations on 10 April. Work will begin simultaneously at two
sites on that date.
95. While frustrating for the families of the missing, the winter-imposed break
in exhumations provided an opportunity for the international community to
organize resources and focus activities in order to improve the conduct of joint
/...

S/1997/310
English
Page 21

exhumations during 1997. Under the auspices of the Expert Group on Exhumations
and Missing Persons, chaired by my Office and consisting of several
international organizations, a number of efforts are under way to assist the
joint exhumation and identification process. These include projects by
Physicians for Human Rights to train Bosnian scientists and technicians in
exhumation techniques, to provide a coordinator for international forensic
monitoring of exhumations and to establish an ante-mortem database (in
conjunction with the Association for the Promotion of the Ludwig Boltzmann
Institute of Human Rights). Physicians for Human Rights is also working on an
identification project designed to assist in scientifically verifiable
identification of mortal remains.
96. The International Commission on Missing Persons announced at its meeting on
21 March that it had established a fund to aid family associations of missing
persons. The Commission has also indicated its willingness to support aspects
of the exhumation process such as the demining of exhumation sites and the
provision of equipment for exhumations and identification. Other assistance
provided by the international community includes donations from the Government
of Switzerland and the United Nations trust fund.
97. Although beneficial, these projects cannot by themselves resolve the many
issues relating to missing persons. Additional resources, security for
exhumation sites and substantial political will are required if this issue is to
be addressed effectively.

Human rights
98. The Peace Agreement expects the authorities to secure the highest level of
internationally recognized human rights; however there are many indications that
the responsible authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina do not view this
obligation as legally binding. The authorities have yet to take a number of
concrete steps to demonstrate their commitment to protecting human rights. For
example, both the Federation and the Republika Srpska conceded in July 1996 that
their laws relating to abandoned property were contrary to basic human rights.
Eight months later, neither entity has brought their laws into compliance with
the Peace Agreement. The Republika Srpska has still to amend its amnesty law to
extend coverage to persons who deserted or avoided military conscription. Such
delays pose a substantial obstacle to return of refugees and displaced people
and contribute to ethnic division.
99. The authorities responsible for protecting human rights, in particular the
police, continue to account for a substantial portion of reported abuses.
Political leaders and police in both the Federation and the Republika Srpska
have often implicitly condoned abuses by failing to respond appropriately. A
particularly egregious example is the failure of the Republika Srpska police to
conduct proper investigations into four separate cases in which Bosniaks were
murdered in Teslic, Doboj, Dubrave and Zvornik.
100. In addition, the police themselves are directly responsible for numerous
abuses, most notably the 10 February incident in Mostar in which uniformed and
plain clothes police fired at the backs of retreating civilians, killing one and
/...

S/1997/310
English
Page 22

injuring more than 20 people. Arrests have still not been made in the case of a
Bosniak man who was beaten to death while in police custody in Banja Luka last
summer; this month the local police proposed to the Ministry of Internal Affairs
of the Republika Srpska that the salaries of the five officers on duty be
partially docked for one month. In both entities there have been numerous
reports of beatings in detention.
101. These problems graphically illustrate the need for the restructuring and
training of the entities' police forces to be accelerated. While the vetting of
the Federation police forces is under way, the Republika Srpska has yet to
submit the lists of officers to be vetted. The Republika Srpska must fully
cooperate with the IPTF in the restructuring and reduction of the Republika
Srpska police force.
102. A precarious human rights situation, characterized by widespread
discrimination and abuse on ethnic grounds, continues to reign. Harassment of
minorities residing, visiting or travelling through areas where another group is
in the majority continues unabated. The most severe abuses are occurring in the
Republika Srpska and in Croat majority areas in western Herzegovina. A worrying
development during the reporting period has been the tit-for-tat attacks on
religious and cultural edifices, such as churches, mosques and cemeteries,
within the Federation.
103. Inter-ethnic tensions within the Federation and between the two entities
continues to prompt forced and illegal evictions of minorities. Destruction of
minority-owned homes in the zone of separation and in other towns during the
period under review further polluted the human rights environment in areas
targeted for return of refugees and displaced persons. Widespread
discrimination against ethnic minorities and supporters of opposition political
parties, in the fields of employment, education and access to services
continued, particularly in the Republika Srpska.
104. My Office is working with UNHCR and the Sarajevo city authorities to ensure
that housing reconstruction furthers the right of return of pre-war occupants.
Efforts continue to be directed at organizing local community councils, in areas
where tense relations are reported between displaced Bosniaks and remaining
Serbs. My Office has organized meetings between local authorities from Sarajevo
canton and adjoining areas of the Republika Srpska to initiate police
cooperation against crime; encourage freedom of movement; and to discuss
possibilities of inter-entity economic cooperation in the wider Sarajevo region.
105. At its final meeting of 1996, the Human Rights Task Force set priorities
for 1997 based on its assessment of the accomplishments and shortcomings of the
human rights community's efforts to date. Priorities for this year include:
human rights institution-building, involving both strengthening of human rights
institutions and support for non-governmental organizations; development of a
human rights culture through public information, education and democratization
initiatives; strengthening the rule of law through projects including
incorporation of human rights standards into law and reform of legal,
administrative and law enforcement institutions.

/...

S/1997/310
English
Page 23

106. Given the multiplicity of organizations involved in the human rights field,
the Human Rights Task Force called for improved integration of activities at an
operational level, as well as better coordination of responses to human rights
abuses. To address these objectives, the Human Rights Coordination Centre
Steering Board was established on 8 January 1997. The Steering Board, which is
composed of the leading human rights/democratization officers of the major
international implementing organizations, has been working to restructure
coordination efforts to address both longer-term initiatives, as well as
monitoring and response to more immediate issues.
107. Failure to implement the human rights provisions of the Peace Agreement
should also be addressed by introducing new techniques to sanction
non-compliance and by strengthening existing mechanisms. During 1996, the
actions of some individuals hampered reconciliation and damaged the peace
process. As agreed, an additional sanction that my Office will employ this year
will be to request that persons who engage in substantial acts of non-compliance
or human rights violations be denied visas allowing them to travel abroad. This
sanction has now been applied for the first time on the three policemen
identified as shooting at the retreating crowd in Mostar. Other strategies are
being developed, including a more coordinated system for joint demarches to
interested Governments and intergovernmental institutions, and methods to ensure
effective and thorough incorporation of human rights considerations into
decision-making relating to economic assistance and reconstruction.

Cooperation with the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and strengthening the rule of law
108. The failure of responsible authorities, particularly in the Republika
Srpska, to fulfil their legal obligation to cooperate with the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, continues. The Republika Srpska has refused
to arrest and surrender persons indicted by the Tribunal, relying on a provision
in their Constitution that is clearly superseded by the Constitution of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and other Annexes of the Peace Agreement. Concurrently, Bosnian
Croat authorities have failed to arrest the numerous indicted persons who reside
in or visit areas of the Federation previously under the control of the Croatian
Defence Council (HVC). The presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina of people
indicted by the Tribunal is a continuing threat to the peace process and a
serious impediment to reconciliation. The responsible authorities must take
immediate steps to execute arrest warrants for persons indicted by the Tribunal,
to submit all cases involving suspected war crimes to it for review prior to
arrest or prosecution by national courts, and to provide information to assist
in Tribunal investigations.
109. The Steering Board has agreed that my Office will compile the necessary
information to implement concrete measures against municipalities, such as
Prijedor and Bosanski Samac, in which indicted persons hold public office.
110. During the reporting period, the Federation has taken some belated steps to
implement the "rules of the road" agreed in Rome on 18 February 1996 by
identifying cases submitted for review by the Tribunal. The Republika Srpska
has submitted virtually no cases for review, and continues prosecutions in both
/...

S/1997/310
English
Page 24

of the cases submitted in violation of the Rome agreement. In addition, both
the Federation and the Republika Srpska continue to detain persons suspected of
war crimes in violation of the Rome agreement.
111. Both entities should implement the rules of the road without further delay
by submitting files on all persons suspected of war crimes to The Hague;
terminating all prosecutions of persons for whom files have not been sent to the
Tribunal; and releasing immediately any person detained on suspicion of war
crimes should the Tribunal determine that the evidence submitted is not
sufficient to warrant further detention or investigation. No arrests of war
crimes suspects should occur prior to review and approval of a case by the
Tribunal. It is essential that the international community provide the Tribunal
with the resources it needs to fulfil its commitment to implement the rules of
the road procedure and to monitor prosecutions and trials by national courts.
112. With regard to persons detained following the peace agreement, substantial
human rights violations continue. Arbitrary detentions, including cases of
tit-for-tat arrests, continue, as does the wartime practice of detaining people
for the purposes of exchange. In late March the Federation authorities in Bihac
failed to release a Serb detained without sufficient evidence until a Bosniak
held in Banja Luka was released. The risk of arrest, which is compounded by the
lack of clarity on who is being sought for war crimes, substantially impedes
freedom of movement.
113. These problems demonstrate the importance of strengthening the rule of law
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The extensive list of human rights obligations,
which form part of the Constitution, must be brought into law through adoption
of implementing legislation and by review of existing laws to determine their
compatibility with international human rights standards, in particular with the
European Convention on Human Rights. The Federation has now formed an expert
team to reform its criminal law and criminal procedure code; the Republika
Srpska should begin this process with expedition and support from international
institutions, including the Council of Europe. A greater effort is also
required to inform the public both of their rights and of the legal framework
which has been created to protect those rights. By monitoring sensitive trials
and intervening to ensure that essential rights, such as the right to legal
counsel, are protected, human rights organizations can play a vital role in
deterring human rights abuses and building confidence in the legal system.

Economic reform and reconstruction
114. I have intensified my coordination efforts with major implementation
agencies and international financing institutions, namely the World Bank, the
European Commission, EBRD, IMF and the International Management Group, by
creating a secretariat attached to the Economic Task Force. This initiative has
been supported by the recent secondment of two additional economists from the
World Bank and the European Commission.
115. In the first quarter of 1997, with the exception of the extension to the
USAID programme for 1997 ($71 million), no other major credit or grant
agreements on reconstruction projects were signed with Bosnia and Herzegovina
/...

S/1997/310
English
Page 25

authorities. Implementation of ongoing projects has continued, however, and
there is still a significant amount of project aid to be disbursed from 1996.
In order to adjust the imbalance of last year, when virtually all reconstruction
projects were conducted in the Federation, a project for critical imports and a
transport sector programme for the Republika Srpska have been prepared by the
World Bank and are scheduled to be presented to the World Bank Board in May.
With respect to telecommunications, the European Commission has recently signed
a contract to finance the repair of the Republika Srpska backbone system and its
eventual linkage to the Federation.
116. Significant, but slow, progress has been made with respect to agreeing the
minimum legal framework necessary for the development of the macro-economy and
for reaching an agreement with IMF. After the presentation of the draft laws in
the quick start package, which were prepared by various international lead
agencies in coordination with my Office, substantial time was absorbed in expert
working groups created by the Council of Ministers. Because of the delay, it
has not yet been possible to hold the planned donors conference. However, most
laws have now reached the stage where they can soon be presented to the
Parliamentary Assembly, and my Office has been working with the Chairs of both
Houses in order to facilitate their swift passage.
117. Within the framework of the transition to a market economy, I have
continued to stress priority sectors such as infrastructure, employment
generation and the restarting of production. The number of contracts completed
or signed has increased by more than 600 in the last three months and,
altogether, the total number of contracts related to civil works, and the
provision of goods and services, now exceeds 1,500. There remain, however,
significant financing gaps in all major sectors in spite of my strong
recommendations to the donor community in the past. Also, in certain sectors
such as railways or telecommunications, political constraints on the spot still
impede quick project implementation. At the Donors Information Meeting, held at
Brussels at the end of January, I pointed out that unless viable sector policies
were adopted in these areas, no further financial commitments could be
recommended. I will press to have these issues addressed at the 1997 donors
conference.
118. The Implementation Conference on Brcko signalled the commitment of the
international community to devote significant financial and material resources
to the sustainable development of infrastructure, transportation links, repair
and construction of housing, social facilities and community and business
structures in the Brcko area. This targeted economic assistance will be
provided only if the local authorities demonstrate sustained cooperation with my
Office in Brcko.
119. A major challenge for 1997 is the expected mass return of refugees to
Bosnia and Herzegovina from host countries in Western Europe. It is clear that
this will place a large burden on the very fragile recovery process. The
coordinating role of the Return and Reconstruction Task Force will be crucial to
avoid the potential destabilizing effect of mass return.

/...

S/1997/310
English
Page 26

Civil aviation
200. There have been some positive developments in the field of civil aviation.
The number of civil carriers operating into Sarajevo Airport has progressively
increased and the recent completion of work to fit an instrument landing system
should further enhance the flow of civil traffic. Problems remain, however, not
least the issue of a tunnel repair under the runway. These will have to be
resolved quickly if the airport is to begin to operate to full capacity.
201. On a wider front the picture is less encouraging. Though the parties
agreed at the London Conference to work collectively and on an equal basis in a
Bosnia and Herzegovina civil aviation authority, this has yet to happen.
Consequently, efforts to open the regional airports have been unproductive. An
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) team has recently completed a
civil aviation master plan dealing with the transition to civil control of all
Bosnia and Herzegovina's airports and airspace, but it remains to be seen
whether this will stimulate progress when it is presented to the parties.
202. There has been one significant breakthrough, brokered in an initiative by
SFOR, resulting in an agreement between SFOR, Croatia and the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia to reopen airspace over Bosnia and Herzegovina above altitudes of
33,000 feet to transiting civil aviation traffic. I welcome this development,
given that it will provide financial benefit to Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia
and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, but more importantly because it should
encourage the parties to begin working together with the international civil
aviation authorities.

Mine clearance
203. Mine clearing has developed some momentum, but the resources available for
this urgent task remain scarce and the number of mines being cleared is small.
The efforts of the international community, working with the United Nationssponsored Mine Action Task Force and the United Nations Mine Action Centre have
been centred on a few well-focused and effective projects conducted by local
companies, Norwegian Peoples Aid and United States Government-sponsored teams.
The United Nations Mine Action Centre has drawn up a comprehensive
organizational structure for mine-clearing activities across Bosnia and
Herzegovina. However, a government structure has yet to be put fully in place
and until it is, proper coordination related to associated funding will not take
place.
204. The key element is the establishment of a fully representative Bosnia and
Herzegovina commission for demining capable of assigning priority to activities
and processing projects. It must be clear that funding will be utilized
sensibly. The Commission has commenced work, but has yet to function as a truly
effective body. It is imperative that it becomes operative soon, as urgent work
is needed to take over certain project facilities and assume responsibility for
the United Nations Mine Action Centre by the end of the year.
205. I welcome the new SFOR policy on mine clearing by the former warring
factions. Linked to the United States Department of State's initiative to train
/...

S/1997/310
English
Page 27

450 such mine clearers, it will stimulate the entities to accept greater
responsibility for the long-term task of demining. SFOR has been strict with
the implementation, and the training should provide a sound basis for
strengthening the former warring factions' mine-clearing capability.
International supervision is likely to be required to ensure that the former
warring factions sustain their efforts once this training is complete.

Regional stabilization
206. Implementation of the Agreement on Confidence- and Security-Building
Measures in Bosnia and Herzegovina, pursuant to Article II of Annex 1B of the
Peace Agreement, continues to proceed satisfactorily. Close cooperation between
the parties to the Agreement, the OSCE Mission and SFOR should contribute to the
climate of trust and confidence necessary to lower military tensions over the
longer term.
207. Progress with the implementation of the Agreement on Subregional Arms
Control (the "Article IV" Agreement) has benefited from the renewed emphasis
placed upon it at the London Conference. The parties have revised their
declarations of the equipment regulated by the Agreement, with the effect of
increasing the overall number of items to be destroyed and reducing the quantity
to be exempted from the reduction process. Equipment declarations, however,
could be improved and the Federation partners have yet to agree on the
allocation of equipment within the terms of the Agreement. The parties must now
redouble their efforts. It is likely that the full support of the international
community will continue to be required to ensure that the letter and spirit of
the Agreement are met on schedule. This will be an essential precursor to
embarking on the negotiations for regional arms control under Article V of
Annex 1B of the Peace Agreement.

IV.

COOPERATION WITH THE STABILIZATION FORCE

208. The presence of a credible international military force continues to ensure
that the parties pursue their goals through peaceful, political means. I
envisage the need for this to continue for some considerable time to come.
209. The transition from the NATO-led Implementation Force (IFOR) to the
significantly smaller Stabilization Force (SFOR) has not impinged upon the close
cooperation established between the military and civilian agencies during the
course of 1996. I and my staff continue to enjoy a close working relationship
with General William Crouch, and his staff in theatre, and also with both the
Supreme Allied Commander in Europe, at the Supreme Headquarters, Allied Powers,
Europe (SHAPE) and NATO headquarters in Brussels.
210. As the smaller military force does not possess the same level of capability
to support civilian tasks as its predecessor, it is more important than ever to
ensure that there is common agreement on priorities and well-coordinated
planning. I am confident that the arrangements are in place to maintain this
over the coming year, as we tackle collectively some of the most important and

/...

S/1997/310
English
Page 28

difficult aspects of the Peace Agreement, including the local elections and the
return of refugees and displaced people to their homes.

V.

LOOKING FORWARD

211. In my last report of 1996 (S/1996/1024), I noted that the first year of
peace implementation was, overall, a year of success, although each step forward
has demonstrated how many more are needed for the peace process to become selfsustaining and stable. The consolidation period of 1997 and 1998 should provide
for this possibility.
212. During the first months of 1997, the focus of my Office's attention has
been on constitutional implementation. It is, in my opinion, only by
establishing and making the common institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina
operational, as is laid down in the Constitution of the Peace Agreement, that
there is any possibility of taking the peace process forward.
213. With the common institutions functioning, there is hope of overcoming the
bitter division of the country and addressing the pressing economic and social
issues that are a legacy, not only of the war, but also of the failed policies
of the previous decades. Without these institutions, there is a risk that the
partition of Bosnia and Herzegovina could become permanent, thus endangering
peace and stability in the country and in the region in the years ahead.
214. As noted above, all the common institutions have been established and, in
most cases, have started to work. While my Office had to negotiate more or less
every detail of the first meetings, they are now holding their sessions as a
matter of routine and with only limited logistical support from my Office.
215. In order to be more than empty shells of little relevance, however, the
common institutions must take decisions on the laws and other issues which will
turn the State into a functioning reality. With the support of other members of
the international community - most notably the European Commission, the World
Bank, IMF and the United States Treasury - my Office has presented the so-called
quick start package of interim essential legislation to the Council of
Ministers. These laws and other measures constitute what we consider the
minimum for the State to start functioning in the key areas under its
competence.
216. Progress on these issues has been slow. There has been controversy between
those seeking to limit the functions of the State to well below what has been
agreed, and those seeking to expand its functions in the direction of a unitary
State. Nevertheless, the quick start package has been moving forward, and I am
confident that we will have decisions on all key issues in the near future.
217. These issues are important, not only in the context of building the common
State, but also to pave the way for the economic reforms essential for the
future economic and social development of the country. International
reconstruction assistance will not continue on present levels for long; it is
vital that conditions are created for self-sustained and rapid economic growth
in the years ahead. This will require fundamental reforms to liberalize the
/...

S/1997/310
English
Page 29

economy, to privatize assets and to open the way for foreign trade and
competition.
218. If decisions are taken on the relevant parts of the quick start package,
there will be the possibility for an agreement with IMF, which will pave the way
for holding the next donor's conference. It is my hope that this will be
possible towards the end of May, although the absence of an agreement with IMF
would seriously limit the possibilities of holding a successful donor's
conference. We would aim to mobilize funds, in the order of $1.4 billion, for
reconstruction in 1997.
219. The economic and social issues are also important in facilitating return,
not least of refugees from other countries primarily in Western Europe. We
cannot expect refugees to return easily if they see a country in economic and
social despair. In this context, it is naturally worrying that developments
have lead to a situation in which the areas of the country from which the
largest numbers of refugees originate have been receiving the least economic
assistance.
220. During 1996, I reported on the disturbing trend towards ethnic separation.
I regret to say that I see no fundamental improvement in the situation. We are
beginning to see some individual and discreet minority returns to certain areas,
but, as a rule, any attempt at major minority return is meeting fierce
resistance ranging from the violent to the bureaucratic.
221. Of particular concern, in this respect, is the state of property
legislation as it involves housing. Existing laws in both the Federation and
the Republika Srpska make return very difficult, if not impossible. My Office
has pointed out this situation repeatedly. In a recent landmark decision the
Human Rights Ombudsperson for Bosnia and Herzegovina ruled that existing laws in
the Federation fail to comply with the Peace Agreement; the same is true for the
Republika Srpska.
222. Return is also hampered by the widely observed lack of respect for human
rights. Here, the presence of IPTF is of essential importance, as is the
programme to restructure and train the local police forces in the Federation and
the Republika Srpska. The funding of these programmes is of great importance,
and I am contemplating further initiatives, in coordination with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Commander of IPTF, in order to
ensure that these programmes can be carried forward as planned.
223. I welcome the authorization by the Security Council to lift the ceiling for
IPTF monitors, in order to be able to take part in the full implementation of
the Brcko supervision. I regret, however, that it has taken so long to obtain
approval for the IPTF increases necessary to reinforce human rights supervision
procedures agreed at the London Conference.
224. An issue of particular concern to me is the question of full cooperation
with the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. Neither the
Federation nor the Republika Srpska cooperates to the extent required, and I am
particularly concerned with situations where indicted persons hold public
positions or exercise de facto political influence.
/...

S/1997/310
English
Page 30

225. According to my information, persons indicted by the Tribunal hold public
office or exercise public functions in the Republika Srpska municipalities of
Bosanska Samac and Foca. I will recommend to international organizations that
they cease all contacts with these municipalities, other than those necessary
for assembling information, organizing election matters or for helping
individuals in need. In the Federation, I am worried that a number of indicted
persons living and working in the municipality of Vitez are tolerated.
226. Of further concern are the ongoing activities of Mr. Radovan Karadzić in
the Republika Srpska. In spite of his undertakings to the contrary, and those
of the Republika Srpska leadership, he seeks consistently to influence the
political process. He remains a force of evil and intrigue that can only taint
those personalities and institutions of the Republika Srpska which continue to
tolerate his activities. This applies, in my judgement, to the member of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Krajišnik. I would therefore
recommend that contacts with him be limited to essential business related to his
function as a member of the Presidency.
227. It remains my opinion that these issues must be resolved if we are to carry
the political part of the peace process forward as envisaged.
228. Although we are only at the beginning of the consolidation period, it is
only natural that we should look ahead in order to meet the different
challenges.
229. It will take time, even under the best of circumstances, for the political
institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina, with the help of the international
community, to implement all the civilian and related provisions of the Peace
Agreement. The rebuilding and reintegration of Bosnia has progressed faster
than any other comparable post-war situation, but it still has a very long way
to go. War is an evil event in any society, the effects of which take years,
decades and even generations to overcome.
230. Increasingly, we must concentrate on preventing the political development
of the country from moving in a direction contrary to the Peace Agreement. In
this regard, I am considering the need for us to prevent three courses of
action, which might otherwise be pursued by one or the other of the political
leaderships of the country or region.
231. The first of these, which needs to be blocked, is the military option.
Until June 1998, the deterrent effect of the SFOR will ensure this. But it is,
in my opinion, important that the message is sent that the international
community will not tolerate any attempt to resort to armed force in the period
thereafter.
232. It is only by removing the military option - the temptation to use military
force, or the fear that military force will be used - that we can ensure the
concentration, on the political, economic and social issues and challenges, so
desperately required.
233. The second is the option of secession from Bosnia and Herzegovina. I am
far less concerned with the dangers of overt secession - which will never be
/...

S/1997/310
English
Page 31

tolerated by the international community - than with the evident risks of
creeping secession concerning both the Croat and the Serb areas.
234. In this context, I have called attention to the nature of the concluded
agreements on special and parallel relations with the Republic of Croatia and
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. It is, in my view, necessary to bring these
into line with the provisions of the constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
235. The third of these options is that of domination of the existing political
institutions by one group, namely the Bosniaks, with only lip-service being paid
to the concept of power-sharing.
236. Indeed, there are signs of old structures being kept alive despite the fact
that they should have been disbanded as the structures of the Federation and the
new common institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina are established. The fact
that not one single ambassador has been appointed or reconfirmed, regardless of
the agreement that this should have been carried out before 31 March, points to
a similar danger of domination contrary to the spirit and letter of the Peace
Agreement.
237. The challenges ahead remain large. It is easy to see what needs to be done
as well as the difficulties we face. Nevertheless, if there is the right
international commitment to Bosnia and Herzegovina and the region in the years
ahead, I remain convinced that peace in the country will strengthen, as the
simultaneous forces of European integration and cooperation create an
increasingly strong web of stability and security for the region as a whole.

-----
