United Nations

A/RES/58/269

General Assembly

Distr.: General
3 March 2004

Fifty-eighth session
Agenda item 59

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 23 December 2003
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/58/587)]

58/269. Strengthening of the United Nations: an agenda for
further change
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its determination to strengthen further the role, capacity,
effectiveness and efficiency of the United Nations and thus improve its performance
in order to realize the full potential of the Organization, in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, and to respond more
effectively to the needs of Member States and existing and new global challenges
facing the United Nations in the twenty-first century,
Recalling Articles 17, 18, 97 and 100 of the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling also its resolutions 41/213 of 19 December 1986, 42/211 of
21 December 1987 and 55/234 of 23 December 2000,
Recalling further the relevant provisions of its resolution 57/300 of
20 December 2002,
Recalling the terms of reference of the Committee for Programme and
Coordination, as outlined in the annex to Economic and Social Council resolution
2008 (LX) of 14 May 1976,
Emphasizing that resources provided to the Secretary-General should be
commensurate with all mandated programmes and activities,
Reaffirming the role of the General Assembly and its relevant
intergovernmental and expert bodies, within their respective mandates, in planning,
programming, budgeting, monitoring and evaluation,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General entitled
“Intergovernmental review of the medium-term plan and the programme budget” 1
and “Improvements to the current process of planning and budgeting”, 2 the note by
the Secretary-General entitled “Improvements to the current process of planning and

_______________
1
2

03 51066

A/57/786.
A/58/395 and Corr.1.

A/RES/58/269

budgeting” 3 and the reports of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions thereon, 4
Taking into account the views expressed by the Member States during the
consideration of this item at its fifty-seventh and fifty-eighth sessions,
1.
Welcomes the commitment of the Secretary-General to strengthening the
United Nations, including its planning, programming and budgetary process;
2.
Stresses that setting the priorities of the United Nations is the prerogative
of the Member States, as reflected in legislative mandates;
3.
Stresses also the need for the Member States to participate fully in the
budget preparation process, from its early stages and throughout the process;
4.
Emphasizes the importance of providing the information necessary to
enable Member States to make well-informed decisions;
5.
Requests the Secretary-General to prepare, on a trial basis, for
submission to the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session, a strategic framework
to replace the current four-year medium-term plan, which would comprise in one
document:
(a) Part one: a plan outline, reflecting the longer-term objectives of the
Organization;
(b)

Part two: a biennial programme plan, to cover two years;

6.

Decides that:

(a) The budget outline shall continue to provide the same level of detail as at
present, in accordance with regulation 3.2 of the Regulations and Rules Governing
Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of
Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation; 5
(b) The budget outline shall be submitted and considered for approval after
consideration and adoption of the strategic framework;
(c) After their approval, the budget outline and strategic framework shall
together form the basis for preparing the proposed programme budget;
7.
Affirms that the strategic framework, as outlined above, shall constitute
the principal policy directive of the United Nations and shall serve as the basis for
programme planning, budgeting, monitoring and evaluation;
Decides to review, with a view to taking a final decision at its sixty8.
second session, the format, content and duration of the strategic framework,
including the necessity of maintaining part one, and requests the Secretary-General
to submit a report, through the Committee for Programme and Coordination,
reviewing the experiences gained with the changes made in the planning and
budgeting process;
Decides also that the programme narratives of the programme budget
9.
fascicles shall be identical to the biennial programme plan;
_______________
3

A/58/600.
A/58/7/Add.5 (for the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session,
Supplement No. 7A) and A/58/610.
5
ST/SGB/2000/8.
4

2

A/RES/58/269

10. Decides further to keep the current format of the proposed programme
budget and to maintain the level of information contained therein;
11. Decides that the Committee for Programme and Coordination shall no
longer consider the budget outline;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to include in the introduction of the
budget fascicles information on the new and/or revised mandates approved by the
General Assembly subsequent to the adoption of the biennial programme plan;
13. Requests the Committee for Programme and Coordination, in performing
its programmatic role in the planning and budgeting process, to review the
programmatic aspects of the new and/or revised mandates referred to above, as well
as any differences that arise between the biennial programme plan and the
programmatic aspects of the proposed programme budget;
14. Also requests the Committee for Programme and Coordination, in the
context of its report on its forty-fifth session, to provide comments on the various
aspects of the review process referred to above;
15. Emphasizes the importance of the intergovernmental nature of the
Committee for Programme and Coordination in discharging its functions;
16. Invites the Committee for Programme and Coordination to submit at its
forty-fourth session proposals on enhancing its role in monitoring and evaluation;
17. Recalls paragraph 34 of General Assembly resolution 57/300, in which
the Assembly invited the Committee for Programme and Coordination to continue to
improve its working methods;
18. Invites the Committee for Programme and Coordination to submit, at its
forty-fourth session, recommendations on improving its effectiveness;
19. Emphasizes the need to strengthen the monitoring and evaluation system,
and in this regard urges the Secretary-General to improve the format and timing of
programme performance and evaluation reports;
20. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that resources are clearly
identified in all the sections of the proposed programme budget for the performance
of the monitoring and evaluation functions;
21. Also requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Office of Internal
Oversight Services, in collaboration with the Joint Inspection Unit, with submitting
to the General Assembly for consideration at its sixtieth session proposals on the
strengthening and monitoring of programme performance and evaluation.
79th plenary meeting
23 December 2003

3
