48

General Auembly-Twenty-ninth Se111ion

3250 (XXIX). United Nations Children's Fund
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Executive Board
of the United Nations Children's Fund20 and the section of the report of the Economic and Social Council
dealing with the Fund, 21
Noting with approval the continuing efforts of the
United Nations Children's Fund to help developing
countries enlarge and improve basic services for their
children,
Deeply concerned about the dangers Qf a further
deterioration in the conditions of life for children in
many developing countries, especially those most adversely affected by the current economic crisis,
Convinced that a substantial expansion of the activities of the United Nations Children's Fund would contribute significantly towards alleviating the plight of
millions of children,
Recalling its resolution 3124 (XXVIII) of 13 December 1973, in which it, inter alia, requested the Secretary-General to . convene, during the twenty-ninth
session of the General Assembly, a special pledging
conference for voluntary contributions to be made to
the United Nations Children's Fund, and Economic
and Social Council resolution 1880 (LVII) of 31 July
1974 on the Fund,
1. Fully endorses the decision of the Executive
Board of the United Nations Children's Fund entitled
"Declaration of an emergency for children in developing countries as a result of the current economic
crisis";22
2. Appeals, with a sense of urgency, to all Governments, especially those of the industrialized countries,
and other potential contributors to increase their contributions to the United Nations Children's Fund so
that it may enlarge its assistance to children in developing countries and respond effectively to the emergency affecting them;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in collaboration
with the Executive Director of the United Nations Children's Fund, to convene regular annual pledging conferences for the Fund starting in 1975.
2306th plenary meeting
4 December 1974

3251 (XXIX). Technical co-operation among
developing countries
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2974 (XXVII) of 14 December 1972 and 3177 ( XXVIII) of 17 December
1973 on co-operation among developing countries,
Recalling further its resolution 3172 (XXVIII) of
J 7 December 1973 on the convening of a special session of the General Assembly devoted to development
and international economic co-operation,
20 Official Ruords of the Economic and Social Council,
Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 9 (E/SS28).
21 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-ninth
Se.rsion, Supplement No. 3 (A/9603), chap. VI, sect. B.6.
22 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 9 (E/SS28), para. 6.

Conscious of the role that the United Nations Development Programme should play in the establishment
of a new international economic order, in accordance
with the pertinent provisions of the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order2:1 adopted by the
General Assembly at its sixth special session, and of
the contribution which technical co-operation among
developing countries "tt>uld make to the establishment
of such a new economic order,
Aware of the need to give international development co-operation a truly universal character and to
enhance the over-all efficiency and extend the dimension of the activities of the United Nations development system by making a systematic and comprehensive effort to pool and utilize the capacities,
experiences and resources of the developing countries,
Convinced of the need to make the fullest use of the
capacity and experience of all Member States, independent of their degree of development, in united
action designed to accelerate the integral development
of the developing countries, especially the relatively
less developed among them,
Convinced further of the importance of ensuring the
optimum impact of the multiplier effect of the assistanct provided to developing countries, in particular
the assistance provided by the United Nations Development Programme,
l. Endorses th.e final report of the Working Group
on Technical Co-operation among Developing Countries~4 taking into account the decision of the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme at its eighteenth session?'' and, accordingly,
requests the Administrator of the Programme to take
all appropriate measures for its implementation;
2. Endorses the establishment of a special unit
within the United Nations Development Programme
to promote technical co-operation among developing
countries-principally through the implementation of
the recommendations of the Working Group-which
should have the functions set forth in the appendix of
the report of the Working Group, and with the objective of integrating this activity of technical co-operation among developing countries fully within the
Programme;
3. Invites the participating and executing agencies
of the United Nations development system to carry
out the measures contained in the recommendations
addressed to them in the report of the Working Group
and to give their full support to Member States and
to the United Nations Development Programme for
the implementation, as appropriate, of those recommendations of the Working Group;
4. Requests the Governing_ Council of the United
Nations Development Programme to consider at its
twentieth session the scope of, and the financial and
other necessary measures to convene at an early date,
an intergovernmental symposium on technical co-operation among developing countries sponsored by the
United Nations Development Programme, under the
aegis of the United Nations, to be preceded by regional
2a Resoluti-Ons 3201

(S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI).

24 DP/69, sect. II.
211 See Officiai Records of the Economic and Social Council,

Fifty-se!lenth Session, Supplement No. 2A. (E/5543/Rev.l),

para. 224.
