Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

lonial Territories, particularly :n Africa, which are
detrimental to the interests of the inhabitants of those
Territories, in order to put an end to such enterprises
and to prevent new investments that run counter to
the interests of the inhabitants;
6. Requests all States to take effective measures to
end the supply of funds and other forms of assistance,
including military supplies and equipment, to those
regimes which use such assistance to repress the peoples of the colonial Territories and their national liberation movements;
7. Invites all Governments and the organizations
within the United Nations system, having regard to
the relevant provisions of the Declaration on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, contained in General Assembly resolution 3201 (S-VI) of
1 May I 974, and of the Programme of Action on the
Establishment of a New International Economic Order, contained in Assembly resolution 3202 (S-VI) of
1 May 1974, to ensure in particular that the permanent sovereignty of the peoples of the colonial Territories over their natural resources is fully respected
and safeguarded;
8. Calls upon all States to discontinue all economic,
financial or trade relations with South Africa concerning Namibia and to refrain from entering into economic,
financial or other relations with South Africa, acting
on behalf of or concerning Namibia, which may lend
support to its continued illegal occupation of that
Territory;
9. Calls upon the administering Powers to abolish
every discriminatory and unjust wage system which
prevails in the Territories under their administration
and to apply in each Territory a uniform system of
wages to all the inhabitants without any discrimination;
I 0. Requests the Secretary-General to give the widest possible publicity to the adverse effects of the activities of foreign economic and other interests in all
colonial Territories, as well as to the decisions of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and
of the General Assembly on this question, and requests
all Governments to assist the Secretary-General in that
regard;
11. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
study this question and report thereon to the General
Assembly at its thirtieth session.
2318th plenary meeting
13 December 1974
3300 (XXIX). lmplemenlalion of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples by the specialized
agencies and the international institutions
associated with the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized
agencies and the international institutions associated
with the United Nations",
Recalling the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained
in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,

113

and the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration. contained in its resolution
2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, a~ well as all other
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council,
Taking into accmmt with appreciation the reports
submitted on the item by the Secretary-General,"' the
Economic and Social CounciF 1 and the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,'~ as well as
the related report of the United Nations Council for
Namibia, 73
Taking into account also the statements of the representatives of the national iiberation movements of
the colonial Territories in Africa who participated as
observers in the work relating to their respective countries, and conscious of the urgent and pressing need of
the peoples concerned for concrete assistance from the
specialized agencies and other institutions associated
with the United Nations in the administration of their
countries and in the reconstruction programmes being
undertaken by their national liberation movements,
Reaffirming the responsibility of the specialized
agencies and other organizations within the United
Nat ions system to take all effective measures, within
their respective spheres of competence, to ensure the
full and speedy implementation of the Declaration and
other rcl.:vant resolutions of the United Nations, particularly in the provision of moral and material assistance, on a priority basis, to the peoples of the colonial
Territories and their national liberation movements,
Noting with deep concern that, although progress
has been maintained in the extension of assistance to
refugees from the colonial Territories in Africa, the
actions taken thus far by the organizations concerned
in the provision of assistance to the peoples of the
Territories through their national liberation movements
continue to remain far from adequate to meet the
urgent needs of those peoples,
Noting with satisfaction the measures taken by several specialized agencies and other organizations within
the United Nations system to grant observer status to
the national liberation movements, and expressing the
hope that other organizations concerned will proceed
forthwith to take the necessary steps in this regard,
Expressing its appreciation to the General Secretariat
of the Organization of African Unity for the continued
co-operation and assistance extended by it to the organizations within the United Nations system in connexion
with the implementation of the relevant resolutions of
the United Nations,
Welcoming the categorical renunciation by the Government of Portugal of the colonialist policy of its
predecessors, in particular the unequivocal acceptance
by that Government of its obligations under the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
and its recognition of the right of the peoples concerned
to self-determination and independence in accordance
with the Declaration and with the provisions of all related resolutions of the United Nations, as well as its
ro A/9638 and Add. I, Add. I /Corr.I and Add.2-5; A/9830.
71 Officit1/ Recorcl.r of the General Assembly, Twe11ty-11i111/i
Session, Suppleme111 No. 3 (A/9603), chap. VI, sect. F.
7~ lbicl., S11ppleme111 No. 23 (A/9623/Rev. I), chap. VI.
1:1 Jbicl..
Supplement No. 24 (A/9624) and Supplement
No. 24A (A/9624/Add.l).

General Aasembly-Twenty-ninth Session

express readiness to co-operate in the work of the
Special Committee,
Mindful of the necessity to keep under continuous
review the activities of the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
in the implementation of the various United Nations
decisions relating to decolonization,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to the item;74
2. Reaffirms that the recognition by the General
Assembly, the Security Council and other United
Nations organs of the legitimacy of the stmggle of colonial peoples to achieve freedom and independence
entails, as a corollary, the extension by the Un'ited
Nations system of organizations of all the necessary
moral and material assistance to the peoples of the colonial Territories, including in particular the populations in the liberated areas of those Territories and
their national liberation movements;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those specialized
agencies and organizations within the United Nations
system which have continued to co-operate in varying
degrees with the United Nations in the implementation
of the Declaration and other relevant resolutions of
the General Assembly;
4. Urges all specialized agencies and institutions
associated with the United Nations and all States to
render, as a matter of urgency, all possible moral and
material assistance to the colonial peoples in Africa
struggling for their liberation from colonial rule and,
in particular, recommends that the organizations concerned should initiate or broaden contacts and cooperation with these peoples in consultation with the
Organization of African Unity and should work out
and implement concrete programmes for such assistance with the active collaboration of the national liberation movements concerned;
5. Reiterates its urgent request that the specialized
agencies and other organizations within the United
Nations system, including in particular the United
Nations Development Programme and the World Bank,
should take measures, within their respective spheres
of competence, to increase the scope of their assistance
to refugees from colonial Territories, including assistance to the Governments concerned in the preparation
and execution of projects beneficial to those refugees,
and, in that connexion, to introduce the greatest possible measure of flexibility in their relevant procedures;
6. Urges once again the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system,
in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council, to take all
necessary measures to withhold any .financial, economic, te,chnical or other assistance from the Government of South Africa and the illegal regime of Southern
Rhodesia, to discontinue all support to them until they
restore to the peoples of Namibia and Zimbabwe their
inalienable right to self-determination and independence
and to refrain from taking any action which might imply recognition of the legitimacy of the domination of
the Territories by those regimes;
74 Ibid.,

Supplement No. 23 (A/9623/Rev.1), chap. VI.

7. Draws the attention of the specialized agencies
and the institutions associated with the United Nations
to the steps towards decolonization undertaken by the
new Government of Portugal, thus enabling these organizations to resume their co-operation with the present Government of Portugal;
8. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system to make
appropriate procedural arrangements and, if necessary,
amend their relevant instruments, with a view to enabling representatives of the national liberation movements of the colonial Territories, recognized by the
Organization of African Unity, to participate fully as
observers in all proceedings relating to their countries,
particularly so as to ensure that assistance projects of
the agencies and organizations are carried out to the
benefit of the national liberation movements and peoples of the liberated areas;
9. Recommends that all Governments should intensify their efforts in the specialized agencies and other
organizations within the United Nations system of
which they are members to ensure the full and effective
implementation of the Declaration and other relevant
resolutions of the United Nations and, in that connexion, should accord priority to the question of providing assistance on an emergency basis to peoples in
the colonial Territories and to their national liberation
movements;
10. Urges the executive heads of the specialized
agencies and other organizations within the United
Nations system, with a view to facilitating the implementation of paragraph 9 above, to formulate and
submit to their respective governing bodies or legislative organs, as a matter of priority and with the active
co-operation of the Organization of African Unity, concrete proposals for the full implementation of the relevant United Nations decisions, in particular specific
programmes of all possible assistance to the peoples
in colonial Territories and their national liberation
movements, together with a comprehensive analysis of
the problems, if any, confronted by these agencies and
organizations;
11. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To prepare for submission to the relevant bodies
concerned with related aspects of the present item,
with the assistance of the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system,
a report on the action taken since the circulation of
his previous report in implementation of the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations, including the present
resolution;

( b) To continue to assist the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations system in working out appropriate measures for implementing the present resolution and to report thereon
to the General Assembly at its thirtieth session;

12. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
continue to consider, in consultation with the Special
Committee, appropriate measures for co-ordination of
the policies and activities of the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations system in implementing the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly;

Resolutions adopted on the reports ol the Fourth Committee

13. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
examine the question and to report to the General
Assembly at its thirtieth session.

3302 (XXIX). Offers by Member States of study
and training facilities for inhabitants of
Non-Self-Governing Territories

2318th plenary meeting
13 December 1974

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3120 (XXVIII) of 12 December 1973,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-Ge!1':ral
on offers by Member States of study an~ tra.mm_g
facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governin.g Terntories, 76 prepared under General Assembly resolution
845 (IX) of 22 November 1954,
Bearing in mind the need to provide increased educational and training facilities at au levels for the inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Aware, in particular, of the urgent needs ~f t_he
transitional Governments of the colonial Terntones
concerned in southern Africa for qualified administrative, . technical and professional personnel to assume
responsibility for the administration and devel?pment
of their countries, and, in that regard, welcommg the
acceptance by Portugal of its obligations under. the
relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
and its recognition of the right of the peoples concerned
to self-determination and independence in accordance
with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, and with the provisions of all related resolutions
of the United Nations,
l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member
States which have made scholarships available to the
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories;
3. Invites all States to make or continue to make
generous offers of study and training facilities to the
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories, particularly those in southern Africa;
4. Requests those States offering scholarships to
inform the Secretary-General of the details of the
offers made and the sct.olarships granted under this
programme and, whenever possible, to provide travel
funds to prospective students;
5. Requests those administering Powers which have
not yet done so to ensure the widespread and continuous dissemination in the Territories under their
administration, particularly in southern Africa, of i!1formation relating to offers of study and training facilities made by States and to provide all the necessary
facilities to enable students to avail themselve& of such
offers;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirtieth session on the implementation of the present resolution;
7. Draws the attention of the Special Committee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to the present resolution.
2318th plenary meetinr13 December 1974

3301 (XXIX). United Nations Educational and
Training Programme for Soutliern Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions on the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa,
in particular cesolution 3119 (XXVIII) of 12 December 1973,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the Programme for 1973/74,15
Taking note with satisfaction of the further increase
in contributions to the Programme and the corresponding increase in assistance for the education and
training of persons from the Territories concerned,
Bearing in mind the progress of the Territories
under Portuguese administration towards independence,
1. Expresses its appreciation to all those who have
made voluntary contributions to the United Nations
Educational and Training Programme for Southern
Africa;
2. Appeals to all States, organizations and individuals to make generous contributions to the Programme
in order to ensure its continuation and expansion;
3. Commends the Secretary-General and the Advisory Committee on the United Nations Educational
and Training Programme for Southern Africa for the
work they have accomplished in strengthening and
expanding the Pcogramme;
4. Decides that assistance under the Programme
should be continued as a transitional measure, at the
request of the Governments concerned, for the inhabitants of Guinea-Bissau and those of the Territories
covered by the Programme which may attain independence;
5. Decides that, as a further transitional measure,
provision shall be made, under the regular budget of
the United Nations for the financial year 1975, for an
amount of $100,000 to ensure continuity of the Programme pending the receipt of adequate voluntary
contributions;
6. Requests the Advisory Committee on the United
Nations Educational and Training Programme for
Southern Africa, in consultation with the SecretaryGeneral, to arrange for an evaluation of the achievements of the Programme and of the ways and means
for its further development;
1. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirtieth session on the activity
and progress of the Programme.
2 318th plenary meeting
13 December 1974
T5 A/9845.

rn A/9877.

•

us

•

•
