THIRTY-FIFTH

YEAR
.-:
-.-_

2247’”

MEETING:

26 SEPTEMBER

1980

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
‘_

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2247)

.“_
.“_
.-

. . ... ... .. ... .. .. .. .. ... ... .. ... .. .. .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

I

The situation between Iran and Iraq . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1
“.
.-.
:-

.-:.‘_’

.-I.__

SlPV.2247

.<
1::
‘_

I-.
-.
1

*

I.

d.,

_ ‘.

*..
>
. ..

:.
.-.
_-

._
_.. .
_-.

-_.;
-_
-:..
. :-_
-_

NOTE

-

Symbols of United Nations documents are com&sed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Councii (symbol S/ . . .) are nornially published in
quarterly Slrpplments
of the OjJkicrl Records r>f tha Security Co~md. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in Hihich information about it is given.
:
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Rc~solutions cd
Decisions c,f the Scwrrity Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before I January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

-.

-_
-_

.-.

-.
:-

*
c

2247th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 26 September 1980, at 7 p.m.
President:

retary-General to the President of the Security Council; S/14195, containing the text of a letter dated 25 September from the representative of Tunisia addressed
to the Secretary-General; and S/l4196 and S/14197,
containing the texts of letters dated, respectively,
23 and 25 September from the Secretary-General to
the President of the Security Council.

Mr. Taieb SLIM (Tunisia).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
, Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2247)L

5. The SECRETARY-GENERAL: I appreciate the
opportunity to make a brief statement to the Council, summarizing developments at the United Nations
in the last few days as regards the conflict between
Iran and Iraq.

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation between Iran and Iraq
The meeting

was called to-order at 7.25 p.m.
Adoption

3

6. Ever since the first clashes, I have followed the
developments with deep concern. On Monday, 22 September, I appealed to the parties to put an end to the
fighting and+&’ ,make every possible effort to settle
their differences by negotiation. On the same day,
through the representatives of the two Governments at
the United Nations, I offered my good offices, should
the parties feel that this might be of use in settling their
differences.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation

betwken Iran and Iraq

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I should like to inform the members of the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Iraq, in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda.
In accordance with the usual practice I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate in the discussion, without the right to
vote, in conformity with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.
At the invitation of the President,
took a place at the Council table.

Mr. Kittani

‘,

4. I now call on the Secretary-General.

7. On the following day, 23 September, I asked the
President of the Security Council to arrange for consultations of the Council at the earliest possible time
in view of the escalation of the conflict [S/14196]. In
consultations on the evening of 23 September, the
Council agreed that you, Mr. President, should issue’
a statement expressing the concern of members of
the Council, stating that the members of the Council
welcomed and fully supported my appeal and the offer
of my good offices, and appealing to the Governments
of Iran and Iraq, as a first step towards a solution of
the conflict, to desist from all armed activity and all
acts that might worsen the present dangerous situation
and to settle their dispute by peaceful means.’

(Iraq)

2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
The Council is meeting today in response to a letter
dated 26 September from the representatives of Mexico
and Norway to the President of the Security Council.
That letter is contained in document S/14198.

.
‘.

-.

a*-

8. On 24 September I addressed a written message

[S/14193] to the Presidents of Iran and Iraq reiterating

my previous appeal. I also attempted to contact them
directly with a view to ascertaining the positions of
both Governments with regard to the appeals which
had been made to them. A special emissary of the
Government of Iraq arrived in New York late on
24 September, and I have discussed the situation with
him on several occasions since that time. I have also
kept in touch with the Charge d’affaires of Iran as well
as contacting the office of the President of Iran by
telephone.

3. I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to the following documents: S/14191and
S/14192, containing the texts of letters dated 22 and
24 September, from the Charge d’affaires ad interim
of the Permanent Mission of Iraq, addressed, respectively, to the Secretary-General and to the President of
the Security Council; S/l4193 and Corr.1, containing
the text of a letter dated 24 September from the Sec1

-:
.^A
.^*
. _*

9. On the afternoon of 25 September, I received a
response to my appeals of 22 and 24 September from
the President of Iraq. Members of the Council will
recall that prior to this time the Foreign Minister of
Iraq had communicated the position of his Govemment in letters dated 22 and 24 September [S/l+191
end S//4/92]. In his message of 25 September, the
President of Iraq expressed his appreciation for my
initiatives and emphasized Iraq’s concern that international peace and security should not be threatened
and that economic and oil interests of States should not
be exposed to danger. In repeating the position stated
in the letters from the Foreign Minister.of Iraq, the
President emphasized that Iraq’s objective was to gain
Iran’s irrevocable recognition of Iraq’s rights in its
lands and sovereignty over its national waters. He
also asked whether Iran was ready to accept a ceasefire.

in mind the principles of the Charter and the interests

of the entire,,worid community. Naturally, the positions of the parties to the conflict are a factor of primary importance. This is a most delicate and difficult,
but at the same time an absolutely vita!, task. I am
sure that the Council will find the most useful and
practical way of reaching the objective which al! have
in mind, namely an end to the fighting and a settiement of the differences between the two Governments
by peaceful means.
I

13. In conclusion. Mr. President, I wish to pay “a
warm tribute-to you for your own unremitting efforts
in these last days and for your wise guidance of the
Council in this very difficult situation. I wish to assure
the Councii,,as we!! as the two Governments concerned, that,.for my part, I shall continue to do my
utmost to be of assistance in finding a solution to this
*very urgent and dangerous problem.

10. Unfortunately, despite a!! these efforts, the
fighting still continued and intensified. On 25 September, I therefore addressed a second letter [S//4197]
to you, Mr. President, repeating that, in view of the
fact that, in my opinion, the current- situation was
undoubtedly a threat to international peace and security, 1felt obliged to suggest that the Security Council
should consider the matter with the utmost urgency.
On the evening of the same day, the representatives of
Mexico and Norway requested a forma! ,meeting of
the Council [S/14198].

14. The PRESIDENT (interpretdon
from Fr~vtcA):
I thank the Secretary-Genera! for his kind words
addressed to me personally. It is rather he who must
be thanked for his continuous efforts to help us since
the very beginning of this crisis.
15. Mr. MUNOZ LED0 (hnexico) (intcvpwfcttion
Spanish):
Mr. President, because of the outstanding manner in which you have been presiding
over the work of the Council, these words of welcome
are no mere formality, but are a sincere expression of
our appreciation for the skill and intelligence with
which you have been conducting our deliberations
at such a difficult time. We should also like to express
our appreciation for the sureness -and wisdom with
which Ambassador Futscher Pereira of Portugal
presided over the work of the Council last month.

front

1I. On the afternoon of 25 September, inembers of
the Council and I were informed that the Islamic Conference would meet at the Foreign Ministerial level
on the next day-that .is, today-to seek ways and
means to assist in resolving the differences of the two
Governments. Clearly ‘it was important that this
valuable initiative should have every chance to succeed
since it was in the spirit of the appeal to the two Governments addressed by you, Mr. President, on behalf
of the members of the Security Council. It was therefore decided in consultations late last night that the
forma! meeting of the Council should take place this
afternoon after the Islamic Conference had met here
,at the United Nations in the earlier part of the day.
I have been informed by the Secretary-Genera! of the
Islamic Conference, Mr. Chatti, that the Conference
will send a good-will ,mission to Iran and Iraq.
Mr. Chatti stressed that this mission should be regarded as complementary to the efforts of the Council. I am gratified by this constructive initiative and
I hope that the mission’s efforts will be successful.

16. This meeting of the Council is being held at a
particularly serious time, inasmuch as peace has in
fact been breached in a region of the world which is
already convulsed and potentially explosive.
17. At the moper time we shall express ourselves
on the substance of the conflict. Now it is a matter of
urgency to secure a commitment by the States so that,
in accordance with the means provided for by the
Charter, an immediate cessation of hostilities may
be brought about on terms which will be just for both
parties.
18. The delegation of Mexico, together with that of
Norway, requested the convening of this forma!
meeting of the Council because we believe that it is
our duty as members of the international community
decisively, to. promote the peaceful settlement of
disputes; We consider it significant that the nonpermanent members of the Council that represent
developing countries have granted us their moral
endorsement of this meeting;

12. Before I conclude this statement, I wish to
express once again my deep concern at the escalation
of this tragic conflict and my anxiety about the dangers which will inevitably arise from its further escaiation. I know that this concern is shared by a!! members
of the Council. The Security Council is the organ of
the United Nations with the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
The Council has to exercise that responsibility keeping

19. Of course, we have not been inactive. Since the
outbreak of the conflict we have held informal consui2

_E

tations, and last Tuesday, 23 September,. we authorized ,the President of the Council, on behalf of all the
members of the Council, to encourage the mediation
efforts of the Secretary-General and ‘to issue an
urgent appeal to the parties to the conflict that they
desist from all armed action.
.
20. .?We wish to reiterate to the Secretary-General
our tprofound appreciation for his intense efforts to
bring about a dialogue and we should also-express our
hope that his efforts will bear fruit.
21. .We also recognize the value of the efforts of both
the countries of the non-aligned movement and of
those of the Islamic Conference to bring about a cessation of this fratricidai war through mutual understanding between the parties. We consider that the
Council should continue to promote that process of
mediation and should in no way hinder it but we also
feel that nothing can relieve this body of its primary
responsibility in the maintenance of international
peace and security.
22. .By its very nature the Council ,provides the
most appropriate forum for the opinion of States to
be expressed and for the will of the international community to take shape on questions of particular importance or gravity. It is also a distinctive feature of the
Council that, in accordance with its functions under
the Charter, its deliberations should culminate, where
appropriate, in decisions of a binding nature-not just
in declarations or recommendations.
l

for the efficient and elegant way .in which he conducted our business last month.
29. The war between Iraq and Iran is a matter of
the gravest concern to all of us:It threatens the stability
of a very sensitive area of extreme importance to the
entire world. The situation, therefore, clearly constitutes a serious threat to international peace and security.
30. Under the Charter, the Security Council has the
responsibility for maintaining international peace
and security. Norway, as a member of the Council,
felt that, faced with an ongoing war, the Council had
a duty to act. Mexico and Norway therefore joined
in bringing the conflict before the Council.
31. Three days ago the President of the Council,
on behalf of the members of the Council, appealed to
the Governments of Iraq and Iran, as a first step, to
desist from all armed activity and all acts that might
worsen the situation. The Secretary-General has also
made appeals’to the parties. Efforts have also ,been
made by the Islamic Conference to find peaceful
means to settle this conflict.
32. We highly appreciate those efforts and we note
with d.eep regret that they have not succeeded in
bringing an end to the hostilities. On the contrary, the
fighting continues. In this situation Norway feels that
the Council must act and discharge its responsibilities
under the Charter.

’

23. We are confident that efforts to bring about a
speedy and just settlement of the conflict will be
entirely successful.
24. We hope that the urgent need to prevent further
loss of life and mate&l damage in two fraternal nations
will prevail over considerations of a strategic or economic nature.
25.. We urge the .parties to the conflict to heed the
appeai of the United Nations and to act accordingly.
We also urge all States to refrain from any action
which might aggravate the present situation.
26. In any case, we must ensure respect for the
essential principles of the Organization: the independence and territorial integrity of States, nonintervention, the peaceful settlement of disputes and
the maintenance of peace.
27. Mr. ALGARD (Norway): Allow me at the outset,
Mr. President, to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for this month.
You have already demonstrated your great diplomatic
skills and patience, combined with a firm hand. We
are very confident seeing you in the Chair.
28. At the same time, I wish to thank the retiring
President, Ambassador Futscher Pereira of Portugal,

33. We believe that the Council, as a matter of highest
urgency, s’hould adopt a resolution calling upon the
,Govemments of Iraq and Iran, as a first step and
without prejudice to their positions, to take forthwith
all measures for an immediate cease-fire and for the
cessation of all military activities in the area. Furthermore, in its resolution the Council should call upon
the Governments of Iraq and Iran ,immediately and
concurrently with the cease-fire to initiate negotiations under appropriate auspices with a view to settling
their dispute by peaceful means.
34. The PRESIDENT: (interpretation from French):
The next speaker is the representative of Iraq, I call
on him.
35. Mr. I&TAN1 (Iraq): First of all, I wish to express
to you, -Mr. President, and to the other members of
the Council our ,deep gratitude and appreciation for
having so graciously acceded to our request to.participate in this meeting. I should like to assure the
Council that our request emanated from our deep
attachment to international peace and security and
from our respect for the United Nations and for the
authority of the Council.
36. We are very grateful to you, Mr. President, and
to the Secretary-General in particular, for having
brought the Council up to date on the various initiatives

.

f

,-.
:

wishes to declare that it appreciates those endeavours and welcomes the consideration of the problem
underlying the present situation, both at the international and the regional level, with a view to setting
things right and securing our national interests.

and appeals addressed to the two parties to the dispute
and for having informed the Council about the prompt
and positive responses of my Government to those
communications.
37. In order to supplement what has already been
made clear and to show that we are willing and ready
at all times to co-operate with any initiative for international peace and security, I wish first of all to read
to the Council some excerpts from a statement issued
earlier today by the Foreign Minister of Iraq in
Baghdad. The Foreign Minister stated, inter &a:

“While welcoming efforts for the establishment
of good relations on those bases, Iraq is acting in
accordance with its sense of responsibility and out
of a belief in the principles of non-alignment and
the Charter of the United Nations, particularly now
that it has proved its ability to defend its sovereignty and rights through military means, after all
political means and the invocation of international
law and custom had failed.”

“Iraq emphasizes the principles of non-interference in the internal affairs of States, respect for
their national sovereignty and concern for international peace and security. It has given many
examples of its genuine belief in and attachment to
those principles, both in words and in deeds. It has
also done its best to establish relations of goodneighbourliness and friendship with Iran and endeavoured, through its contacts and statements of
position, as well as through the repeated notes it
has recently submitted, to make the Iranian regime
listen to the voice of reason, accept those principles
and adhere to them.

Those are the excerpts from my Foreign Minister’s
statement earlier today that I wished to bring to the
attention of this body.
38. There is one other matter I wish to bring to the
attention of the Council. As the consideration of the
matter in the Council proceeds, we have one request
to make: if the Council is at any time going to move
into substantive discussions of the conflict and perhaps consider draft resolutions that might be submitted offically to it, we would humbly request that
an opportunity be given to our Government to present
its case in full, through its Foreign Minister, who is
willing and ready to come here when we inform him of
the request of the Council or when we inform him that
such substantive debate and consideration of draft
resolutions is to take place.

“On the basis of these same principles, Iraq today
reiterates its concern for peace in the world and the
fact that it does not intend to continue the fighting
at all if Iran acknowledges these principles and acts
accordingly.
“Iraq’s objective, as we have repeatedly stated,
is the maintenance of its national rights, its honour,
its territorial integrity and its sovereignty over its
national waters. It categorically has no ambitions
concerning Iran’s territory. All it aims at is: the
acknowledgement by the Iranian regime of these
rights; non-intervention in Iraq’s internal affairs;
the establishment of lasting peace on our common
border; and good-neighbourly relations.

39. 1think this is a reasonable and fair request by any
party to any dispute and I hope it will be accepted by
the Council.
40. The PRESIDENT (interpr&tion from French):
There are no other speakers. We shah thus continue
our consideration of this question, bearing in mind the
wish expressed by the Government of Iraq in the
statement by its representative here today.

“Iraq appreciates the concern shown by many
States throughout the world for security in this area
and understands and shares their apprehension. For
its part, Iraq wishes to make clear that it has a sense
of responsibility towards the vital economic interests
of all States, especially as regards oil. Iraq has
played a responsible role regarding this matter over
the past year.

The meeting

rose at 8.00 p.m.

NOTE

“With regard to the numerous proposals for
mediation and good offices, the Iraqi Government

I See Resolutions and Decisions qf the Security Council, 1980,
Q. 23.

4

’ ,

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLiCATlONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstote or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

DES NATIONS UNIES

Les publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dans Ies librairies et ies agencesd@ositaires du
monde entier. lnformez-vous aupr6s de votre libraire ou adressez-vous a : Nations Unies. Section
des writes. New York ou Get&e.

.

KASC
-1.

SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS

Hanam%

HOJIY’IHTh

H3JIAHHII

Oprawf~asun

OPl-AHH

3~x(SfSi

06ae~n~enubrx

HauuR

wnf

no

OWhE~HHEHHMX

YOXXO
KynHrb
B KKH)I(Kbm
mraHaBOnATe
cnpaBKH
06 n3AaHHXX
affpecy:
Opraxn3asnn
06zeAHxenxbfx

akuiax H areHTCTaax a.0 acex paRoxax uxpa.

I

Bafneu

KRII~KHO~

rarasnfe

numuTe

HanuR. Cexqnn no nponaxce u3naxnR. Hbw-Hopit

. .

B

HRHXexeaa.

COMO CONSECUIR PUEtLICACIONES DE LAS NAgON%-

.’

HAIWR

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas est&n en vcnta en librertas y cams diitribuidotas en
todas pattes de1 mtmdo. Con&e a su libtero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas. Sccci6n de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

L.itho in United Nations, New York

‘ao300

83-6146Z-October 1987-2.050
