General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

I. Notes with satisfaction that in its report to the
General Assembly the Ad Hoe Committee on the World
Disarmament Conference stated, inter a/ia, the following:
"Having regard for the important requirements of a
world disarmament conference to be convened at the
earliest appropriate time, with universal participation and with adequate preparation ... the General
Assembly may wish to decide that, after its second
special session devoted to disarmament, a world disarmament conference would take place as soon as the
necessary consensus on its convening has been
reached"; 44
2. Renews the mandate of the Ad Hoe Committee;
3. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to maintain close
contact with the representatives of the States possessing
nuclear weapons in order to remain currently informed
of their attitudes, as well as with all other States, and to
consider any possible relevant proposals and observations which might be made to the Committee, especially
having in mind paragraph 122 of the Final Document of
the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly;
4. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to submit a
report to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "World Disarmament Conference".

94th plenary meeting
12 December 1980

35/152.

Review of the implementation of the recommendations and decisions adopted by the General
Assembly at its tenth special session
A

UNITED NATIONS PROGRAMME OF FELLOWSHIPS ON
DISARMAMENT

The General Assembly,
Recalling its decision, taken at the tenth special session, to establish a programme of fellowships on disarmament, 45
Recalling also its resolution 34/83 D of 11 December
1979, in which it requested the Secretary-General to
make adequate arrangements relating to the programme for 1980 in accordance with the guidelines approved by the General Assembly at its thirty-third session,
Expressing its satisfaction that Governments, particularly those of developing countries, have continued
to manifest serious interest in the programme,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of the United Nations programme of fellowships on disarmament for 1980, 40
I. Decides to continue the United Nations programme of fellowships on disarmament;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to make adequate
arrangements relating to the programme for 1981 in accordance with the guidelines approved by the General
Assembly at its thirty-third session;
44
Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-fifth Session.
Supplement No. 28 (A/35/28), para. 15.
"Resolution S-10/2, para. 108.
"A/35/521.

3. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to
the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session a report
on the implementation of the programme;
4. Commends the Secretary-General for the diligence
with which the programme has been conducted;
5. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
that have invited the fellows to their capitals to study
selected activities in the field of disarmament, thereby
complementing usefully the fulfilment of the over-all objectives of the programme, as well as providing additional information sources and practical knowledge
for the fellows.

94th plenary meeting
12 December 1980
B
NUCLEAR WEAPONS lN ALL ASPECTS

The General Assembly.
Reaffirming that nuclear weapons pose the m0st
serious threat to mankind and its survival and that it is
therefore essential to proceed with nuclear disarmament and the complete elimination of nuclear weapons,
Reaffirming also that all nuclear-weapon States, in
particular those which possess the most important
nuclear arsenals, bear a special responsibility for the fulfilment of the task of achieving the goals of nuclear disarmament,
Stressing again that existing arsenals of nuclear
weapons alone are more than sufficient to destroy all life
on earth, and bearing in mind the devastating results
which nuclear war would have on belligerents and nonbelligerents alike,
Noting with alarm the increased risk of a nuclear
catastrophe associated both with the intensification of
the nuclear-arms race and with the adoption of the new
doctrine of limited or partial use of nuclear weapons giving rise to illusions of the admissibility and acceptability of a nuclear conflict,
Stressing again that priority in disarmament negotiations should be given to nuclear weapons, and referring
to paragraphs 49 and 54 of the Final Document of the
Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly,4 7
Recalling its resolutions 33/71 H of 14 December
1978 and 34/83 J of II December 1979,
Noting with satisfaction that the Committee on Disarmament during its session held in 1980 considered
the item of its agenda entitled "Cessation of the
nuclear-arms race and nuclear disarmament",
Noting also the proposals and statements made in the
Committee on Disarmament on the cessation of the
nuclear-arms race and nuclear disarmament,
Noting with regret that the Committee on Disarmament during its session held in 1980 did not have an opportunity to attempt to reconcile the different points of
view as regards the approach, machinery and basis for
multilateral negotiations on nuclear disarmament,
Convinced that the Committee on Disarmament is the
most suitable forum for the preparation and conduct of
the negotiations on nuclear disarmament,
I. Notes the decision of the Committee on Disarmament to resume intensive consideration, at its session to
be held in 1981, of the item on the cessation of the
nuclear-arms race and nuclear disarmament;
,, Resolution S-10/2

II I.

69

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

2. Believes it necessary to intensify efforts with a
view to initiating, as a matter of high priority, negotiations, with the participation of all nuclear-weapon
States, on the question of the cessation of _the nucleararms race and nuclear disarmament, in accordance with
the provisions of paragraph 50 of the Final Document
of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly;
3. Calls upon the Committee on Disarmament, as a
matter of priority and for the purpose of an early commencement of the negotiations on the substance of the
problem, to undertake consultations in which to consider, inter a/ia, the establishment of an ad hoe working
group on the cessation of the nuclear-arms race and of
nuclear disarmament with a clearly defined mandate:
4. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to
report on the results of those negotiations to the General
Assembly at its thirty-sixth session.

94th plenary meeting
12 December 1980
C
NUCLEAR WEAPONS IN ALL ASPECTS

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, at its tenth special session, the first
special session devoted to disarmament, it decided that
effective measures of nuclear disarmament and the prevention of nuclear war had the highest priority and that
it was essential to halt and reverse the nuclear-arms race
in all its aspects in order to avert the danger of war involving nuclear weapons,
Recalling also that. at the same session, it was expressly recognized that the achievement of nuclear disarmament would require urgent negotiation of agreements at appropriate stages and with adequate
measures of verification satisfactory to the States
concerned, and the results that should be pursued in
each one of those stages were defined,
Reiterating its conviction, as stated in its resolution
34/83 B of 11 December 1979, that the Committee on
Disarmament, as the single multilateral disarmament
negotiating body, should become urgently and most
directly involved in substantive negotiations on priority
disarmament questions,
Bearing in mind the declaration formulated by twentyone of the States members of the Committee on Disarmament, in the working paper of 27 February 1980, 48
to the effect that working groups are the best available
machinery for conduct of concrete negotiations within
the Committee,
Taking into account the positive conclusions derived
from the performance of the four ad hoe working groups
established by the Committee on Disarmament on 17
March 1980 to deal, respectively, with the items relating
to chemical weapons, radiological weapons, "negative
guarantees" and the comprehensive programme on disarmament,
1. Urges the Committee on Disarmament to establish, upon initiation of its session to be held in 1981,
an ad hoe working group on the item which in its agenda
for 1979 and 1980 was entitled "Cessation of the
nuclear-arms race and nuclear disarmament":
2. Considers that, in the light of the exchange of
views held on this subject during the last two annual sessions of the Committee on Disarmament, it would be
advisable that the working group begin its negotiations
"SeeCD/139/Appendix 11/Yol.L document CD/64.

by addressing the question of the elaboration and
clarification of the stages of nuclear disarmament envisaged in paragraph 50 of the Final Document of the
Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, 47 inducting identification of the responsibilities of the
nuclear-weapon States and the role of the non-nuclearweapon States in the process of achieving nuclear disarmament.

94th plenary meeting
I 2 December 1980

D
NON-USE OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS AND PREVENTION OF
NUCLEAR WAR

The General Assembly,
Alarmed by the threat to the survival of mankind and
to the life-sustaining system posed by nuclear weapons
and by their use, inherent in concepts of deterrence,
Convinced that nuclear disarmament is essential for
the prevention of nuclear war and for the strengthening
of international peace and security,
Recalling its declaration, contained in the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General
Assembly, that all States should actively participate in
efforts to bring about conditions in international relations among States in which a code of peaceful conduct
of nations in international affairs could be agreed upon
and which would preclude the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons, 40
Recalling its resolutions 1653 (XVI) of 24 November
1961, 33/71 8 of 14 December 1978 and 34/83 G of 11
December 1979,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,"' to
which is annexed the Comprehensive Study on Nuclear
Weapons, prepared with the assistance of a Group of
Experts,
I. Declares once again that:
(a) The use of nuclear weapons would be a violation
of the Charter of the United Nations and a crime against
humanity:
(b) The use or threat of use of nuclear weapons
should therefore be prohibited, pending nuclear disarmament:
2. Requests all States that have so far not submitted
their proposals concerning the non-use of nuclear weapons, avoidance of nuclear war and related matters, to do
so, in order that the question of an international convention or some other agreement on the subject may be
further considered at the thirty-sixth session of the
General Assembly:
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "Non-use of nuclear weapons and prevention of nuclear war".
94th plenary meeting
12 December 1980

E
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS AND
DECISIONS OF THE TENTH SPECIAL SESSION

The General Assembly.
Having reviewed the implementation of the recommendations and decisions adopted at the tenth special
,,, Resolution S--IOi~- para. 58.
'' A/35./.192: sec also l'oot-note 67 below.

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

70

session, the first special session devoted to disarmament,
Recalling its resolutions S-10/2 of 30 June I978 and
34/83 C of 11 December 1979,
Bearing in mind that general and complete disarmament has been recognized as an imperative and most
urgent task facing the international community and that
all the peoples of the world have a vital interest in the
success of disarmament negotiations,
Considering it imperative to achieve genuine progress
in all negotiations dealing with disarmament issues,
Reaffirming that the United Nations has a central role
and primary responsibility in the sphere of disarmament,
Noting with satisfaction that the tenth special session
resulted in greater involvement by Member States in efforts aimed at halting the arms race and launching a
process of genuine disarmament,
Expressing its satisfaction that some initial results in
the implementation of the recommendations and decisions of the tenth special session have been achieved,
primarily through a considerable revitalization of the
multilateral disarmament machinery,
Deeply concerned, however, about the continuing
arms race and, in particular, the nuclear-arms race,
which constitutes a growing threat to international
peace and security,
Calling attention to the tasks set forth in the Declaration of the 1980s as the Second Disarmament Decade,' 1
which demand intensified efforts to be taken in the
Committee on Disarmament and other appropriate
forums,
Stressing the need to promote the development,
strengthening and intensification of international cooperation designed to achieve general and complete
disarmament, as defined by the General Assembly at its
tenth special session,
Noting with concern the lack of tangible progress with
respect to the implementation of the measures expressed in the Programme of Action set forth in section
III of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session
of the General Assembly;'
I. Expresses its deep concern about the continued
arms race, in particular the nuclear-arms race, and
about the constantly growing military budgets, which
bear negative consequences and pose a growing threat to
international peace and security as well as to the unhampered development of countries, particularly developing countries;
2. Urgently calls upon all States, in particular nuclear-weapon States and other major military Powers,
immediately to take steps leading to effective halting
and reversing of the arms race and to disarmament:
3. Urges those States also to intensify their efforts to
bring to a successful end the negotiations which are currently taking place in the Committee on Disarmament
and other international forums or to proceed with negotiations on effective international agreements according to the priorities of the Programme of Action set
forth in section III of the Final Document of the Tenth
Special Session of the General Assembly;
4. Recommends that the Committee on Disarmament should concentrate on the substantive and priority
items on its agenda with a view to achieving tangible
results;
·" See resolution 35/46 above.

5. Expresses its conviction that one of the most important contributions for the preparation of the special
session on disarmament to be held in I 982 will be to
achieve tangible progress in the implementation of the
Programme of Action:
6. Calls upon all States to refrain from any actions
which have or may have negative effects on the implementation of the relevant recommendations and decisions of the tenth special session:
7. Invites all States which are engaged in disarmament negotiations ,lr arms limitation negotiations outside the United Nations framework to keep the General
Assembly and the Committee on Disarmament informed of the results of such negotiations in conformity
with the relevant provisions of the Final Document of
the Tenth Special Session:
8. Also calls upon States engaged in disarmament
negotiations or arms limitation negotiations outside the
United Nations framework to implement the results
achieved so as to create favourahle conditions for further progress:
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "Implementation of
the recommendations and decisions of the tenth special
session of the General Assembly".

94th plenary meeting
12 December 1980
F
REPORT OF THI DISARMAMFNT COMMISSION

The General Assembly.
Having considered the report of the Disarmament
Commission,'·'
Emphasizing again the importance of an effective
follow-up to the relevant recommendations and decisions adopted at ih tenth special session,
Considering the important role that the Disarmament
Commission has played and the significant contribution it has made in examining and submitting recommendations on various problems in the field of disarmament and in the promotion of the implementation
of the relevant decisions of the tenth special session,
Recalling its resolution :S4/83 Hof 11 December 1979,
1. Endorses the report of the Disarmament Commission and the recommendations contained therein:
2. Requests the Disarmament Commission to continue its work in accordance with its mandate, as set
forth in paragraph 118 of the Final Document of the
Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly,4 7 and,
to that end, to meet for a period not exceeding four
weeks during 198 I:
3. Also requests the Disarmament Commission to
continue the consideration of the agenda items contained in General Assembly resolution 34/83 H, with
emphasis on the preparation of a report to the Assembly
at its second special session devoted to disarmament;
4. Further requests the Disarmament Commission to
submit a report on its work and its recommendations on
paragraphs 2 and 3 above to the General Assembly at its
thirty-sixth session:
5. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Disarmament Commission the report of the Committee
,. Official Record,· o/ rhc (irneral .·lswmhli·. Thirty~fijrh Session.
Supplemenr \'o. 4:! ( ·\ .1' -l:')

Ill.

on Disarmament, 53 together with all the official records
of the thirty-fifth session of the General Assembly
relating to disarmament matters, and to render all assistance that it may require for implementing the present resolution;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "Report of the Disarmament Commission".

94th plenary meeting
I 2 December I 980
G
PARAGRAPH 125 OF THE FINAL DOCUMENT

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the declaration set forth in section II
of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of
the General Assembly 47 that, unless its avenues are
closed, the continued arms race means a growing threat
to international peace and the security of mankind,
Profoundly concerned over the deterioration of the international situation,
Recalling the Programme of Action set forth in section III of the Final Document as well as the activities
undertaken in pursuance of the Declaration of the 1980s
as the Second Disarmament Decade' 1 towards bringing
about the cessation of the arms race and towards real
disarmament,
Reaffirming that, while nuclear disarmament is a task
of the first and highest priority, progress in the limitation and subsequent reduction of nuclear weapons
would be facilitated by parallel political measures and
international legal measures to strengthen the security of
States;
Calling for the dissolution of existing military
alliances and, as a first step, for refraining from actions
conducive to expansion of existing military groupings,
Concerned over the fact that the current negotiations
on arms limitation and on disarmament are being protracted and that some of them have been suspended or
terminated,
I. Calls upon the States permanent members of the
Security Council and the countries which have military
agreements with them to exercise restraint in both the
nuclear and conventional fields and to resolve not to increase their armed forces and conventional armaments,
effective from an agreed date. as a first step .towards a
subsequent reduction of their armed forces and conventional armaments;
2. Invites the appropriate international bodies in the
field of disarmament to continue, in accordance with the
Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the
General Assembly, efforts aimed at achieving positive
results in curbing the arms race in accordance with the
Programme of Action set forth in section III of the Final
Document and the Declaration of the 1980s as the
Second Disarmament Decade:
3. Requests the Secretary-General to keep this question under constant review and to transmit all relevant
documents of the thirty-fifth session of the General Assembly to appropriate international bodies.

H
PROGRAMME OF RESEARCH AND STUDIES ON
DISARMAMENT

The General Assembly.
Recalling the recommendations concerning the establishment of an international institute for disarmament research contained in its resolution 34/83 M of
11 December 1979,
Taking into account the dec_isions ta~en by the B_o~rd
of Trustees of the United Nations Institute for Training
and Research at its special meeting in February 1980,
Bearing in mind the work of the Advisory Board on
Disarmament Studies at its meetings held in 1980,
I. Approves the report of the Secretary-General on
the programme of research and studies on disarmament: '4
2. Welcomes the establishment at Geneva of the
United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research within the framework of the United Nations Institute for
Training and Research as an interim arrangement for
the period until the second special session of the
General Assembly devoted to disarmament.
94th plenary meeting
12 December 1980

WORLD DISARMAMENT CAMPAIGN

The General Assembly,
Recalling that at its tenth special session it stressed the
importance of mobilizing public opinion on behalf of
disarmament,
Taking into account that, in the Final Document of
the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly/ 7 it
recommended to that end the adoption of several concrete measures intended to intensify and broaden the
dissemination of information about the arms race and
the efforts to halt and reverse it as well as to promote
programmes of study and education concerning disarmament,
Bearing in mind that for the realization of a world disarmament campaign of a permanent character it will be
necessary, on the one hand, to define some basic rules
which, without detriment to the necessary flexibility,
will ensure a minimum of co-ordination and, on the
other hand, to establish a practical and generally acceptable system for the financing of such a campaign,
Having examined the relevant section of the report of
the Secretary-General on the fourth and fifth sessions of
the Advisory Board on Disarmament Studies,"
l. Requests the Secretary-General to carry out, with
the assistance of a small group of experts, for whose
composition, in so far as circumstances permit, preference should be given to members of the Secretariat, a
study on the organization and financing of a World Disarmament Campaign under the auspices of the United
Nations;
2. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session an item entitled "World Disarmament Campaign".

94th plenary meeting
12 December 1980
"Ibid., Supplement No. :>7 (A/ JS /27)

71

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

94th plenary meeting
12 December 1980
" i\/35/574.
"A/35/575, sect. II A..

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

72

J

35/153.

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON DISARMAMENT

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 34/83 B of 11 December 1979,
Expressing its satisfaction that the Committee on Disarmament has made progress in respect of the improvement of its organization and methods of work,
Affirming that the establishment of ad hoe working
groups on substantive disarmament issues will promote
the negotiating role of the Committee on Disarmament,
Expressing its concern that, despite improvements in
its methods of work, the Committee on Disarmament
has not thus far been able to achieve concrete results on
disarmament issues which have been under consideration for a number of years,
Convinced that the Committee on Disarmament, as
the single multilateral negotiating body on disarmament, should play the central role in substantive negotiations on priority questions of disarmament and on the
implementation of the Programme of Action set forth in
section III of the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly, 47
Stressing that negotiations on specific disarmament
issues conducted outside the Committee on Disarmament should not in any way constitute an impediment to
the negotiations on such questions in the Committee,
I. Urges the Committee on Disarmament to continue or undertake, during its session to be held in 1981,
substantive negotiations on the priority questions of disarmament on its agenda, in accordance with the provisions of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly and the other relevant
resolutions of the Assembly;
2. Invites the members of the Committee on Disarmament involved in separate negotiations on specific
priority questions of disarmament to intensify their
efforts to achieve a positive conclusion of those negotiations without further delay for submission to the Committee and, at the same time, to submit to the Committee a full report on their separate negotiations and the
results achieved in order to contribute most directly to
the negotiations in the Committee in accordance with
paragraph I above;
3. Requests the Committee on Disarmament, at its
session to be held in 1981, to continue negotiations on
the elaboration of a comprehensive programme of disarmament, and to submit the programme in time for
consideration by the General Assembly at the second
special session devoted to disarmament;
4. Also requests the Committee on Disarmament to
intensify its work on priority questions of disarmament,
so that it may be in a position to contribute, through
concrete accomplishments, to a favourable climate for
the second special session of the General Assembly
devoted to disarw.ament:
5. Further requests the Committee on Disarmament
to submit a report on its work to the General Assembly
at its thirty-sixth session;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "Report of the
Committee on Disarmament''.

94th plenary meeting
12 December 1980

United Nations Conference on Prohibitions or
Restrictions of Use of Certain Conventional
Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate
Effects

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/152 of 19 December 1977,
33/70 of 14 December 1978 and 34/82 of 11 December
1979,
Reiterating its conviction that the suffering of civilian
populations and of combatants could be significantly reduced if general agreement could be attained on the prohibition or restriction for humanitarian reasons of the
use of specific conventional weapons, including any
which may be deemed to be excessively injurious or to
have indiscriminate effects,
Reaffirming its belief that positive results as regards
the non-use or restriction of use for humanitarian reasons of specific conventional weapons would serve. in
addition, as encouragement in the broader field of disarmament,
Recalling that, by its resolutions 32/152 and 33/70, it
decided to convene in 1979 the United Nations Conference on Prohibitions or Restrictions of Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to
Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects and established the mandate of the Conference.
Further recalling that. by its resolution 34/82, it endorsed the recommendation of the Conference to hold
another session in September /October 1980. with a view
to completing negotiations in conformity with resolutions 32/152 and 33/70,
I. Takes note with appreciation of the Final Report
of the United Nations Conference on Prohibitions and
Restrictions of Use of Certain Conventional Weapons
Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or
to Have Indiscriminate Effects, held at Geneva from I0
to 28 September 1979 and from 15 Septc·m bcr to I O October 1980; 5 "
2. Welcomes the successful conclusion of the Conference, which resulted in the adoption. on 10 October
1980, of the following instruments:
(a) Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on
the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May
Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have
Indiscriminate Effects:
(b) Protocol on Non-Detectable Fragments (Protocol I):
(c) Protocol on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the
Use of Mines. Booby Traps and Other Devices
(Protocol II);
(d) Protocol lm Prohibitions or Restrictions on the
Use of Incendiary Weapons (Protocol Ill):
3. Takes note of article 3 of the Convention, which
stipulates that the Convention shall be open for
signature on 10 April 1981:
4. Commends the Convention and the three annexed
Protocols to all States, with a view to achieving the
widest possible adherence to these instruments:
5. Notes that, under article 8 of the Convention,
conferences may be convened to consider amendments
to the Convention or any of the annexed Protocols. to
consider additional Protocols relating to other categories of conventional weapons not covered hy the ex,, A/CONF.95, I 'i and Corr 1.
