UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1997/48
20 October 1997
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH, FRENCH
AND RUSSIAN

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3824th meeting of the Security Council, held on 20 October 1997 in
connection with the Council's consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Croatia", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council welcomes the report of the Secretary-General of
2 October 1997 (S/1997/767), on the United Nations Transitional
Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium (UNTAES),
and agrees with its balanced and objective assessment.
"The Security Council notes with approval several positive actions
taken by the Government of Croatia which are contained in the report, as
well as those which have occurred since the report was issued. These
developments include the recent agreements relating to education, progress
on the reintegration of the judiciary, the law on convalidation, moves
towards recognition of pensioner service, assistance to local governments
and municipalities, and provision to UNTAES of documentation on 25 war
crimes cases. The Council is also encouraged by the increased cooperation
with the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. The Council
expects the Government of Croatia to continue to build upon these positive
steps and accelerate its efforts in order fully to complete these
initiatives.
"The Security Council welcomes the recent establishment by the
Government of Croatia of a programme for national reconciliation. A final
assessment of this programme must await its full and prompt implementation.
"The Security Council continues to note with concern that there are
still many outstanding areas and issues of contention and non-compliance,
which require further, urgent action from the Government of Croatia. The
Council reiterates its call to the Government of Croatia to curb media
attacks on ethnic groups. The Council also underlines, in particular, the
importance of the removal of all legal and administrative barriers, thus
allowing the accelerated voluntary two-way return of displaced persons,
including their right to choose to live in the region, as well as the
return of refugees. It calls upon the Government of Croatia to give
immediate effect to recent decisions of the Constitutional Court regarding
97-27891 (E)

201097

/...

S/PRST/1997/48
English
Page 2

the Law on the Temporary Takeover and Administration of Specified Property,
and to take further action to promote the safe return of owners to their
homes and the resolution of the issue of lost tenancy rights, including
ensuring access to reconstruction assistance.
"Much progress in these and other outstanding areas must be made on an
urgent basis, in order for the Government of Croatia to comply fully with
its obligations and create the conditions for a successful completion of
UNTAES. For its part, the local Serb population must also take more active
measures to participate in the reintegration process.
"The Security Council notes the urgent need for all local government
bodies in the region, particularly the City Council of Vukovar, to commence
full normal functions immediately.
"The Security Council expresses its concern about the behaviour of
some officers of the Transitional Police Force, and urges full cooperation
with UNTAES in improving the performance of this Force. The Council
approves the intention of the Secretary-General to retain United Nations
civilian police and military observers at current levels to the end of the
UNTAES mandate. The Council also notes the need to address concerns
relating to the continuation of police monitoring functions.
"The Security Council welcomes the close cooperation between UNTAES
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in
expanding the long-term mission of the OSCE in Croatia.
"The Security Council shares the assessment of the Secretary-General
that there is sufficient time for Croatia to comply fully with its
obligations and commitments before 15 January 1998 and urges the Government
of Croatia to redouble its efforts in the time remaining. The Council
looks forward to the next report of the Secretary-General on all aspects
relevant to the peaceful reintegration of the region, due by the beginning
of December."

-----
