United Nations

A/RES/62/209

General Assembly

Distr.: General
11 March 2008

Sixty-second session
Agenda item 59 (c)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 19 December 2007
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/62/424/Add.3)]

62/209. South-South cooperation
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 33/134 of 19 December 1978, in which it endorsed
the Buenos Aires Plan of Action for Promoting and Implementing Technical
Cooperation among Developing Countries, 1
0F

Recalling its resolutions 57/270 B of 23 June 2003, 60/212 of 22 December
2005 and other resolutions relevant to South-South cooperation,
Recalling also the 2005 World Summit Outcome, 2
1F

Recalling further its resolution 59/250 of 22 December 2004, in which it, inter
alia, urged organizations and bodies of the United Nations system to mainstream, in
their programmes and through their country-level activities and country offices,
modalities to support South-South cooperation,
Recalling its resolution 49/96 of 19 December 1994 on a United Nations
conference on South-South cooperation, welcoming the support expressed for the
convening of a United Nations conference on South-South cooperation, and
recognizing the increased role undertaken by the United Nations to support
activities in economic cooperation among developing countries,
Taking note of the initiatives contained in the Havana Programme of Action
adopted by the first South Summit, 3 the Marrakesh Framework for the
Implementation of South-South Cooperation 4 and the Doha Plan of Action, 5
2F

3F

4F

1.
Welcomes the report of the High-level Committee on South-South
Cooperation on its fifteenth session and the decisions taken at that session; 6
5F

_______________
1

Report of the United Nations Conference on Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries,
Buenos Aires, 30 August–12 September 1978 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.78.II.A.11 and
corrigendum), chap. I.
2
See resolution 60/1.
3
A/55/74, annex II.
4
A/58/683, annex II.
5
A/60/111, annex II.
6
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 39 (A/62/39).

07-47631

A/RES/62/209

2.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the state of SouthSouth cooperation; 7
6F

3.
Stresses that South-South cooperation, as an important element of
international cooperation for development, offers viable opportunities for
developing countries in their individual and collective pursuit of sustained economic
growth and sustainable development;
Also stresses that South-South cooperation is not a substitute for, but
4.
rather a complement to, North-South cooperation;
5.
Highlights the fact that, in spite of progress achieved in this area, further
efforts are required to better understand the approaches and potential of South-South
cooperation to enhance development effectiveness, including through national
capacity development;
Encourages the international community, including the international
6.
financial institutions, to support the efforts of developing countries, inter alia,
through triangular cooperation;
Encourages the initiatives and arrangements, including public-private
7.
mechanisms, undertaken in the efforts to enhance cooperation between developing
countries, including, inter alia, in the areas of the fight against poverty and hunger,
access to information and communications technologies, science and technology,
environment, culture, health, education and human development;
Invites the High-level Committee on South-South Cooperation and the
8.
Executive Board of the United Nations Development Programme and of the United
Nations Population Fund, as appropriate, to consider measures to strengthen further
the Special Unit for South-South Cooperation within the United Nations
Development Programme as a separate entity and a focal point for South-South
cooperation in the United Nations system, so as to enable it to carry out its full
responsibilities, in particular through the mobilization of resources for the
advancement of South-South cooperation, including through triangular cooperation;
Recognizes the need to further assess the progress made by the United
9.
Nations development system in its support to South-South cooperation, particularly
through the provision of resources for South-South cooperation, and mobilization of
technical and financial resources for triangular cooperation, as well as to
mainstream South-South cooperation in the work of the United Nations funds and
programmes and the specialized agencies in the field;
10. Also recognizes the need to mobilize additional resources for enhancing
South-South cooperation, and in this context invites the donor community, including
Member States, to contribute generously to the United Nations Fund for SouthSouth Cooperation and the Pérez-Guerrero Trust Fund for Economic and Technical
Cooperation among Developing Countries, in accordance with its resolution 57/263
of 20 December 2002;
11. Reaffirms that existing regular resources will continue to fund the
activities of the Special Unit for South-South Cooperation, and encourages the
Special Unit to explore and undertake intensive, innovative and additional resource
mobilization initiatives to attract more resources, both financial and in kind, to

_______________
7

2

A/62/295.

A/RES/62/209

supplement regular resources and other funds for activities involving South-South
cooperation;
12. Encourages all Member States to deepen, intensify and enhance SouthSouth cooperation, including through triangular cooperation, in all its aspects, as a
continuing and vital process undertaken to help meet the challenges facing the
countries of the South, especially least developed countries, landlocked developing
countries, small island developing States and countries in post-conflict and crisis
situations;
13. Recognizes the need to strengthen and further invigorate South-South
cooperation, in that regard decides to convene a High-level United Nations
Conference on South-South Cooperation on the occasion of the thirtieth anniversary
of the adoption of the Buenos Aires Plan of Action for Promoting and Implementing
Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries,1 no later than the first half of
2009, and requests that the President of the General Assembly entrust the President
of the High-level Committee on South-South Cooperation with undertaking the
necessary consultations with Member States in order to prepare for the proposed
conference, with a view to the Assembly’s taking a decision, during its sixty-second
session, on the nature, date, objectives and modalities of the conference, making use
of the existing coordination mechanisms of the United Nations system;
0H

14. Welcomes the generous offer of the Government of Argentina to host the
High-level United Nations Conference on South-South Cooperation;
15. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-fourth session
the sub-item entitled “South-South cooperation for development”, and requests the
Secretary-General to submit at that session a comprehensive report on the
implementation of the present resolution.
78th plenary meeting
19 December 2007

3
