S/PRST/2005/21

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
31 May 2005
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5191st meeting of the Security Council, held on 31 May 2005, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “United Nations
peacekeeping operations”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council recognizes the vital role that United Nations
peacekeeping operations have played for decades in bringing peace and
stability to countries emerging from war. The Council further recognizes that,
with few exceptions, the women and men who serve in United Nations
peacekeeping operations do so with the utmost professionalism, dedication
and, in some cases, make the ultimate sacrifice.
“The Security Council is deeply concerned with the allegations of sexual
misconduct by United Nations peacekeeping personnel. The distinguished and
honourable record of accomplishment in United Nations peacekeeping is being
tarnished by the acts of a few individuals.
“The Security Council condemns, in the strongest terms, all acts of
sexual abuse and exploitation committed by United Nations peacekeeping
personnel. The Council reiterates that sexual exploitation and abuse are
unacceptable and have a detrimental effect on the fulfilment of mission
mandates.
“The Security Council, while confirming that the conduct and discipline
of troops is primarily the responsibility of Troop Contributing Countries,
recognizes the shared responsibility of the Secretary-General and all Member
States to take every measure within their purview to prevent sexual
exploitation and abuse by all categories of personnel in United Nations
peacekeeping missions, to enforce United Nations standards of conduct in this
regard. The Security Council reiterates the importance of ensuring that sexual
exploitation and abuse are properly investigated and appropriately punished.
“The Security Council underlines that the provision of an environment in
which sexual exploitation and abuse are not tolerated is primarily the
responsibility of managers and commanders.
“The Security Council welcomes the comprehensive report on sexual
exploitation and abuse by United Nations Peacekeeping Personnel (A/59/710),
prepared by the Secretary-General’s Adviser on this issue, H.R.H. Prince Zeid
Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein, Permanent Representative of the Hashemite Kingdom
05-36800 (E) 310505

*0536800*

S/PRST/2005/21

of Jordan to the United Nations. The Council also welcomes the report of the
resumed session of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping (A/59/19/Add.1).
“The Security Council urges the Secretary-General and Troop
Contributing Countries to ensure that the recommendations of the Special
Committee, which fall within their respective responsibilities, are implemented
without delay.
“The Security Council will consider including relevant provisions for
prevention, monitoring, investigation and reporting of misconduct cases in its
resolutions establishing new mandates or renewing existing mandates. In this
regard, the Security Council calls on the Secretary-General to include, in his
regular reporting of peacekeeping missions, a summary of the preventive
measures taken to implement a zero-tolerance policy and of the outcome of
actions taken against personnel found culpable of sexual exploitation and
abuse.”

2
