Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

developing countries, and especially the relatively less
developed among them,
Convinced also of the importance of ensuring the
optimum impact of the multiplier effect of assistance
provided to the developing countries, and in particular
the assistance provided by the United Nations Development Programme,
Recalling paragraph 4 of its resolution 2814 (XXVI)
of 14 December 1971 on the capacity of the United
Nations development system,
l. Invites the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme to convene, through
the Administrator of the Programme and in consulta!ion with the interested Member States, a working group
m order to:
(a) Examine and make recommendations on the
best way for developing countries to share their capacities and experience with one another with a v,iew
to increasing and improving development assistance;
(b) Examine the relative possibilities and advantages of regional and int-erregional technical co-operation among developing countries;
2. Calls upon the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme also to give priority
to the improvement of procedures for the elaboration
and implementation of inteI1regional, regional and subregional programmes of the United Nations Development Programme in accordance with paragraphs 21,
22 and 23 of the annex to General Assembly resolution 2688 (XXV);
3. Also invites the Governing Council of the United
Nations Develop,I1ent Programme to consider at an
early session measures that are needed to reduce the
administrative costs of the Programme;
4. Requests the Goveming Council of the United
Nations Development Programme to submit to the
General Assembly at its twenty-ninth session, through
the Economic and Social Council, a report and recommendations on the matters indicated in paragraph 1
above.
2109th plenary meeting
14 December 1972
2975 (XXVII). Measures to strengthen the executing agencies of the United Nations Development Programme

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the important role of the United Nations
development system for attaining the goals and objectives of the International Development Strategy for
the Second United Nations Development Decade30
and the responsibility of the United Nations Development Programme, as wdl as of the participating and
executing agencies, effectively to assist Member States
in their efforts to achieve economic development and
social justice as weU as qualitative and structural
changes in society,
Recalling the consensus adopted by the Governing
Co_uncil of the ~nit~d Nations Development Programme
at 1ts tenth sessmn, m June 1970,31 designed to increase
3 0 Resolution 2626 (XXV).
31 See Of]icial Records of the Economic and Social Council

Forty-ninth Scssion, Supplemem No. 6A (E/4884/Rev.1)'.
para. 94. Sce also General Assembly resolution 2688 (XXV),
annex.

41

the capacity of the United Nations development system
to respond effectdvely and rapidly to the needs of
developing countries in accordance with their own
development objectives and priorities,
Further recalling the decision adopted by the Economic and Social Council on 22 July 1970 to recommend to all executing agencies of the United Nations
Development P,rogramme that they take the necessary
administrative and organizational steps for the common
endeavour of implementing the consensus and improving the delivery capacity of the United Nations
devclopment system,32
Bearing in mind its resolution 2688 (XXV) of
11 December 1970 on the capacity of the United
N ations development system,
Aware of the fact that operational activities financed
by the United Nations Development Programmc rcpresent a very large and growing sharc of thc total
activities of the agencies,
l. Emphasizes the need for effective and t,imely
preparation as well as implementation of the country
programmes and other activities financed by the Unitcd
Nations Development Programme;
2. Stresses that administrative overhead costs involved in the execution of projects of the Unitcd
Nations Development Programme should be minimized
in order to secure increased resources for direct assistance to recipient countries;
3. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme to take all necessary measures
at the headquarters and in the field offi.ces of the
Programme to ensure the timely approval and execution
of projects;
4. Invites the governing bodies of the participating
and execut,ing agencies to strengthen the executing
capacity of their respective agencies in accordance with
the above-mentioned, as well as other relevant, resolutions and decisions of the United Nations;
5. Further invites the governing bodies of the participat-ing and executing agencies, on the basis of
problem-oriented documentation prepared by the secret-ar~ats concemed, to discuss periodically and keep under
rev1ew the problems encountered by their respective
organizations in the planning and implementation of
the country programmes, taking into account the
desirability of achieving a high rate of project implementation and the need to promote high quality programmes and projects;
6. Requests the Administrator of thc United Nat-ions
Development Programme to gather all relevant information on difficulties encountercd and measures takcn bv
the agencies to strengthen thcir operational strncture
and their delivery capacity and to submit pcriodic
reports thereon, together with his commcnts. tll the
Governing Council of the Programme.
:! ! 09th ple11arv meeting
14 Deccmher 797.?
2976 (XXVII). Unitf'd Natiom, Capital Developuu'nt Fuud

The General AS'sembly,
Recalling its rcsolutions 2186 (XXI) of l 3 Dcccmber 1966, 2321 (XXH) of 15 Dcccmber l %7. 2-t1 f)
32 /bid., Supp/ement No. l (E/4904 and Corr.l), Other
deci~ions, p. 17.
