S/PV.7505

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7505th meeting

Tuesday, 18 August 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Ogwu. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Nigeria)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Hmoud
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Gasso Matoses
Mr. Wilson
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Regional organizations and contemporary challenges of global security
Letter dated 5 August 2015 from the Permanent Representative of Nigeria to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2015/599)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-25853 (E)
*1525853*

S/PV.7505

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Regional organizations and contemporary
challenges of global security
Letter dated 5 August 2015 from the Permanent
Representative of Nigeria to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2015/599)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Armenia, Benin, Botswana, Brazil,
Cuba, Egypt, Georgia, Haiti, India, Indonesia, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan,
Kuwait, Morocco, the Netherlands, Pakistan, Panama,
Poland, the Republic of Korea, South Africa, Sweden,
Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, Uruguay and Viet Nam to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Nick
Westcott, Managing Director for Africa of the European
External Action Service of the European Union, and
Mr. Adonia Ayebare, Adviser to the African Union
Mission to the United Nations, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2015/599, which contains the text of a letter
dated 5 August 2015 from the Permanent Representative
of Nigeria to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note on the
item under consideration.
I wish to warmly welcome Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, to whom I now give the floor.
The Secretary-General: I welcome this
opportunity to discuss regional organizations and
contemporary global security challenges. I thank
Ambassador Ogwu for Nigeria’s initiative to organize
this very important meeting.
I have always valued cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations, which have gained greater
influence in recent years. Today I will focus on how
2/32

18/08/2015

to strengthen partnerships so that we can improve our
collective response to evolving threats. My message
is simple: the United Nations increasingly shares
responsibility for peace and security with regional
organizations. We should do everything possible to
help them resolve regional problems — and to include
the States concerned in solutions. At the same time,
regional organizations should continue contributing to
United Nations peace and security efforts. We count
on them for political leverage, as well as civilian and
military capacities.
Members of the Security Council are all too
aware of the changing nature of conflict. Terrorism
and the spread of violent extremism are destabilizing
volatile regions. The stakes are high in any response.
Urbanization,
unemployment
and
population
movements, including massive displacement, are
increasing dramatically. Technological advances in
warfare, including cyberthreats, pose grave dangers
to civilians. Against that shifting security landscape,
the United Nations is deploying into fragile and remote
environments with little peace to keep. The Security
Council has rightly given our Blue Helmets ambitious
mandates to protect civilians, but too often we lack
the proper equipment, resources and training for that
life-saving mission.
To close the gap, last year I called for a fresh review
of peace operations. I am now analyzing the report of
the High-level Independent Panel on United Nations
Peace Operations (see S/2015/446). We are identifying
the recommendations we can carry out immediately,
and those that will require action by legislative bodies,
Member States and partners. The Panel calls for a
stronger global-regional partnership to ensure that
the Council can draw on a more resilient and capable
network of actors. In recent years, we have seen how
practical cooperation among the United Nations, the
African Union (AU) and the European Union has
enhanced progress in Africa. Now we need to build
on this trilateral cooperation and boost our collective
ability to manage, plan and execute peace operations.
We should also be open to different forms of
engagement with other organizations, including the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations, the Collective
Security Treaty Organization, the League of Arab
States, NATO and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe. The Panel recommends that we
deepen the strategic United Nations-AU partnerships. I
fully agree. Almost two thirds of our peace operations

15-25853

18/08/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

and nearly 90 per cent of our uniformed peacekeepers
are deployed in Africa.
I applaud the AU and the regional economic
communities and regional mechanisms for significantly
strengthening their capacities and for responding
rapidly to emerging crises. In Mali, the Central African
Republic and Somalia, the African Union has deployed
robust operations in complex settings. That dangerous
work carries a high price. I honour the courage of those
AU troops who have lost their lives in the cause of
peace. The best tribute is to establish lasting security
where they served.
The report calls for greater support to Security
Council-authorized AU peace operations. The experts
recommend that the United Nations enable regional
organizations to share the burden, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations. Towards that end, I
draw attention to the Panel’s call for more predictable
financing, including through the use of United Nationsassessed contributions.
There are other important forms of support. We are
helping with planning processes, logistical packages,
United Nations-managed trust funds and access to
United Nations expertise, systems, materiel and
services. The United Nations broad support for the AU
and the Economic Community of West African States
also includes political cooperation, which is difficult to
quantify but still highly valuable.
Strengthening conflict prevention and mediation
saves lives. Our joint efforts have made a meaningful
difference in defusing tensions and supporting the
transition in Burkina Faso, encouraging political
dialogue ahead of elections in Guinea, resolving the
electoral crisis in Kenya and ending a political deadlock
in Madagascar through a Southern African Development
Community road map, among other engagements.
Investing in prevention will spare the much higher
human and financial costs of a crisis. Leaders must
recognize that peace will prevent humanitarian
tragedies and spur economic development. We should
place high expectations on the countries concerned and
help them to realize lasting stability.
Our partnerships have brought valuable lessons.
We have learned to manage transitions from regional
operations to United Nations peacekeeping missions.
We have provided a logistics support package to the
African Union Mission in Somalia — the AU’ s largest
peace operation. The United Nations Office to the AU

S/PV.7505

is strengthening our impact. Now we must optimize our
collaboration even more. We must continue working
together to harmonize standards. That would improve
the transition from AU operations to United Nations
peacekeeping missions. More systematic coordination
and consultation on policies, guidance and training
standards would ensure coherence at all phases, from
planning to drawdown. Human rights must always be
at the forefront.
The Panel rightly underscores the primacy of the
United Nations Charter and other international human
rights and humanitarian law instruments. United
Nations support to regional partners is contingent on
compliance with United Nations norms and standards,
including the Human Rights Due Diligence Policy, the
highest standards of conduct and discipline, the United
Nations financial rules and regulations, as well as other
legislated procedures. We are all accountable for what
we do and how we do it. Our ultimate responsibility is
to the peoples we serve.
We have succeeded in dramatically enhancing our
partnerships. We have come to rely on each other in
critical times. We will continue to advance progress.
The United Nations and regional organizations strive
for a common approach to today’s challenges. Our views
may diverge at times, but as long as we are committed
to peace, security and human rights, we will stay on
course to a more secure future.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I now give the floor to the members of the Security
Council.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates Nigeria’s initiative to convene today’s open
debate on regional organizations and contemporary
challenges of global security. I thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his presence at this meeting,
and listened carefully to his briefing.
The United Nations is at the heart of the
international collective security mechanism. The
Security Council has the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. Peace
and development are the watchwords of our times, but
our world is not yet at peace. Regional turbulence,
terrorism, major epidemics, natural disasters and other
non-traditional security issues continue to arise. All
countries are becoming increasingly interdependent
and share a common destiny.

15-258533/32

S/PV.7505

Maintenance of international peace and security

China supports the efforts of the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations to deepen
cooperation in accordance with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations in consolidating and
strengthening the international collective security
mechanism as we strive to jointly maintain international
peace and security. I should like to emphasize three
points in that regard.
First, we must be guided by and base our actions
on the United Nations Charter. The United Nations
should encourage and support regional organizations
in resolving conflicts through dialogue, consultations,
good offices and mediation, in defusing differences
through peaceful means, and in contributing to the
promotion of regional peace and security. The actions
of relevant regional organizations should adhere to the
principles and purposes of the Charter, in particular the
principle of respect for the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of States.
Secondly, we must deploy our respective strengths
in order to enhance complementarity and coordination.
China supports regional organizations in fully utilizing
their own experiences and advantages in regional,
historical and cultural expertise in playing their
unique role in resolving regional conflicts. When
cooperating with each other, the United Nations and
regional organizations should use their respective
strengths to complement and promote each other’s
efforts. Regional organizations should strengthen
contacts and cooperation among themselves, draw on
one another’s experiences and learn from each other.
China appreciates the efforts of regional organizations,
such as the African Union (AU), to resolve regional
hotbed issues through good offices and peaceful means.
We hope that the United Nations will provide more
assistance to the relevant regional organizations and
support their important role in maintaining regional
peace and security.
Thirdly, we should continue to cooperate in seeking
win-win situations and towards common development.
All countries should adopt a new approach for win-win
solutions, and in pursuit of self-interest we must also
take the interests of others into account and promote
common development, while seeking our own. They
should maintain a concept of security that is joint,
integrated, cooperative and sustainable; take full
account of the history and reality of relevant regional
problem; and develop comprehensive policies that seek

4/32

18/08/2015

security through cooperation, place equal emphasis
on development and security, and promote sustainable
security through sustainable development.
The AU, the largest and most representative regional
organization in Africa, is playing an increasingly
important role in regional peace and security affairs.
China has always been an active and constructive
participant in African peace and security affairs. In July
2012, at the fifth ministerial conference of the Forum
on China-Africa Cooperation, China put forward the
Initiative on China-Africa Cooperative Partnership
for Peace and Security, aimed at enhancing the AU’s
capacit-building in peace and security, improving its
capacities in peacekeeping operations and combatting
terrorism and piracy. The Initiative covers Chinese
financial support to the AU for conducting peacekeeping
operations and building the African Standby Force. It
also covers strengthened training for African Union
peace and security officers and peacekeepers.
With the efforts of both sides over the past three
years, there has been positive progress in implementing
the initiative. China has provided positive support
to the African Union Mission in Somalia, as well as
for other activities, and has trained a large number of
peacekeepers for African countries. The Forum will
hold its sixth meeting later this year, on the theme
“Peace and security”.
Together with Africa, China is ready to seize
the opportunity to step up the implementation of the
Initiative on China-Africa Cooperative Partnership
for Peace and Security so as to facilitate the political
settlement of hot-spot issues and jointly promote peace,
stability and development on the African continent.
China attaches great importance to the important
role played by regional and subregional organizations
in preventing and resolving conflicts and facilitating
post-conflict reconstruction, as well as responding to
non-traditional security threats. China is ready to join
hands with the international community to strengthen
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations to promote international
peace and security and to create a more secure and
brighter future for all.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to extend my sincere thanks to Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his valuable briefing. I would also
like to thank the presidency of the Security Council for
organizing this important meeting.

15-25853

18/08/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

At present, the world faces great changes and
transformations in the structure of the international
system and with regard to the concept of regional and
international security, as well as with regard to the
policies guiding regional and international relations.
Ongoing instability in certain regions has led to great
changes in the type of security threats we face. For
example, terrorist groups take advantage of chaos
and instability to transform into global groups that
threaten all regions without exception. Increasing
globalization and technological progress have also
served to create complex, intertwined threats that go
beyond the territory of a single State or region — such
as cyberthreats — which will threaten global security
unless we work collectively to address them with
creative methods.
The concept of security has therefore changed
overall. It is no longer tied just to military or State
security as it once was. It is therefore no longer enough
to focus on regional security alone, as it too is linked
to political, economic and developmental issues that
require a comprehensive, global perspective as well
as mutual reliance among regional and international
organizations, such as the United Nations. That in turn
requires efforts on all levels, with a view to setting
out clear strategies and charting courses of action that
we can take to face the current threats to international
peace and security.
Cooperation among regional and international
organizations has become an important prerequisite
to face all sorts of challenges, whether regional or
international. In that context, some organizations — such
as the League of Arab States, the European Union and
the African Union, as well as many other organizations
in Asia and Latin America — serve as very useful
models that should be followed in collectively
achieving regional security. The League of Arab States
is also among the regional organizations that serves as
an important political forum for settling conflicts and
launching mediation efforts and political processes.
The European Union, too, plays an extremely effective
role in mediation and in responding to crises in various
geographical regions, including the Middle East and
the African continent. The African Union also faces
grave security threats on the African continent.
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union, especially when it comes to peacekeeping
operations, has contributed greatly to maintaining
international peace and security, alleviating the burden

S/PV.7505

on the United Nations and implementing resolutions of
the Security Council. In that context, I should like to
emphasize the importance of subregional cooperation
in facing terrorist threats, which are pervasive in
certain regions. Such cooperation has proved useful,
in particular in the cases in the Lake Chad Basin
and Benin, as well as in addressing terrorist groups
associated with Boko Haram. Utilizing multinational
forces and good military coordination also play an
important role in facing the threats posed by that and
other terrorist groups.
Regional
organizations
have
comparative
advantages in their own geographic regions, as well
as strong networks with extensive knowledge of their
respective regions. Geographical proximity also makes
those organizations more responsive to the needs of
their regions, as well as more active as partners in
determining the causes and solutions to the various
crises. On the other hand, many regional organizations
continue to lack certain important strategic and
executive capabilities necessary to facing security
threats, in particular terrorism, violent extremism and
transnational organized crime. They need to be given
adequate tools and means to carry out preventive
diplomacy and provide early warning, so as to prevent
and settle conflicts in a timely way.
In that regard, the United Nations can play a very
important role in supporting regional organizations,
which are indispensable in facing many conflict
situations. We would like to stress the importance of
the role of the Organization and of using the Charter of
the United Nations to respond to international security
threats. The United Nations should lead regional
and international coordination with subregional and
civil society organizations alike. That places great
responsibility on the United Nations to set up the
necessary partnerships and play a greater role in
providing the necessary means to regional organizations
so that they can adequately and promptly respond to
security threats and to adapt in the best way possible to
the various changes and geopolitical transformations.
In that regard, we would like to suggest reconsideration
of a permanent mechanism of cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations, which
would hold regular meetings with a view to promoting
cooperation among such organizations and to expand
the scope of dialogue and exchanges on lessons learned,
including achieving consensus on dealing with different
international peace and security issues. We hope that

15-258535/32

S/PV.7505

Maintenance of international peace and security

18/08/2015

the Security Council and the Secretariat will look into
a way of discussing and launching such a mechanism.

the illegal flow of small arms and light weapons is of
the utmost importance.

In conclusion, I would like to stress the importance
of the role of regional organizations for two main
reasons. First, at the regional level, cooperation between
the countries of a given region that are members of the
same organizations would positively influence peace in
the entire region. Secondly, regional organizations that
face security challenges are part of the global security
structure, which now relies on the efforts of those
organizations, as well as of international organizations.
While regions are the source of many security threats,
they are also capable of providing solutions to threats
that could have extremely dangerous regional and
international repercussions if left unchecked.

We have consistently supported developing
multifaceted cooperation among the United Nations,
the African Union and African countries vulnerable
to crises. Although we are talking primarily about
the African Union, other regional and subregional
organizations, which usually have a better understanding
of the specificity of local issues, are also of considerable
relevance. We welcome the establishment of the African
Peace and Security Architecture with the assistance of
the international community. We are convinced of the
need to further strengthen the partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union, so as to increase
the effectiveness of efforts to solve the problems of
peace and security in Africa and to better tackle crises
around the globe.

I would also like to underscore the fact that
bridging the gaps between the regional organizations
and the United Nations would increase the chances of
success in dealing with world crises at a time when
those organizations require the necessary support to
complement the United Nations role in international
peace and security. That makes the link between
regional and world security a complementary and
interdependent relationship.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his briefing. We note the key role of
the United Nations in establishing a more reliable, fair
and effective architecture for international relations,
where the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security is borne by the Security
Council. The Russian Federation has consistently called
for the development and improvement of cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
on a wide range of issues, based on the Charter of the
United Nations and, in particular, its Chapter VIII.
With respect to joint efforts in the maintenance of
international peace and security within the Security
Council’s purview, we deem it of critical importance
to ensure the Council’s approval of and control over
regional and coalition operations that envision the use of
force. Only by adhering to the decisions of the Security
Council can the necessary international legitimacy be
attributed to the use of sanctions mechanism. It must
also be noted that, in the context of new and emerging
threats and challenges, cooperation in areas such as
counter-terrorism, drug trafficking, organized crime,
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and

6/32

In that connection, we note the efforts of the United
Nations and the African Union to stabilize the situation
in Darfur, Somalia, the Central African Republic,
the Sahel and Mali, as well as on the inter-Sudanese
track. Of equal importance is the coordination of
actions to prevent conflicts in South Sudan. At the
same time, we commend the successful cooperation
between the African Union and other subregional
organizations — such as the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, the East African
Community, the Lake Chad Basin Commission, the
Economic Community of West African States and
the Southern African Development Community — in
neutralizing the threats to peace, security and stability
on the African continent.
We are deeply concerned about the ongoing
activities of the armed group Boko Haram in a number of
countries. We welcome the efforts of regional partners
of Abuja in providing assistance to counter that group’s
threat to the security of West African States and the
countries of the Gulf of Guinea, in the understanding
that any international assistance should be provided
only with the consent of the Nigerian authorities.
There is also great potential in the cooperation
between the United Nations and the League of Arab
States. We also feel that there is promise for the
broadening of contacts between the United Nations and
other dynamically growing regional structures, such
as the Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States, the Union of South American Nations and the
Caribbean Community.

15-25853

18/08/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7505

One of Russia’s priorities is to strengthen the
cooperation between the United Nations, the Collective
Security Treaty Organization and the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization, which are enhancing their
political standing in the world and strengthening
regional and international architectures for security. We
consider the Collective Security Treaty Organization to
be a multifaceted structure able to respond to a wide
range of contemporary challenges and threats that
its member States might face. In that regard, we see
prospects for deepening the cooperation between the
Collective Security Treaty Organization and the United
Nations in the area of peacemaking. In the framework
of the Collective Security Treaty Organization, there
is intensive work underway in the development of its
own peacekeeping capabilities, including cooperation
with the United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Furthermore,
the
Collective
Security
Treaty
Organization is assisting international efforts aimed
at post-conflict rebuilding in Afghanistan as well as at
stemming the threat of drugs coming from that country.

History has demonstrated how double standards
and a selective approach to implementing standards in
an attempt to strengthen one State’s security undermine
that of other States and how intervention in inter-State
affairs increases security threats for the region as a
whole. Unfortunately, over the past year — as this is
clearly demonstrated by the Ukrainian crisis — we are
witnessing a crisis in European security. There is a need
to continue to seek solutions to that situation. We think
that the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe should reject confrontation and return to
discussions in a constructive spirit. That is the only
way to find solutions to the accumulated and systemic
problems — while finding steps to ensure the principle
of the indivisibility of security. We hope that the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
will return to discussing the idea of establishing a
unified military-political, humanitarian and economic
space from the Atlantic to the Pacific oceans, including
the integration processes or what is known as the
“integration of integrations”.

The Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO)
plays a major role in ensuring stability and security
in the Eurasian region. We note that the SCO has
rightly become a cornerstone of regional security in
all of its manifestations. Its activities relate to counterterrorism and countering extremism. In that regard,
we have seen the positive impact of the organization’s
regional counter-terrorism structures. There has also
been development in cooperation in the areas of the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
international information security.

We fully the support the efforts of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe aimed at
assisting in settling the conflict in Ukraine and welcome
the essential work of the Special Monitoring Mission in
monitoring the situation on the ground. However, of key
importance for the swift implementation of all provisions
of the package of measures for the implementation of
the Minsk Agreement, which recently have reached
an impasse, is active and productive dialogue within
the framework of the Contact Group and its working
sub-group. Clearly, without progress in implementing
the political provisions of the Minsk agreements and
direct dialogue between Kyiv, Lugansk and Donetsk,
there can be no final settlement or sustainable
de-escalation.

Of particular importance for the European continent
are the activities of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe — an organization that
complements the efforts of the United Nations in the
region and within the framework of its mandate — in
establishing agreed mechanisms across the region. On
1 August, we marked the fortieth anniversary of the
signing of the 1975 Final Act of the Conference on
Security and Cooperation in Europe, which is one of
the most modern security architectures in the world.
We are fully committed to the Helsinki principles of
inter-State relations, their linkages and the reciprocal
obligations under the Conference on Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe. We call upon
all States of the Eurasian and Atlantic community to
follow the letter and spirit of those principles.

Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I would like to
thank you, Madam President, for convening us today
to discuss the contribution of regional organizations to
the maintenance of international peace and security. I
also thank the Secretary-General for his briefing at the
beginning of this meeting.
Lithuania aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union (EU).
As our Jordanian colleague noted a few minutes
ago, regional and subregional organizations have the
advantage of geographical proximity and can thus
respond more quickly to the evolving situation on the

15-258537/32

S/PV.7505

Maintenance of international peace and security

ground. They share better knowledge of and insights
into the causes, factors and actors of a crisis, and, as
neighbours, they have a direct interest in preventing
a crisis from spilling over. The United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations would benefit
greatly from developing greater complementarity and
using their comparative advantages and capabilities
as they seek to defuse crises, negotiate peaceful
settlements and tackle cross-border threats.
Let me refer today to three regional organizations
of which my country is a member — the European
Union, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) and the Council of Europe — and to
their cooperation with the United Nations.
In the aftermath of the horrors of the Second
World War, European Governments, determined to
prevent another such terrible war, were determined to
proceed so as to make a war between the historic rivals
not merely unthinkable, but materially impossible.
Successive transformations made the European Union
an anchor of peace and security on the continent, whose
underlying principle of solidarity works inside as well
as well outside its boundaries, including through a
comprehensive strategic partnership with the United
Nations, which was recognized in last year’s presidential
statement S/PRST/2014/4 on the subject, adopted under
the Lithuanian presidency of the Council.
On the political level, the EU commitment to
prevention and mediation finds expression in its
continued support for United Nations stand-by teams
of mediation experts and its direct involvement in
mediation, such as that which produced an historic
agreement between Pristina and Belgrade in 2013 and,
more recently, the successful conclusion of negotiations
between the E3+3 Governments and Iran.
As the largest humanitarian and development donor
worldwide, the European Union cooperates with the
United Nations in all major conflict and post-conflict
areas, whether Syria, Libya, South Sudan, Ukraine,
the Central African Republic, Yemen or Afghanistan.
The EU has been at the forefront of United Nationsled international efforts in the Ebola response, which
the Council discussed just last week. The EU and its
member States dedicated €1.2 billion for humanitarian
aid, recovery and research projects in the affected
countries, including for support to the African Union’s
medical mission in West Africa. EU institutions and
member States have allocated some €3.7 billion to

8/32

18/08/2015

tackle the unprecedented humanitarian crisis in Syria
alone.
The comprehensive and synergistic nature of
partnerships among the United Nations, the EU and
African Union can well be seen in Somalia, Mali,
the Central African Republic and elsewhere, ranging
from border management and security sector reform
to capacity-building, post-conflict reconstruction and
reconciliation.
In Mali, an EU training mission (EUTM) and
the civilian mission EUCAP Sahel Mali are actively
contributing to the country’s security sector reform.
Lithuania is a long-term contributor to EUTM Mali
and is committed to maintaining its involvement. Close
cooperation between the United Nations, the European
Union and the African Union is also strong in Somalia,
involving Mission Atalanta, among others, in which
Lithuania has participated since 2011. The EU’s African
Peace Facility, inter alia, supports the fight of the
African Union Mission in Somalia against Al-Shabaab
terrorists and will provide funding for the multinational
joint task force against Boko Haram. EUCAP Sahel
Niger, established in 2012, is assisting the country and
the region to tackle transborder security threats such as
terrorism and organized crime.
With regard to combatting terrorism and countering
violent extremism, United Nations-EU high-level
counter-terrorism political dialogue and cooperation
offer much-needed and useful exchanges, as well as
capacity-building initiatives for affected regions and
States and should be further developed.
The OSCE, an organization with 57 participating
States on three continents, engages in a wide range
of issues, including conflict prevention, mediation,
confidence- and security-building measures, the fight
against illicit trade in small arms, non- proliferation
issues, and the promotion of the rule of law, good
governance, human rights and fundamental freedoms.
All those areas coincide with the activities of the
United Nations. Thus the two organizations certainly
have a great potential for closer cooperation that has
yet to be fully utilized. The OSCE has developed
considerable mediation and conflict-prevention
capacities complementary to those of the United
Nations, and it continues to play a role in tackling the
protracted conflicts in Nagorno Karabakh, Transnistria
and Georgia, as well as to contribute to security and
stability in Central Asia.

15-25853

18/08/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

This year, the OSCE marks the fortieth anniversary
of the Helsinki Final Act — a set of fundamental
commitments based on the principles of sovereignty,
territorial integrity, the inviolability of borders and
the non-use of force, which are also at the core of
the Charter of the United Nations. It is an important
but also a poignant anniversary, in the context of the
unprecedented breach of those very principles by
Russia, whose proxy war against Ukraine and illegal
annexation of Crimea continue to cause death and
destruction.
The OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine
has an important role to play, as it represents the only
international body providing continuous reporting
from the ground and registering ongoing violations
of the Minsk ceasefire. The Mission’s vehicles have
been burned and its unmanned aerial vehicles have
been repeatedly jammed, while its observers have been
denied access and threatened by illegal militants who
continue to enjoy the military and material support
of their patrons. The Mission definitely needs greater
support and cooperation from both the European Union
and the United Nations as it continues to carry out its
work. Despite existing difficulties, a greater role for
the United Nations in the pursuit of a durable, viable
resolution of that conflict should be further explored.
Let me now turn to the Council of Europe, which
has developed an impressive inventory of international
treaties aimed at addressing some of the most pressing
contemporary challenges that are at the core of issues
related to peace and security. The conventions on
mutual assistance in criminal matters, on corruption,
on cybercrime, on the prevention of terrorism and on
action against trafficking in human beings are just a
few highly relevant examples for the work we do here
at the United Nations, including in this Council. Those
treaties are open to accession by States not members of
the Council of Europe and can provide useful standards
and tools for countries anywhere around the globe for
strengthening governance, the rule of law and respect
for human rights.
In June, for the first time, the Secretary-General of
the Council of Europe addressed the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism on the initiatives
aimed at supporting efforts by States to implement
resolution 2178 (2014) on foreign terrorist fighters.
The recent adoption by the Council of Europe of
the protocol on foreign terrorist fighters merits our

S/PV.7505

attention as we continue to elaborate joint responses to
that unprecedented threat. It also serves as an excellent
example of close cooperation between regional
organizations and United Nations entities, since the
adoption of the protocol was originally suggested by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
which also participated actively in the drafting process.
The partnership between the United Nations and
the Council of Europe can also be strengthened in the
field of the rule of law, the absence of which, along
with the ensuing lawlessness and abuse, are often at
the very core of conflict. The Venice Commission of
the Council of Europe assists countries in democratic
transitions and constitutional processes. The work of
the Commission is well recognized not only within the
Council of Europe but also among its Mediterranean
and Central Asian partners. The Venice Commission
is already working closely with the United Nations
Development Programme on justice reforms. Its
expertise could be further used in assisting countries
in the constitutional and legislative fields, especially
in post-conflict situations, where building a judicial
system and ensuring the independence of the judiciary
are often key priorities.
Contemporary security challenges are too
complex and too multidimensional to be addressed by
any one single player. It is essential to take forward
the partnerships between the United Nations and
regional organizations, with a view to strengthening
complementarities and creating new synergies on the
basis of their comparative advantages. I hope that
today’s debate will contribute to that process.
Mr. Gasso Matoses (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
presence, as well as for his valuable contributions
to today’s discussion. I would also like to thank the
Nigerian presidency for organizing today’s debate and
for its cohesive approach to the three debates that have
been scheduled for this week to address new challenges
such as Ebola, crucial solutions such as security sector
reform and the work to be undertaken by regional
organizations. Those are three issues that affect us all
and whose consideration by the Council is essential.
Our thanks for that.
I am going to divide my statement into two parts.
First, I would like to refer to those aspects that, in the
view of Spain, have greater added value for the role of
regional organizations in the face of new challenges to
international peace and security. Second, I will address

15-258539/32

S/PV.7505

Maintenance of international peace and security

the challenges those regional organizations face in
conducting their work.
First of all, with respect to the added value of
these bodies, I will paraphrase the Secretary-General,
who acknowledged that this is a time of partnership
peacekeeping. Of course, this is a reality, and the main
aspect to which I will refer is the importance of the
work of regional organizations in peacekeeping as well
as the repercussions of current conflicts in terms of
violence, with indiscriminate attacks against civilians,
and in humanitarian terms, causing refugees crises,
just to give a few examples.
It is now more than ever necessary that regional
and subregional structures become involved in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding in the States of
their region. They have a greater knowledge of local
realities and can make the best contributions. The case
of Africa is a paradigmatic in that respect. The crucial
role played by the African Union (AU) in crises such as
those in Somalia and the Central African Republic with
the support and the assistance of the United Nations is
a very good example.
But it is not only regional organizations of a
continental nature but also subregional organizations
that have important added value. In the case of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, for
instance, we saw yesterday how it was able to shape
the beginnings of an agreement in the case of South
Sudan that we trust will be able to be developed later.
Also, the Economic Community of West African
States plays a very important role in supporting and
playing a preventive role with respect to resolving the
institutional and political crisis in Guinea-Bissau. Let
me mention also the East African Community, which
also supported the Arusha agreements in Burundi and
which today could play a very important role in helping
to achieve stability in that country, and, of course, we
encourage them to do so.
Another area where regional organizations also
have important added value is attention to new threats,
and here I should to refer in particular to the fight
against terrorism. Undoubtedly the rise of terrorism
and radicalism is a global problem that we all face and
that requires that we be united in the fight against this
barbaric phenomenon. Tackling the problem from a
global perspective is key, but we must do it also from a
regional perspective.

10/32

18/08/2015

Regional organizations are increasingly aware
of that fact, and a very clear example of this was the
participation of many of these organizations — the
European Union, the African Union, the League of Arab
States, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and the Council of Europe — in the ministerial
meeting on foreign terrorist fighters held in Madrid on
28 July, along with the special meeting of the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate chaired
by the Ambassador of Lithuania. That was a very clear
example of their involvement in this area.
There are other aspects and other new threats that
also require efforts on the part of regional organizations.
Here I refer to the fight against transnational organized
crime, mitigating environmental threats and the
fight against illicit trafficking, including human
trafficking, which is something we see every day on
the Mediterranean coast.
Another aspect that my delegation would like to
stress in connection with the importance of regional
organizations is preventive diplomacy and, more
specifically, mediation. We in Spain firmly believe in
the value of mediation as an instrument of preventive
diplomacy. Regional organizations have a great deal to
say in this area, as they have deeper knowledge of the
local culture and realities, and they have the capacity
to influence regional actors, with broad leeway for
the participation of civil society, including women, in
mediation initiatives.
Any initiative promoting the training and
involvement of regional organizations in mediation
efforts seems particularly interesting to us. I would
like to give an example of this. In March, within the
framework of the Spanish-Moroccan initiative on the
promotion of mediation in the Mediterranean region,
a seminar was held in Madrid on the role of regional
and subregional organizations in mediation in the
Mediterranean region. The seminar helped to promote
and develop General Assembly resolution 68/303,
of 2014, on mediation and regional organizations.
We were joined in Madrid not only by the United
Nations but also by the European Union, the Union
for the Mediterranean, the League of Arab States,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and the Arab Maghreb Union. These types of
meetings will continue and soon, as I said earlier, the
representative of Jordan will hold another meeting in
Amman along these same lines.

15-25853

18/08/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

Having said that, we have to acknowledge that
obstacles exist to the work of regional and subregional
organizations, obstacles that we must jointly try
to overcome. Among them I would mention very
briefly the need to guarantee and sustainability and
predictability of financial resources, the need to
promote capacity-building in regional and subregional
bodies, and the need to enhance cooperation between
regional bodies and the United Nations. The African
Union is once again a very good example of the efforts
that have been made in recent years, with its increasing
contribution to the maintenance of peace and security.
As a member of the European Union, I must of course
mention the importance that Spain attaches to the
cooperation that the European Union has with those
regional organizations.
While aligning myself with the statement to be
made later by the representative of the European Union,
I wish to to stress the important role of triangulation
among the European Union, the United Nations and
other organizations, specifically the African Union.
I should like to conclude by raising a series of issues
that the Council itself could reflect on and consider as
a means of deepening the existing relationship between
the United Nations and these regional organizations.
There are annual meetings between the Security
Council and the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union or the Political and Security Committee
of the European Union. These types of meetings are
a very good starting point, and my delegation fully
supports them. There are other things we could take
into account, for example, the statements made by
Security Council members before the organs of regional
bodies. Spain had the honour to participate this year, on
four different occasions, in the work of the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union, and we believe
that that was a very positive experience for all involved.
Other ideas could involve greater coordination
among the agendas or presidencies of the Councils,
joint annual meetings of the Secretaries-General of
the regional organizations with the Secretary-General
of the United Nations, and so there is a whole set of
different aspects on which I believe the Security
Council should reflect so as to determine if we could
put them into practice.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like at the outset to thank the Nigerian presidency
for having convened this debate and the SecretaryGeneral for his very thorough and detailed briefing.

S/PV.7505

We have said repeatedly that the vision and
contributions of regional organizations are crucial and
irreplaceable in preventing conflict and strengthening
peace processes. That is why these organizations must
strengthen their ability to act, taking account of new
approaches and strategies, in order to take on a more
direct role in terms of peace and regional security,
in accordance with the spirit of Chapter VIII of the
Charter.
The conduct and interests of local actors and
networks as well as emerging threats characterized
by their intensity must be considered from a regional
perspective in order to adequately prevent and tackle
the crises that emerge.
The Latin American and Caribbean region is
a zone of peace that through cooperative efforts
promotes sustainable development as one of the pillars
of stability and cooperation for peace, a vision that is
present in the various bodies and mechanisms in that
region. Here we wish to acknowledge the important role
played by the Organization of American States (OAS)
in strengthening cooperation in security matters. For
more than a decade, it has incorporated the concept of
multidimensional security in order to tackle emerging
threats, including terrorism, transnational organized
crime, the global drug problem, corruption, moneylaundering, illicit arms trafficking, human trafficking
and the possession of weapons of mass destruction
by non-State groups. At the same time, the OAS
recognizes that extreme poverty and the exclusion
from society of broad sectors of the population affect
stability and democracy, eroding social cohesiveness
and undermining States’ security. The OAS’s approach
constitutes a significant contribution to the ways
in which regional organizations can deal with new
threats, i.e. by addressing their underlying causes and
promoting inclusive development in order to maintain
international peace and security.
We appreciate the fact that cooperation between the
United Nations and regional and subregional bodies is
becoming more structured, given the concrete role that
those bodies have to play in managing conflicts. In that
context, interaction between the Security Council and
the Peace and Security Council of the African Union
can promote a more effective partnership involving the
multiple actors that negotiations and inclusive dialogue
aimed at building and consolidating peace require.
We also appreciate the role played by the African
Union peacekeeping operations conducted within the

15-2585311/32

S/PV.7505

Maintenance of international peace and security

context of United Nations mandates, and emphasize
the importance for them of being able to rely on
funding that is predictable, sustainable and flexible, if
they are to be as effective as possible. Ensuring that
standardized procedures and training in human rights
and international humanitarian law issues are used in
equipping those missions and their contingents is also a
crucial area to which regional organizations can make
a positive contribution.
Recent experience such as that in Sierra Leone
have shown how the United Nations, working together
with the African Union and subregional organizations,
can help to consolidate peace processes, based on the
principles of national ownership and inclusiveness,
while ensuring the involvement of civil society and,
of course, the participation of women. In that regard,
regional and subregional organizations are crucial to
implementing resolution 1325 (2000), and we would
like to highlight the African Union’s proclamation
of 2015 as the Year of Women’s Empowerment and
Development towards Africa’s Agenda 2063. The
Agenda refers specifically to the role of regional
organizations in consolidating democratic governance,
human rights and the rule of law in Africa and is an
example of the strategic vision that dealing with that
issue requires. Finally, we would like to emphasize
the commitment of African countries and regional
and subregional organizations to the second five-year
review of the peacebuilding architecture of the United
Nations, illustrating how regional experiences can
influence global processes.
We would like to conclude by reaffirming the high
priority that Chile assigns to regionalism’s contribution
to ensuring greater effectiveness in our system as a
whole, especially through an understanding of local
contexts. We believe that cooperation should be at the
heart of that approach if we are to achieve a functioning
multilateralism.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like to
thank the Nigerian presidency for organizing today’s
open debate and for its choice of theme, which addresses
issues that the Security Council has to deal with on a
daily basis. I would also like to acknowledge and thank
the Secretary-General for enriching our discussion this
morning through his presence, which again is a way of
sending a clear message that regional organizations and
their joint work with the Security Council are important
to his own agenda as Secretary-General. And I thank

12/32

18/08/2015

Nigeria for the excellent concept note (S/2015/599,
annex) it prepared for the debate.
Angola believes that strengthening global,
continental and subregional cooperation is critical to
the ability of the entire international community to
achieve peace, security and sustainable development.
In that context we must stress the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union in
several innovative missions, as well as the continued
engagement of the United Nations with regional
organizations on the basis of Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations, as exemplified by their
interaction and consultations on developing a shared
understanding of the root causes of conflicts. In that
regard, the creation of the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union is a milestone in that cooperation
and partnership.
We have recently witnessed the resurgence in
Africa of attempts to achieve unconstitutional changes
of Government and other threats that are undermining
national and subregional stability and affecting our
peoples’ human rights, progress and well-being. The
nature of the threats to peace and stability in Africa
has changed recently, with the appearance of terrorist
groups, particularly Al-Shabaab and Boko Haram, in
Kenya, Somalia, Nigeria, Chad and Cameroon. In that
connection, we commend the joint response to the threat
of Boko Haram represented by the creation of a joint
force, to which the Council has pledged its support.
The security of off-shore platforms and the danger of
piracy, particularly in the Gulf of Guinea, is a matter
of regional and global concern as well and deserves the
full attention of the international community, especially
the Security Council.
The African Union’s launch of the African Capacity
for Immediate Response to Crises (ACIRC), which
seeks to create a robust rapid-reaction force aimed at
providing a capacity for managing and responding to
security situations around the continent, is an important
development. While the technical aspects of ACIRC are
still being finalized, we believe that with the support
of the African States, Africa’s main partners and the
United Nations, it will become a reality, representing a
major gain in combating current and future threats to
peace and security on the continent.
We reiterate that the primary responsibility for
guaranteeing peace and stability is national. We
welcome the initiatives of subregional organizations

15-25853

18/08/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

such as the Southern African Development Community,
the Economic Community of West African States, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
for their contributions to addressing subregional
security. Angola strongly supports African ownership in
addressing and responding to contemporary challenges
to regional peace and security on the continent.
In conclusion, I would once again like to thank you,
Madam President, for bringing to the Security Council
this important topic, so crucial to peace and security in
the world today and in the future.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank you, Madam President, for convening today’s
very important debate. I also thank the SecretaryGeneral for sending a very clear signal to the Council
about how important it is that we cooperate effectively
with regional and subregional institutions.
That relationship between the United Nations and
regional organizations is one of the greatest structural
issues for the Security Council. At their best, the United
Nations and the region work in partnership towards
shared objectives, harnessing each other’s expertise and
making a difference to lives for people across the world.
When it works, we are very strong; when it does not,
none of us achieve what we want to achieve. Therefore,
cooperation is indispensable. The challenges facing
the Council cannot be tackled by one body on its own.
We need the united efforts of international, regional,
subregional and local bodies.
I think that is most true of all in Africa. The
Council has shared objectives and shared challenges
on peace and security with the African Union across
the continent. Those shared challenges make our
relationship with the African Union so important. At
its best, that relationship makes the lives of some of the
world’s most vulnerable people better. Somalia is a good
example of that integrated partnership. The African
Union’s military mission, the African Union Mission
in Somalia, supported by United Nations logisticians
working alongside a United Nations special political
mission, have been at the heart of progress in Somalia.
A joint team from the African Union and the United
Nations recently made important recommendations on
strengthening military and political progress in the
country. The Security Council endorsed that work
through resolution 2232 (2015) in the past month. The

S/PV.7505

results of that close partnership make Somalia one of
the few bright spots on the Council’s agenda.
Bringing an end to the fighting in South Sudan
is another challenge that we jointly face. We all said
that 17 August was a hard deadline for an agreement
to bring peace. If the Government of South Sudan will
not sign up to the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development-plus deal, then we must all be firm on
our next steps. We cannot sit by while leaders fight and
their people’s suffering grows.
As a member of the European Union, the United
Kingdom is committed to ensuring that Europe
plays its part in making the world a safer and more
prosperous place. The European Union is engaged
across the waterfront of international issues, and it is
a key partner for the United Nations in Africa. Its role
has also been clear with regard to Iran, where it was a
key facilitator in the recent E3+3 Governments talks
and helped to achieve an outcome of which the Council
was very supportive and endorsed emphatically.
We all bring different approaches to tackling issues
of peace and security. We make the most progress
when we harness our comparative advantages, as
the Secretary-General said. The Council’s ultimate
responsibility for the maintenance of peace and
security does not exclude the significant talents and
perspectives that regional organizations can provide,
but it is important for the United Nations to be engaged
at all stages of peace processes where we are required
to support and implement them. The report of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see
S/2015/446) has interesting things to say on this. We
agree with the Panel that consultative decision-making,
a common strategy and division of labour are key
components of the relationship between the Council and
regional organizations. We also agree that partnerships
with regional and subregional organizations should be
part of the Council’s early engagement on emerging
threats. Substantive dialogue between the Council
and regional organizations is an important tool, and
where possible, joint analysis and planning will enable
the Council to adopt clearer and better mandates, in
particular where regional missions are deployed.
We encourage regional organizations to review
their own planning authorization, human rights
monitoring and governance structures so that together
we can create a more coherent international and
regional approach to conflict. It is also important for

15-2585313/32

S/PV.7505

Maintenance of international peace and security

us to work with regional organizations to identify more
sustainable ways of funding their operations. The other
partner in that for all of us is civil society, the media
and other relevant non-State actors. This year, we have
heard moving and detailed accounts in Arria Formula
meetings from individuals brave enough to share their
experiences in Darfur, in North Korea and in Syria.
Those briefings improve our understanding of what is
at stake. The testimony of those on the ground is central
in alerting the international community to escalating
tensions. We should continue to examine how we
can work more effectively with those groups on the
challenges that we face internationally.
The United Kingdom is convinced that we can and
should do more to deepen our cooperation with regional
organizations across the world. Our responsibility in the
Council is to maintain international peace and security.
Our ability to discharge that heavy responsibility will
only be made stronger by deepening our relationship
with regional organizations, which is why we so
strongly welcome this important debate today.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): New Zealand
also thanks Nigeria for convening this meeting, and the
Secretary-General for his briefing and for staying with
us this morning. We are strong advocates of the role of
regional organizations and of the need for cooperation
between the United Nations, especially the Security
Council, and regional organizations.
African leadership on this issue is important,
but we must also acknowledge at the outset that
these are not challenges solely limited to Africa and
that the issues discussed today affect other regional
organizations around the globe. The experience in our
own region has been that regional organizations can be
highly effective. They frequently have the comparative
advantage that the Secretary-General has referred to,
because of their immediate needs and interests in local
stability, their understanding of the local context and,
where necessary, logistical ease of deployment.
As the Secretary-General has noted this morning,
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
has strongly endorsed the role of regional organizations
and made encouraging recommendations for better
synergy with the United Nations, and especially the
Security Council. We have seen many successful
examples of regional organizations responding to
emerging crises to prevent the emergence of conflict.
However, we need to be honest. In addition to the
issues of finance and capacity, which have already been
14/32

18/08/2015

highlighted today, there are other significant challenges
to effective cooperation with regional and subregional
engagement on peace and security issues. The result is
that there are still too many situations where regional
action is not proving sufficient to prevent or resolve
crises.
Cooperation with the Security Council, particularly
in the case of key organizations, such as the African
Union, is still largely reactive and ad hoc. Interventions
such as the African-led International Support Mission
in Mali (AFISMA) were highly challenging, not only
in terms of resourcing, but also in vision and shared
understanding. That hugely complicated the process of
transition to a post-AFISMA operation.
A key part of the problem, as we see it, is a failure
of approach on both sides. There is just not enough
political energy going into cooperation to produce
the necessary collective partnership between the two
Councils. Such structured cooperation between the
Security Council and regional entities on developing
coordinated approaches should begin at the outset
when crises are emerging. The Council and the African
Union Peace and Security Council need to do a better
job of working in unison to complement each other
and of utilizing each other’s comparative advantages,
starting with conflict prevention. We also believe that
both organs should be less concerned about sequencing
and should focus more on working together and
simultaneously. Again, the High-level Panel has useful
recommendations in that regard. At the end of the day,
both the United Nations and the African Union (AU)
have responsibilities to fulfil. They cannot avoid those
by arguing that they were waiting for the other to act.
If cooperation is going to work in the long term, it
requires a more systematized arrangement, based on the
view that the two organizations recognize the threats in
the region and wish to work with each other to address
them. There is a clear capacity gap, not only in terms
of the organizations themselves, but also in terms of
the national capacity that Security Council members
themselves deploy to promote effective cooperation.
As a result, we are still some distance from the kind
of coordinated approach to the assessment of key
regional threats and the development of appropriate and
coordinated responses that we all seek.
Furthermore, we cannot simply wish away the
uncomfortable financial realities. Capacity is still a
major issue for the AU and for its Peace and Security
Council. The shift towards a greater role for regional
15-25853

18/08/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

actors over the past decade has put real pressure on
regional and subregional organizations to build a
complex apparatus over a short period of time. There
needs to be a sustained long-term focus on building
effective regional conflict management frameworks so
that regional organizations are fully equipped to take
on tasks on behalf of the international community.
In our view, the United Nations has a clear role to
play in providing assistance. Indeed, it is in the United
Nations own interest to assist, because as the experiences
in Mali and the Central African Republic have clearly
shown, the only alternative is the United Nations
itself taking on more and more highly dangerous and
expensive operations and paying the full cost. Those
whose positions are driven by fiscal considerations
should think about how much they would have saved
if those operations had been funded under some kind
of innovative formula that would have resulted in only
part of the cost being funded from the United Nations
budget.
We suggest that the Security Council continues to
have a very important role to play. The Council should
continue to provide institutional support to regional
organizations through dedicated United Nations
resources, such as the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the United Nations Office to the African
Union. They are useful for building strong collaborative
relationships with the Economic Community of West
African States and the African Union, and have had
effective results on the ground.
The Council should also look to identify effective
and practical ways to improve interaction between the
members of the Council and the AU Peace and Security
Council. The Council must also face up to the challenge
of how to fund regional and subregional peacekeeping
operations, including by improving the efficiency of
the existing mechanisms. The recommendations of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
concerning predictable financing for AU-led peace
support operations under Security Council mandates
are a useful starting point for discussion, as the
Secretary-General told the Council this morning.
For our part, New Zealand supported the inaugural
meeting between the 10 elected members of the
Security Council and the AU Peace and Security
Counci in Addis Ababa at the start of this year, and
with Spain, we have been meeting at the start of each
month with the Chair of the AU Peace and Security
Council to discuss the joint agendas of each Council.

S/PV.7505

We have also sought the views of key regional actors
ahead of and following key Security Council decisions.
In our view, the communication between the Councils
in New York and in Addis Ababa needs to be informal,
regular and substantive if it is to be effective. Most
of all, it must become part of the regular business of
both organizations. That will indicate that we have the
partnerships that the Secretary-General has rightly
identified must be our objective.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): My delegation joins other
Council members in thanking Nigeria for convening
today’s debate. We also wish to thank your delegation,
Madam President, for the informative concept note
(S/2015/599, annex) that has been circulated, which
helps frame our debate today.
We wish to also express appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his briefing, which we have heard
with much interest, as well as for his untiring efforts
and leadership in enhancing and consolidating the
relationship between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations around the world.
We share the view that regional actors should
assume greater ownership of developments in their
respective regions. Malaysia aligns itself with the
statements to be delivered by the representatives of
Viet Nam on behalf of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN), the Islamic State of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, and Kuwait on
behalf of the countries of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation.
We are of the view that today’s debate comes at a
particularly timely juncture as threats to international
peace and security have become increasingly complex
and challenging, with trans-border elements and
other multi-layered regional dimensions. As rightly
envisioned in the Charter of the United Nations, the
United Nations has been and remains at the forefront
of international, multilateral efforts to combat such
new challenges, which range from blatant violations of
international law, terrorism, transnational organized
crime, humanitarian crises, environmental degradation
and the outbreak of deadly diseases, among others.
However, the authors of the Charter of the United
Nations also had the foresight to presage that while the
Organization and the Council would constitute the hub
of the international peace and security architecture,
they could not substitute for regional and subregional
arrangements and organizations, which should perform

15-2585315/32

S/PV.7505

Maintenance of international peace and security

such functions at that level, as envisioned by Chapter
VIII of the Charter.
Over the years, regional organizations such as the
African Union (AU), ASEAN, the European Union (EU)
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, among others, have embarked on pragmatic
steps, including by modifying their outlook and
perspectives in order to more effectively meet and
address changing global dynamics. At the same time,
the Council has also taken steps to promote and enhance
its engagement with regional organizations, including
through the adoption of relevant decisions and through
the convening of joint regular consultative meetings
such as with the AU Peace and Security Council and
the EU Political and Security Committee. Furthermore,
close partnerships with various regional bodies on many
important strategic areas — such as conflict prevention,
mediation and peacekeeping operations — have also
been established and strengthened over time.
To date, cooperation and coordination among
regional organizations in dealing with conflict and
security challenges have been encouraging. Examples
include the partnership between the African Union
and the EU and the coordination between the AU and
African subregional organizations to address threats to
peace and security in the African continent. Malaysia
believes that strategic partnership between the United
Nations and regional organizations is vital in addressing
contemporary global security challenges. We further
believe that multilayered partnerships between the
Council and regional organizations could serve as a
strong foundation of the future global security agenda.
From our perspective within ASEAN, Malaysia
places great value and importance on the role
played by regional and subregional organizations in
conflict prevention and resolution, the deployment
of peacekeeping operations, post-conflict building
and reconstruction and other important areas. On its
own, ASEAN has placed greater emphasis on creating
an enabling environment for peace in order to ensure
uninterrupted economic development. It has promoted
regional architecture towards stability and prosperity,
including tools for conflict prevention and peaceful
settlement of disputes.
Based on our experience, we support further
efforts to deepen cooperation between the United
Nations, and the Council in particular, and regional
bodies. That said, we wish to highlight the following.
The level and degree of intraregional cooperation
16/32

18/08/2015

varies significantly among regions, based on the unique
historical and political background of each region. In
addition, their aspirations, mandates and activities vary
enormously. In that regard, we believe that cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
will be more rewarding when such diversity is duly
observed and considered. Any form of cooperation
should be inclusive, flexible, responsive and adaptable,
especially in the case of complex joint endeavours
such as peacekeeping, peacebuilding and post-conflict
reconstruction.
While regional organizations may provide an
attractive alternative to an overstretched United
Nations mission, it is important to bear in mind
that regional bodies are also vulnerable to similar
problems faced by the United Nations. While being
mindful of the advantage of regional organizations
in better understanding the conflicts in their regions,
experience in dealing with situations such as those in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali, Somalia,
Darfur and the Central African Republic, among others,
has revealed the limitations of cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations. Without
sufficient financial and capacity-building support, the
aspirations and determination of regional organizations
could outstrip their ability to deliver, particularly in
harsh and challenging parts of the world. Consequently,
burden-sharing can easily become burden-shifting
as the international community places unrealistic
expectations on regional organizations that have yet to
build full capacity.
We are of the view that although significant
progress has been made in improving mutual
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations, we strongly believe that more can be
done. We hope that the discussion today will generate
more ideas and strategies in order to deepen, expand and
improve cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations, as well as among the regional
bodies, with a view to strengthening the capacity of the
international community to respond effectively to new
and old threats to international peace and security.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank the
Nigerian delegation for convening this meeting on
regional organizations and contemporary challenges
of global security. I also thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his briefing.
Chad aligns itself with the statement to be made by
the observer of the African Union to the United Nations.
15-25853

18/08/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

The growing number and intensification of
internal conflicts and the appearance of new serious
threats — including terrorism, the proliferation of
weapons, piracy at sea, transnational organized
criminality, trafficking in drugs, arms and human,
separatism and power conflicts, environmental
degradation and pandemics — make coordinated
regional action and a comprehensive approach
more necessary than ever to address those manifold
challenges. The cross-border nature of most security
challenges in Africa, as well as the insufficient means
at the disposal of individual countries, require the
strengthening of regional organizations, which are
the only bodies able to provide effective responses to
insecurity in its many and multiplying forms across the
world.
In that regard, the African Union (AU) has adopted
a peace and security architecture and developed
exemplary cooperation with the United Nations,
whose Charter in Chapter VIII recognizes its role in
the prevention, resolution and peaceful settlement
of conflict. Thus, the AU has not only deployed
peacekeeping operations authorized by the Security
Council, but has also undertaken its own activities in
the area of conflict prevention and crisis management,
including in Burundi, the Sudan, Somalia, Mali, the
Central African Republic, and so on.
In spite of its experience and significant means,
the United Nations alone cannot be everywhere all the
time to tackle the manifold challenges in the areas of
peace and security. That is why in Africa, where more
than 62.5 per cent of United Nations peacekeeping
operations and 87 per cent of uniformed personnel are
deployed, the African Union is a key strategic partner
that deserves to be supported so that it can shoulder its
responsibilities in the area of peace and security on the
continent. In Mali and in Central Africa, cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union,
through the Economic Community of West African
States and the Economic Community of Central African
States, has allowed for the swift deployment of African
troops. We welcome such cooperation and the support
of the United Nations to the African Union through the
Ten-Year Capacity Building Programme, the provision
of technical assistance and political support through
the United Nations Office to the AU in Addis Ababa.
Chad favours the strengthening of cooperation between
the two organizations, and reiterates its support for
the Common African Position on the United Nations
Review of Peace Operations.

S/PV.7505

Relations between the two organizations are
evolving in a positive manner, but they have not yet
attained the degree of strategic cooperation we would
like to see. We encourage the United Nations prioritize
a resolution to the urgent matter of financing African
Union peacekeeping operations authorized by the
Security Council. The two organizations must adopt
specific measures to make financing of United Nationsmandated African Union peacekeeping operations of
the Union more flexible, lasting and predictable, as
recommended by the High-level Independent Panel on
United Nations Peace Operations, whose high-quality
and serious work we commend. We hope that all the
other relevant recommendations of the High-level Panel
will enjoy the attention of the Council. Despite its lack
of predictable resources, which significantly hinders
its ability to undertake peacekeeping and security
operations on the continent, the African Union has
comparative advantages, such as geographic proximity,
legitimacy, an understanding of the root causes of
conflict and the ability to swiftly intervene in case of
crisis, as recalled by many speakers today.
Given the transnational, even transcontinental
dimension of contemporary security challenges, the
development of rapid reaction capacity by the African
Union — including the African Standby Force — three
of whose five regional brigades should be operational
by the end of 2015 — and the operationalization of the
African Capacity for Immediate Response to Crises
could provide the Security Council with the means to
act first when a crisis emerges.
Chad welcomes cooperation between the African
Union and the European Union, two close partners
of the United Nations in peacekeeping in Africa. The
continent is hosting nine European Union civilian
missions and military operations. Through the African
Peace Facility, these are financing the African Union
Mission in Somalia, which is a model of cooperation
between the European Union, the African Union and
the United Nations. It has also contributed to the
deployment of the African Union operations in Mali
and the Central African Republic. Chad welcomes
the European Union’s efforts and underscores the
importance of trilateral cooperation among the African
Union, the European Union and the United Nations in
addressing the common security and peace challenges
on the continent.
Strengthening cooperation between regional
organizations and civil society and non-governmental

15-2585317/32

S/PV.7505

Maintenance of international peace and security

organizations is of paramount importance because such
organizations could provide advantages and a useful
capacity to shore up peace and other activities relating
to conflict management. In the African context, the
importance of civil society, in particular women and
youth, was reflected in the African Union decision
marking 2015 as the Year of Women’s Empowerment
and Development Towards Africa’s Agenda 2063.
It would be a good idea to strengthen the capacity of
African civil society organizations and to encourage
their participation in resolving matters tied to peace
and security.
In conclusion, we note that the majority of security
challenges in Africa and the world know no borders and
require States and regional organizations to draw more
on their mutual efforts to suppress such threats. No
organization, including the United Nations, or region
can respond to the many challenges relating to collective
security alone. Only a solid, reliable and viable
partnership between the United Nations and regional
organizations, in particular the African Union, based on
a division of labour and taking into account the relative
comparative advantages, and strongly supported by the
United Nations, can address the manifold challenges to
peace and security on the continent. In that connection,
the African Union and its subregional mechanisms
have developed institutional and operational capacities
to play their full role, provided that the United Nations
provides significant financial support.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I thank
you, Madam President, for organizing this important
debate. We would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing.
While the nature of threats to global security has
become more complex and challenging over the course
of the United Nations 70-year history, the partnership
between the United Nations and regional organizations
has become truly indispensable. We have made much
progress in strengthening these partnerships, and we
must collectively recommit to continuing to do so. Part
of that effort will have to grapple with two increasingly
relevant phenomena in the evolving relationship between
regional organizations, subregional organizations and
the United Nations: overlapping responsibilities and
inequities and the need to improve the support provided
by the international community to support the work of
regional organizations.
In the United States about 50 years ago, a
programme known as Neighbourhood Watch was
18/32

18/08/2015

created. The idea was simple. Neighbours note when
something is awry and they have a vested interest in
ensuring that their communities and neighbours are
safe. Now regional and subregional organizations are
obviously much more than the Neighbourhood Watch of
the international system, but regional and subregional
organizations, as neighbours, are uniquely positioned to
recognize root causes more accurately and to identify
solutions earlier than organizations further away.
When regional or subregional organizations engage,
they do so with the benefit that comes from being a
neighbour. They bring a unique capacity to understand
local experiences, cultures and the complexity of the
challenges being confronted. As neighbours, they are
often better positioned to watch for problems and to act
on them.
But peacemaking and peacekeeping are not and never
should become something that concerns neighbours
alone. Indeed, the United Nations system, and United
Nations peacekeeping especially, are premised on the
idea that sometimes those further removed from deeply
engrained challenges — strangers, even, rather than
neighbours — are in a unique position to neutrally and
effectively engaged to protect people endangered by
their neighbours. That is why the Charter of the United
Nations envisions a robust partnership between those
closest to conflict and the United Nations itself. Both
roles are essential.
As the complementary and, at times, overlapping
responsibilities of regional organizations, subregional
organizations and the United Nations develop, there
appears to be an increasing bifurcation of political
and peacekeeping processes. Regional and subregional
organizations have taken on an increasingly important
role in facilitating, if not running, political processes
to resolve conflicts and reach peace agreements, even
when the Security Council has deployed a peacekeeping
operation with responsibility for protecting civilians
from being victimized in that conflict. This bifurcation
of responsibilities sometimes offers important
benefits, but it can also come with a price. While
neighbours bring familiarity and ownership, they can
also bring independent equities and interests. In order
for our partnerships to be effective, we need to share
responsibility and accountability even as we divide our
labour based on comparative advantages.
In South Sudan, while the Security Council has
deployed over 12,000 troops to the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan, the Security Council has

15-25853

18/08/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

deferred to the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development to lead mediation efforts. Given the
outrageous failure of the parties to reach an agreement
yesterday, support for the regional political process now
must mean a readiness of the Security Council to take
action, mobilize our collective resources, and increase
pressure accordingly on those who frustrate peace. We
must advance meaningful efforts to hold perpetrators
of atrocities accountable.
As part of our commitment to strengthening the
United Nations capacity to support peacekeeping
missions, the United States will co-host a summit this
fall at the United Nations to secure new commitments
and greater international support for United Nations
peacekeeping. We must also, however, ensure that
regional forces have the necessary support, training and
equipment to carry out their critical work. Where the
Security Council has authorized a regional organization,
such as the African Union, to undertake critical actions
to advance international peace and security, we need
to ensure that the regional mission has the resources
needed to execute its mandate effectively.
But just as the Security Council needs to remain
involved when political processes are being carried out
by regional actors, so too does the Security Council
need to retain accountability and oversight when it
authorizes regional or subregional organizations to
undertake peace operations. In particular, we need to
ensure that all operations carried out under Security
Council authority operate with the same respect for
human rights and zero tolerance for sexual exploitation
and abuse.
The stakes for getting the relationship between
regional subregional organizations and the United
Nations right could not be higher. As neighbours close
to a conflict or strangers far from it, each of us must do
more to work cooperatively and effectively to support
our partners in the important work of advancing peace.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela thanks Nigeria for convening
this important thematic debate and expresses its
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his briefing.
Furthermore, we endorse the statement to be made by
the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The concept note circulated by the Nigerian
presidency (S/2015/599, annex) rightly points out that

S/PV.7505

the end of the Cold War led to the strengthening of
regional and subregional organizations with greater
political space and international relevance. Venezuela
believes strongly that the emerging multipolar and
multicentre world bodes very positively for the
strenghening of international peace and security.
In this process, sustained cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations is critical to
achieving the definitive abandonment of unilaterlism
in international affairs. In this respect, we stress the
need to work towards a more balanced world in which
regional organizations have an important role to play
in ensuring peace and security. Venezuela therefore
calls for the expansion and strengthening of regional
organizations, as well as for increasing interaction and
relationships among them, since they are the natural
agencies for preventing and resolving the conflicts that
threaten world peace.
Regional organizations are prior and complementary
entities in the United Nations efforts to maintain
peace and security, with particular emphasis on their
preventive capacities. In fulfilling these tasks, regional
organizations should fully respect all the principles
and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations,
including full respect for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of States and the
self-determination of peoples. Regional organizations
cannot promote war.
Over the past 15 years, Latin America and the
Caribbean have seen a profound change in their
structures and political and social institutions with the
emergence of a clear, progressive orientation towards a
multipolar and multicentre world, inspired by President
Hugo Chávez and other great regional leaders, including
Commandante Fidel Castro Ruz and Presidents Nestor
Kirschner, Evo Morales Ayma, Rafael Correa, Daniel
Ortega Saavedra, Lula da Silva, Dilma Rousseff and
Michelle Bachelet Jeria, among others. It has created a
new regional political architecture that answers more
to the interests of the countries of Latin America and
the Caribbean than to the interests of any other Power,
leaving far behind regional organizations that, rather
than represent the interests of Latin America and the
Caribbean, subordinate them to alien interests and
needs.
Thus, these past 15 years have seen the emergence of
the Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America
(ALBA), PetroCaribe, the Union of South American
Nations (UNASUR), the Community of Latin American

15-2585319/32

S/PV.7505

Maintenance of international peace and security

and Caribbean States (CELAC), and the Southern
Common Market, now expanded and re-energized. This
break with the past represents a reaffirmation of the
principles of sovereignty, non-intervention in internal
affairs and political independence, and the definition
of the interests and priorities of the countries of the
region. These political integration processes are based
on the need for mutual respect and benefit in preserving
peace with social justice.
The Union of South American Nations is built
on the common resolve of all the countries of the
subregion. UNASUR has demonstrated its ability to
act quickly and decisively to prevent any corruption of
the constitutional order, as happened in Bolivia against
President Evo Morales Ayma in 2008 and against
President Rafael Correa in Ecuador in 2010, when the
member countries of that forum spoke up in favour of
the validity of the constitutional and democratic order in
those sister nations, in rejection of the insurrectionary
and separatist claims of the insurgents. UNASUR now
has a democratic protocol, signed in 2010, that provides
for the imposition of diplomatic, political and economic
sanctions in case of a breakdown of the democratic
order in the South American region.
Furthermore, ALBA was born of an initiative of
the President of Venezuela, Hugo Chávez, to strengthen
the self-determination of peoples and the sovereignty
of States against the neocolonial policies of foreign
Powers and consistently in favour of the poorest and
most excluded. ALBA is not a subregional defence
mechanism. It is an organization that is sensitive to
the social, economic and environmental challenges
facing the peoples of the region. It is committed to
the fight against poverty and inequality. It is aware
of the inequities among rich, middle-income and
least developed countries. And it is focused on the
complementarity of economies, and not on voracious
and predatory competition. Cooperation and respect
are pillars of peace.
The greatest illustration of the commitment of
ALBA with regard to the development of the peoples
of the region is the establishment of PetroCaribe, in
2005. Conceived as an initiative to promote energy
security in Central America and the Caribbean,
PetroCaribe benefits more than 17 countries. It is a
model of cooperation based on energy integration and
founded on the principles of solidarity and special but
differential treatment in the region. That cooperation
is taking place in absolute respect for the agreements

20/32

18/08/2015

of the Caribbean Community and the Community of
Latin American and Caribbean States, as outstanding
examples of South-South cooperation among our
countries.
The Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States is an example of pluralistic multilateralism
and of unity in diversity among its members. Those
aspects have allowed CELAC to make progress
firmly in the development of common policies in such
sensitive areas as sustainable development, climate
change, nuclear disarmament, illicit drug trafficking,
rejecting the embargo against Cuba, rejecting sanctions
against Venezuela, and support for the process of
the decolonization of the Malvinas and Puerto Rico,
among others. In doing that, CELAC has highlighted
its strong commitment to international peace and
security, development with solidarity, partnership
and the promotion of human rights. Through CELAC,
not only do we consolidate the dream of the liberator
Simón Bolívar for a united America, but we reiterate
the historic principles of Latin America on international
law with regard to self-determination, territorial
inviolability and non-intervention, which are enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations.
Latin America and the Caribbean still faces
significant challenges, but the strength of its institutions
and the commitment of its leaders and its peoples to move
forward towards fair, solidarity-based and autonomous
integration is the best tool at its disposal. In that context,
Latin America and the Caribbean stands out as a region
with a clear commitment to peace, which in the past
two decades have witnessed irrefutable progress in the
area of peace and security. In that regard, our countries
together have the lowest rate of military spending
worldwide. We strongly support the objectives with
regard to disarmament and the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. We are part of the first
nuclear-weapon-free zone in a heavily inhabited region,
set up in 1967 through the Treaty of Tlatelolco. We add
our support to the principles set out in the declaration
on South America as a zone of peace, as promoted by
the Union of South American Nations, as well as the
declaration on a zone of peace adopted by CELAC in
January 2014.
That experience, founded on respect for sovereignty,
rejection of interventionism, and an unlimited
commitment to peace, security and international law,
contribute to strengthening our cooperation with other

15-25853

18/08/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

regional organizations in Africa and the Middle East,
among others.
Lastly, we want to stress the importance of
cooperation among the various regional and subregional
organizations, above all in support of regions beset by
terrorism, violence and war. Perhaps our experience in
the South as a zone of peace could be useful to our other
brotherly countries throughout the world.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I thank you,
Madam President, for having organized today’s useful
debate on the relationship between the United Nations
and regional organizations. I also want to thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing. The complexity of
current crises requires increasingly concerted action by
the United Nations and regional organizations, within
the framework provided by the Charter of the United
Nations, in particular Chapter VIII. In that regard, I
should like to make three observations.
First, regional organizations play an essential and
growing role in crisis management. Their precise local
knowledge and the networks they develop are an asset
in understanding conflicts. Their geographic proximity
allows faster deployment. And the special relationship
they have with crisis States can contribute to the
consolidation of fragile situations.
France encourages the already considerable
involvement of regional organizations in preventing
conflicts, as well as in peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
Today, African organizations whose efforts are
intended to be integrated into the African Peace and
Security Architecture are taking on more and more
responsibility. They are deploying more operations to
respond to crises. Besides their military involvement,
their political role in mediation and support has also
increased. That is of course an important development.
My second observation is that this mobilization
by regional organizations is even more effective if
undertaken with the various stakeholders, such as other
regional organizations, States, civil society and, first
and foremost, the United Nations. Two examples serve
to underscore this: the strengthening of ties between the
African Union and the United Nations, and the increased
cooperation between African organizations and the
European Union. France welcomes the strengthening
of links between the African Union and the United
Nations through the establishment of a United Nations
Office to the African Union, in 2010, the establishment
of liaison offices in New York and Addis Ababa, and

S/PV.7505

the institutionalization of annual exchanges between
the Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council.
Regional organizations are also called upon to work
together and support each other. As the Ambassador of
Chad mentioned earlier, the European Union finances
a number of peacekeeping operations — such as the
African Union Mission in Somalia — as well as various
elements of the African Union Peace and Security
Architecture, including the African Standby Force and
the Continental Early-Warning System. To date, the
commitment of the European Union to contribute up to
€450 million to support the implementation of African
Peace Facility for Africa for the period 2014 to 2016 has
almost been fully realized.
Beyond the financial support provided, the
European Union also provides civilian and military
assistance — in Libya, the Niger, the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Somalia and Mali. The commitment in Mali, for
instance, shows the extent of the European Union’s
efforts, namely, as part of the European Union Capacity
Building Mission for the Sahel and Mali, as well as
its military mission. In that way, the European Union
is helping the Government of Mali to reform and
restructure its security forces. In addition, the European
Union Mission on Regional Maritime Capacitybuilding in the Horn of Africa is providing assistance
to several countries of the subregion, including surface
and maritime border protection in order to combat
maritime piracy.
With regard to my third observation, in the context
of increasing involvement by regional organizations,
France supports the recommendations of the SecretaryGeneral set out in his report of 2 January 2015, as
well as those of the High-level Independent Panel
on United Nations Peace Operations. With regard to
African operations in Mali and the Central African
Republic, the Secretary-General has highlighted
the complementarity of the United Nations and the
African Union. The transition from the African-led
International Support Mission in Mali to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali, and from the African-led International
Support Mission in the Central African Republic
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
serves to illustrate the comparative advantages of the
two models of intervention — on the one hand, with

15-2585321/32

S/PV.7505

Maintenance of international peace and security

regard to the African Union, the rapid deployment of
armed forces capable of offensive operations, and, on
the other hand, with regard to the United Nations, the
establishment of a peacekeeping force equipped for a
longer-term operation with a different mandate.
With regard to the strategic review of peacekeeping
operations, the examples of Mali and the Central
African Republic have confirmed that it is essential
for the United Nations to fully invest upstream in the
definition of an overal framework for coordinated crisis
management, both from the perspective of political
and security considerations. That framework must be
established in close cooperation with other regional
stakeholders, so as to facilitate the implementation
of United Nations standards, the training of regional
contingents and to allow for better awareness on human
rights issues.
Lastly, the sustainability and financial viability
of military operations remain a major concern. Today,
the African Union is highly dependent upon outside
contributions to finance its operations. It would be
fitting for African organizations — as they have
expressed their intention to do — to consistently take
on increased responsibility for the financial burden
of their actions. France stands ready to continue its
efforts and cooperation with the United Nations and all
regional organizations along those lines.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Nigeria.
First, let me lend my voice to those who have
expressed their appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his very lucid briefing. I believe that the SecretaryGeneral captured the very essence of our deliberations
today.
We know that the contemporary challenges to global
security are increasing, both in complexity and severity.
Threats — such as extremist ideologies, terrorism, the
illicit transfer and proliferation of small arms and light
weapons, humanitarian disasters, human trafficking,
environmental hazards, drug trafficking, the criminal
use of cybertechnology and global pandemics — are
critical factors that have profoundly shaped international
security in contemporary times. Today’s global security
challenges have assumed a transnational character and
are often beyond the capacity of any one country to
resolve. That is why we need collective cooperation
and collective action. While the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security

22/32

18/08/2015

resides with the Security Council, regional actors share
and lighten the burden of the Council and provide an
added layer of legitimacy to multilateralism. Regional
efforts enhance the prospects for inclusiveness and
consensus in addressing the challenges to global peace
and security.
The drafters of the Charter of the United Nations were
very perceptive in envisioning a world where the United
Nations and regional organizations would work together
to prevent, manage and resolve crises. Over the years,
multiple instances of cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations — particularly in the
areas of peacekeeping and conflict prevention — have
yielded significant dividends. We believe that those
gains hold a lot more promise for the future. In today’s
world, international security has assumed a distinct
regional and institutionalized character. That has been
manifested in the advocacy for the greater recourse to
Chapter VIII of the Charter, to which a number of my
colleagues have referred — to create a decentralized
United Nations-led system of global security
management.
Over the years, it has become evident that regional
organizations are often the first responders to conflict
situations. That point resonates more poignantly
in Africa, where subregional organizations have
consistently demonstrated remarkable commitment to
regional peace and security by deploying peacekeepers
to theatres of conflict. Several of the speakers who
spoke before me this morning acknowledged that
regional and subregional organizations have a deeper
understanding of the sensitivities and sensibilities of
the actors in conflict situations, the values and norms
of their societies and the dynamics, as well as the
root causes, of local conflicts. Those ingredients are
crucial for fashioning a mediation strategy that parties
to a conflict could more easily recognize and agree to
implement.
In West Africa, for example, the Economic
Community of West African States has made
landmark achievements in the maintenance of peace
and security — particularly in addressing conflicts
in Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea-Bissau, among
other places. That underscores the success of that
organization’s framework for conflict management.
There are other instances where regional
organizations have relentlessly demonstrated their
capacity to act in the interest of regional peace
and security. The Intergovernmental Authority on
15-25853

18/08/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

Development in East Africa has been unwavering
in its conflict resolution efforts, especially in South
Sudan. The East African Community is playing an
active and constructive role in Burundi. The Economic
Community of Central African States has made
significant contributions to stabilizing the situation in
the Central African Republic. The Mano River Union,
the Economic Community of West African States and
the African Union (AU) have demonstrated remarkable
leadership in the fight — as we heard last week (see
S/PV.7502) — against the recent Ebola virus disease
outbreak in West Africa.
The establishment of the multinational joint task
force by the Lake Chad Basin countries and the Republic
of Benin — with the aim of fighting the Boko Haram
terrorist group — bears eloquent testimony to the
possibilities that exist for regional arrangements — not
only to seize the bull by the horns, but especially to
advance the cause of peace and security. The successes
achieved by the Task Force thus far validate the regional
approach to dealing with the threat of terrorism.
Today, it is evident that the regionalization of global
security is rapidly gaining remarkable momentum. In
our view, it transcends a first response to crisis situations
and an understanding of the people, the environment
and the nuances of the conflict. Indeed, it is about all of
those and more. Regional organizations — considering
the contiguity of their component States — are vital
stakeholders in the success — or otherwise — of peace
efforts within their spheres of influence.
In our times, regional States bear the burden
of the first displacements. They bear the burden of
food insecurity, the recruitment of child soldiers, the
sexual exploitation of women and children and other
consequences of violent conflicts. While at a national
level those States may have limitations — in terms
of their capacities and resources to address those
challenges — their membership in regional organizations
has allowed them to act in concert with other States in
order to mitigate the effects of those challenges.
It is important that, while we highlight the role
of regional organizations in meeting contemporary
challenges of global security, we should not overlook
the contributions of non-governmental organizations
(NGOs). I think that a number of my colleagues have
mentioned that issue this morning, and it is worth
repeating. The advocacy of NGOs — in terms of peace
of security — especially in Africa, is well documented.
Non-governmental organizations have made, and

S/PV.7505

continue to make, direct interventions in humanitarian
crises and other emergencies. They assist in the
mobilization of resources to address issues linked to
conflicts. The contributions of the independent
humanitarian aid group Médecins sans frontières were
crucial in containing and eventually rolling back the
recent Ebola virus disease outbreak in West Africa. All
of that demonstrates the importance of NGOs in the
emerging architecture, not only in Africa but also in
other areas of conflict in the world. It would therefore
be beneficial for the continent if African regional
and subregional organizations incorporated NGOs as
significant and vital partners in meeting contemporary
security challenges and strengthened their cooperation
with them accordingly.
A critical important dimension of the role of
regional organizations in meeting global security
challenges is the way and manner in which they
cooperate with the United Nations. African regional
and subregional organizations have worked together
with the United Nations in the maintenance of peace
and security in several parts of the continent, as we
heard this morning. There are several examples of the
potential for cooperation between the United Nations
and African regional organizations. The United
Nations and the then Organization of African Unity
(OAU) cooperated in the deployment of peacekeepers
in Ethiopia and Eritrea after the OAU had mediated
an accord, which the United Nations was requested to
implement. In Ethiopia and Eritrea, as in Western Sahara
and Rwanda, the OAU was the principal early mediator.
The United Nations itself complemented that mediation
by deploying peacekeepers on the ground. Within
the framework of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the AU and the United
Nations are working together to stabilize the situation in
Darfur. The United Nations is also making substantial
contributions to the African Union Mission in Somalia.
All those joint actions and all those concerted actions
and their positive outcomes demonstrate the value of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations in the maintenance of international peace
and security.
It is also essential to ensure that the comparative
advantages of each region be thoroughly harnessed
and mobilized in the pursuit of peace. In that regard,
the triangular cooperation to which my colleagues
have referred among the AU, the United Nations and
the European Union (EU) is exemplified by the United
Nations-EU joint programme of support to the AU on

15-2585323/32

S/PV.7505

Maintenance of international peace and security

security sector reform. That is an example of the vibrant
interregional cooperation that has yielded tangible
results and has the potential to yield even more.
In the face of the increasing gap between the
demand for the involvement of the United Nations in
conflict situations, on the one hand, and the ability
of the United Nations to respond effectively, on the
other hand, regional organizations become even more
compelling as enablers of peace. That is why we
believe that greater consideration should be accorded
to expanding and enhancing regional approaches to the
pursuit of international peace and security. Regional
approaches, in essence, represent a critical bridge
between the international and global dimensions of
conflict. It is a bridge that we must continue to build,
no matter how challenging that will appear at times. I
believe that today’s debate is not only a call to greater
action, it is an urgent demand to accelerate regional and
international cooperation in a world that is ravaged by
conflict, by humanitarian crisis and by disease.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their statements
to no more than four minutes in order to enable the
Council to conduct its work expeditiously. Delegations
with lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate
their texts in writing and to deliver a condensed version
when speaking in the Chamber. I would also like to
appeal to speakers to deliver their statements at a very
reasonable speed so that accurate interpretation may be
provided.
I give the floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Bishnoi (India): We thank you, Madam
President, for organizing today’s debate on regional
organizations and contemporary challenges of global
security. We also thank your delegation for the useful
concept note (S/2015/599, annex) it has prepared. We
also take this opportunity to thank the SecretaryGeneral for the comprehensive briefing he provided.
India supports the role of regional organizations
in the maintenance of international peace and security
in accordance with the provisions of Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations. The role discharged
by such organizations should, however, be consistent
with the purposes and principles of the United Nations.
The principles of national sovereignty and the political
independence, unity and territorial integrity of States
must be fully respected. It is also our belief that the
24/32

18/08/2015

peaceful resolution of conflicts should be the first
priority — both of the Security Council and of regional
organizations. The recent report of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446)
highlights the fact that peacekeeping cannot substitute
for political solutions. No purpose would be served
by having regional organizations struggle to manage
conflict with military tools while political processes
are either not under way or have not been concluded.
Chapter VIII of the Charter refers to regional
arrangements and agencies. There is therefore a clear
requirement for vicinity — or geographical contiguity.
It is important to note that Chapter VIII does not
envisage any role for organizations formed on any
other basis, whether of language, religion or historical
coincidence. Any overly liberal interpretation of
terminology would violate the Charter and would also
be counterproductive.
We would also like to caution that, while regional
organizations can at times play a useful role in assisting
the United Nations, the primacy of the United Nations
itself cannot be denied. Speaking of Africa, the
United Nations cannot disengage with that continent
by subcontracting peacekeeping under regional
arrangements. We would need to start worrying if the
impartiality of peacekeepers were called into question.
That, however, is a possibility that cannot be ruled
out with the regionalization and subregionalization of
peacekeeping. In cases where the United Nations does
depend upon regional organizations for peacekeeping,
it is important that there should be full consultations
before arrangements are put into place. That would
mean that troop-contributing countries should be
invited to participate in the decisions of the Council in
accordance with Article 44 of the Charter of the United
Nations. This is necessary for mandates to be realistic,
and also for obtaining the full cooperation of those who
will actually be carrying out implementation on the
ground.
We would like to take this opportunity to
call attention to the fact that the Charter has clear
provisions for the Council to be kept fully informed
of actions undertaken under regional arrangements for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
However, such information is not shared with the
wider membership of the United Nations. We would
like to request that consideration be given to including
that information in the annual reports of the Security
Council.

15-25853

18/08/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

In conclusion, we would also like to draw attention
to the fact that at least two thirds of the work of the
Security Council relates to Africa. There is, however,
no representation of that continent in the permanent
membership of the Council. That shortcoming seriously
undermines the legitimacy of the Council’s decisions.
Until such time as that historical injustice is addressed,
the decisions of the Council will lack full force. The
seventieth anniversary of the Organization, in our
view, provides a most opportune moment to rectify that
grave lacuna.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I thank you very much,
Madam President, for convening this open debate. I
listened to your statement with great interest. I also
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.
The international community today sees regional
organizations playing significant roles in ensuring
international peace and security. That is indeed what
was expected when the Charter of the United Nations
was drafted, as evident from its Chapter VIII, on
regional arrangements.
In response to a suggestion made in the very useful
concept note (S/2015/599) that you, Madam President,
distributed earlier, I wish to focus today on the AsiaPacific region, to which Japan belongs. I would like first
to introduce the roles played by regional frameworks in
ensuring peace and security in the Asia-Pacific region
and then share with the Council our view on how to
further enhance their roles.
In East Asia, the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) Regional Forum (ARF)
has been serving as an ASEAN-centric ministerial
framework to address political and security issues for
more than 20 years. The mission of ARF is to foster
confidence-building in the region. To that end, ARF
not only provides a venue for candid discussions
among ministers, but it also embraces a wide range
of challenging issues such as disaster relief, maritime
security, counter-terrorism and transnational crime,
as well as non-proliferation and disarmament. I am
proud to note that Japan has actively contributed to
the activities of ARF by, for example, co-chairing and
organizing a number of ARF intersessional meetings
and official events.

S/PV.7505

The East Asia Summit (EAS) is another notable
example. Established in 2005, the EAS has been
providing a unique forum for the leaders of 18 countries
of the Asia-Pacific region to gather and discuss issues
of common interest and concern, including political
and security challenges, from a strategic point of view.
The Pacific Islands Forum (PIF) is also an example
of a regional framework at the summit level in the
Pacific. It aims to promote cooperation among its 16
member States in a wide range of areas, including
political and security challenges. Since 1997, the
Prime Minister of Japan has hosted the Pacific Islands
Leaders Meeting with the 16 PIF member States, aimed
at realizing the stability and prosperity of the Pacific.
In the Asia-Pacific region, a number of regional
frameworks are therefore being developed in a
multilayered manner, reflecting the political, economic
and cultural diversity of the region. We are convinced
that the further development of these frameworks is
essential to ensuring peace and security in the AsiaPacific region. It is from this standpoint that Japan
advocates the further strengthening of the role of the
East Asia Summit in the political and security field,
and developing it as a premier forum of the region.
Finally, let me refer to the supplementary role that
the United Nations and regional frameworks can play in
the Asia-Pacific region.
In my view, in order to identify the most appropriate
bodies to deal with particular challenges, it is important
to examine the nature of each challenge on a case-bycase basis. Sometimes the direct involvement of the
United Nations might be more appropriate, which is
what happened in the case of Cambodia in the 1990s.
Sometimes regional frameworks are more effective in
handling issues on a region-wide scale, such as in terms
of combating piracy and armed robbery against ships.
Efforts to ensure nuclear non-proliferation in East Asia
are a notable example of the fact that a dual approach,
at both the United Nations and the regional level, is
important.
Japan will not cease in its endeavour to strengthen
multilateral frameworks in the Asia-Pacific region and
develop closer relations with the United Nations and the
relevant regional organizations, with a view to realizing
a more stable and peaceful Asia-Pacific.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sweden.

15-2585325/32

S/PV.7505

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Bjällerstedt (Sweden): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Nordic countries: Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Norway and my own country, Sweden.
Let me first, like so many other speakers here
today have done, thank you, Madam President, for
having convened this timely debate on the role of
regional organizations in meeting contemporary
challenges of global security. The complexity of global
security threats and the growing number of intra-State
conflicts call for a greater regional approach to conflict
prevention and peacebuilding. The Nordic countries
therefore welcome this valuable opportunity to discuss
the importance of forging stronger partnerships with
regional organizations and thus building a more resilient
global and regional architecture for maintaining
international peace and security.
Through the United Nations Charter, we have
committed to working together to achieve peace
and security, human rights and economic and social
development. This shared responsibility rests on a web
of global governance, of which strategic partnerships
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations are a fundamental aspect.
Today such partnerships are even more essential, not
least in the face of new threats with increasing crossborder risks through transnational crime; illegal
trafficking in people, illicit arms and narcotics; and
well-armed groups of terrorists and extremists.
The Nordic countries have consistently advocated
for strengthened cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations. The increased
collaboration between the Security Council and the
African Union (AU) Peace and Security Council is
thus a welcome development. Another good example
is the close work between the United Nations and
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation in very
challenging situations of limited humanitarian access
on issues ranging from conflict prevention and counterterrorism to human rights, humanitarian affairs and
sustainable development. There are many other good
examples as well.
In order to build stronger partnerships, we need a
clear strategic vision. We therefore welcome the three
reviews on United Nations peacemaking: on peace
operations; on resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security; and on the peacebuilding
architecture. We in particular welcome the fact that
the report on peace operations highlights the need for
better cooperation with regional organizations, and we
26/32

18/08/2015

wholeheartedly subscribe to the view that there is an
urgent need to find mechanisms to ensure predictable
and sustainable funding for regional peacekeeping
arrangements that are consistent with the United
Nations Charter and its Chapter VIII.
African-led peace-support and peace-enforcement
missions are today operating in the most challenging
conditions. Better capabilities need to be built, enablers
provided and personnel trained in order to improve the
protection of peacekeepers and to ensure their capacity
to protect civilians in harm’s way. In other words, and
to reiterate what United States President Obama said
in Addis Ababa last month ahead of the summit on
peacekeeping in September, we need to develop a new
partnership between the United Nations and the AU that
can provide reliable support for AU peace operations. At
the same time, we need to keep in mind that cooperation
is most effective when guided by the principles of
burden-sharing and complementarity. Partnerships
must be forged on a common understanding of what
each organization can do in any given situation and
on a realistic assessment of one another’s comparative
advantages and mandates.
The Nordic countries have engaged in supporting
the capacities of the AU and subregional organizations,
including the strengthening of the mediation capacities
of these organizations. This engagement stands a
much better chance of producing added value with a
system in place for predictable resourcing for regional
peacemaking and peacekeeping.
The Nordic commitment in supporting peace and
security in Africa and elsewhere is to a large extent
focused on tackling the root causes of conflict,
instability and fragility. Effective conflict prevention
and sustainable peacebuilding go hand in hand, which
puts emphasis on the need for strategic coordination
and a robust system for early action at a global as well
as a regional level. We welcome the fact that such
collaboration is already taking place today through
the joint consultations of the United Nations Security
Council and the AU Peace and Security Council, as
well as between the European Union and the AU. The
United Nations Peacebuilding Commission can also
contibute further by holding regular consultations with
regional bodies in order to discuss early warning and
shared conflict analysis. The African Union, the United
Nations and subregional organizations can, and should,
do better in conflict prevention. There have been some
hard lessons learned by all actors in recent years, inter

15-25853

18/08/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

alia in the Central African Republic, South Sudan
and Burundi. Sometimes both the United Nations and
regional actors must act sooner.
We would also like to emphasize the importance of
the full and active inclusion and participation of women in
the prevention, management and resolution of conflicts,
as well as in post-conflict efforts and cooperation. It
is the experience of the Nordic countries that women’s
genuine participation in all aspects of peacemaking
is an indispensable foundation for solid peace and
sustainable development. That interdependence is also
underlined in the new sustainable development goals
and their targets for peaceful development.
Local ownership is a precondition for bringing
legitimacy and effectiveness into peacemaking efforts,
as well as for facing other challenges — something we
were strongly reminded of by the briefing on the Ebola
epidemic here in the Security Council last week (see
S/PV.7502). I can assure the Council that the Nordic
countries will remain firm supporters in forging
stronger partnerships with regional organizations, and
we look forward to the follow-up on the three reviews
of the United Nations peacemaking.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Mr. Westcott: I have the pleasure to speak on
behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with this
statement.
I would first like to thank you, Madam President,
for taking the initiative to convene this open debate on
an important topic, and for the excellent concept note
(S/2015/599, annex) and for highlighting the work of the
European Union in peacebuilding, conflict prevention
and mediation.
The global and European security environments
have changed dramatically in recent years. The
conflicts, threats and instability in the EU’s immediate
and wider neighbourhood, together with the longstanding and emerging security challenges affecting
Iraq, Libya, the Sahel, Syria and Ukraine, are having an
impact on Europe’s security as well as on international
peace and security, and represent a common challenge

S/PV.7505

to our fundamental values and principles. This
changing global environment was outlined by the High
Representative in her report to the European Council
in June, which launched work on an EU global strategy
on foreign and security policy. In May, it also prompted
European foreign and defence ministers to call for a
stronger Europe and a more effective common security
and defence policy.
Among the many challenges we see, there is a
need to address in particular the challenge of terrorism
and foreign fighters, maritime security and organized
crime, including the smuggling of migrants and
trafficking in human beings. Those are in addition to
the challenges posed by irregular migration, climate
change, energy security, cybersecurity and space
security. To address those challenges, the EU and its
member States are assuming increased responsibilities
to act as a security provider, at the international level
and in particular in our neighbourhood, in order to
enhance our own security and our strategic role in the
world and to respond to those challenges together with
the international community.
Our response is focused on a comprehensive
approach to preventing and managing conflicts, using
both our Common Security and Defence Policy and
the other policies and instruments of the European
Union. In particular, preventing conflicts and relapses
into conflict, in accordance with international law, is
a primary objective of our external action, working
together with global, regional, national and local
partners.
Since the adoption, in 2001, of the so-called
Gothenburg Programme, the EU has developed an
early-warning system, strengthened its mediation and
dialogue capacities and established its own mediation
support team. In that field we have developed
close cooperation with regional and international
organizations. We recently hosted a meeting in
Brussels on preventive diplomacy and mediation, with
experts from the United Nations, the League of Arab
States, the African Union (AU) and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). That
approach has helped the European Union to facilitate
crucial agreements — between Belgrade and Pristina
in 2013, and last month between the E3+3 and Iran on a
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action that is contributing
to a comprehensive, long-lasting and peaceful solution
to the Iranian nuclear issue. The Plan of Action also
strengthens the nuclear non-proliferation regime as a

15-2585327/32

S/PV.7505

Maintenance of international peace and security

18/08/2015

whole, and that will be monitored by the International
Atomic Energy Agency.

women and peace and security. Ensuring follow-up to
those reports with concrete steps will be crucial.

The European Union will remain committed
to effective multilateralism. That commitment is
enshrined in our founding treaty, according to which
the EU

Similarly, improved cooperation and coordination
among regional organizations is a priority for us. In
that context, we are pleased about something that you
yourself pointed out, Madam President, which is the
partnerships we have developed, in particular with the
African Union, as well as with African subregional
organizations such as the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), the Southern African
Development Community, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), the East African
Community, the Economic Community of Central
African States and the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region.

“shall contribute to peace, security, sustainable
development [and] the strict observance ... of
international law, including respect for the
principles of the United Nations Charter.”
We therefore work particularly closely with the
United Nations at the heart of the multilateral system.
In 2011, the General Assembly itself underlined
the EU’s special relationship with the United Nations
through its resolution 65/276, which recognizes
the EU’s partnership with the Organization. This
partnership, particularly with regard to peace and
security, comes under Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations, which explicitly recognizes and
encourages that regional arrangements should be put
in place. The Secretary-General recently built on that
in drawing up his report on partnering for peace and
partnership peacekeeping (S/2015/229), which we
thoroughly welcome and support.
As a rather unique regional organization, we
cooperate very closely with the United Nations
at the strategic level through our United NationsEuropean Union Steering Committee and high-level
dialogue on crisis management, as well as through
joint consultative mechanisms and arrangements for
operational cooperation on the ground in places such
as the Central African Republic, Mali and Somalia. In
order to strengthen that further, we welcome the recent
joint identification of priority areas for strengthening
the EU-United Nations strategic partnership, which,
among other things, underline the importance of
EU member States’ contributions to United Nations
peacekeeping operations.
Both the EU and the United Nations are currently
engaged in crucial strategic reviews, in order to face
the challenges more effectively. We welcome the
reports issued by the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) and by the Advisory
Group of Experts on their respective reviews of peace
operations and the peacebuilding architecture, which
reflect well the EU’s contribution. We particularly look
forward to the review of resolution 1325 (2000), on

28/32

At the most recent EU-Africa Summit, in Brussels
last year, the EU strongly supported African aspirations
and commitment to ensuring peace, security and
stability on the continent in the framework of the
African Peace and Security Architecture. In order
to improve the African capacity to handle crises, we
committed to operationalizing the multidimensional
African Standby Force and recognizing the African
Capacity for Immediate Response to Crises as a
transitional tool that is complementary to the Force,
and thereby enhancing the AU’s capacity to respond
rapidly to crises and reinforce its continental early
warning system. Progress on that is to be welcomed,
and closer cooperation between the AU and its regional
organizations is of great value. In that respect, we
particularly value the positive role the AU has played in
the recent crisis in Burundi in recalling very clearly the
principles of the African Charter for good governance
and democracy.
We have supported AU-led peace operations
themselves in a number of ways. In the 10 years since
2004, the EU has provided €1.4 billion to AU-led
peace operations through the African Peace Facility.
I am happy to announce that we recently agreed to
increase the Facility provision from €750 million to
€900 million for the next three-year period, to respond
to the increasing crises. It will enable us not only to
continue our support for the efforts of the African Union
Mission in Somalia and the IGAD-led monitoring and
verification mechanism in South Sudan, but also to
provide funding for the Multinational Joint Task Force
against Boko Haram and the ECOWAS mission to
Guinea-Bissau.

15-25853

18/08/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

But the long-term solution is to reinforce the
AU’s own capabilities and fund all these. We provide
additional support through the European Development
Fund and the Instrument for Stability to build longterm African sustainability. The EU, in addition, has
deployed a Common Security and Defence Policy
missions in Mali, the Niger, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Somalia and the Central African Republic,
specifically to enhance the capacity of local security
operations to deal with the challenges they face. Those
include security sector reform, border management,
peacebuilding and post-conflict reconstruction and
reconciliation, which we support through the provision
of advice, mentoring and training. Where there are
regional security challenges, such as piracy, trafficking
and terrorism, we have adopted a regional strategic
approach for the Sahel, the Gulf of Guinea and the
Horn of Africa. Once again, those approaches are built
very strongly on triangular cooperation among the EU,
the AU and the United Nations in order to face the
challenges.
It is not in Africa alone that the EU has been active.
We have developed partnerships with other regional
organizations. Earlier this month, High Representative
Federica Mogherini travelled to Malaysia to participate
in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
Regional Forum and to co-chair the EU-ASEAN PostMinisterial Conference. In that context, allow me to
reiterate our appreciation to Malaysia for kindly hosting
those two important meetings.
The European Union also cooperates closely with
NATO, the OSCE and the Council of Europe. All EU
member States are participating States in the OSCE
and the Council of Europe, and 22 member States
belong to NATO. The EU cooperates closely with
NATO, both strategically and operationally, in crisis
management, for example, off the Horn of Africa and
in the Western Balkans. Most recently, the focus of the
partnership with the OSCE has been the conflict in
Ukraine, where the OSCE role is central and has the
EU’s full support, including through considerable EU
financial and material support to the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission to Ukraine. However, the scope
of our partnership is much broader and covers such
important issues as election observation, arms control
and the many OSCE field presences throughout the
wider European region. We consider the OSCE to
be a central and inclusive platform for dialogue and
confidence-building in the current crisis in European
security. Cooperation with the Council of Europe is

S/PV.7505

also important in the context of the Ukrainian conflict
in focusing on support for constitutional and judicial
reform.
We are now facing a particularly dramatic situation
in the Mediterranean, on the European Union’s own
borders, which illustrates very well many of today’s
themes. Since 17 April, in which more than 800
migrants died in a single dramatic incident, the EU has
adopted a comprehensive plan for substantial measures
to deal with the challenges faced in the Mediterranean.
Dealing with migration is a common interest of all
countries around the Mediterranean, in the Sahel and in
East Africa. It is not only a humanitarian problem, but
also a political and a security problem for our member
States and the wider neighbourhood, and therefore
involves joint efforts with our partners in the AU, the
Rabat Process and the Khartoum Process and with the
League of Arab States.
The current situation in the Mediterranean is
an example of how international organized crime is
involved with the smuggling of migrants and trafficking
of human beings and how that can destabilize a whole
region and put the basic rights and the lives of thousands
of migrants at risk. In response to that threat, the
European Union decided to launch in June, in addition
to the naval operations Triton and Poseidon, operated
by Frontex, another naval operation, the European
Union Naval Force-Mediterranean, with the mandate
to disrupt the business model of smuggling and
trafficking networks. It is already engaged in collecting
information and intelligence about those networks.
Once the Council provides the required authorization,
it will enable the operation to actively disrupt the
smugglers and traffickers’ business, in full respect for
international law and the Security Council mandate.
That will also be undertaken in close cooperation
with the Libyan authorities in order to ensure that the
legitimate livelihoods of Libyans are not affected. We
will also ensure that the rights of the refugees and
migrants are fully protected, and we are pleased to have
established close cooperation with the United Nations,
particularly the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, in that regard.
Many migrants risk their lives to travel across
the Mediterranean to Europe, often driven by despair,
poverty, conflict or human rights abuses, which means
that we also need to cooperate with the countries of
origin and transit and to do more to address the root
causes of migration. We will do so in close cooperation

15-2585329/32

S/PV.7505

Maintenance of international peace and security

with the regional organizations concerned. On 11 and
12 November, we will hold a conference with African
partners in Valletta to build our common vision and
agree on common action on migration to tackle the
challenge in the Mediterranean. A high-level meeting
on the Western Balkan route is also envisaged.
Furthermore, the EU supports underpinning
regional cooperation frameworks, such as the Rabat and
Khartoum Processes, and provides increased support
to border management across Africa and more widely,
including through the Common Security and Defence
Policy missions, such as that in the Niger. The EU
also supports the development of return and migration
management capacities, including at the regional level
in Western Africa. But above all, we want to look at
addressing the root causes of migration and, where
we can, to support local efforts to tackle conflicts and
human rights abuses and to improve the socioeconomic
conditions in the countries of origin so that people are
no longer feel forced to flee their own countries.
Finally, Madam President, I thank you very much
for your time and for the opportunity to contribute to
this debate from the EU’s perspective.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Ayebare.
Mr. Ayebare: At the outset, Madam President,
allow me to thank you for convening this important
debate of the Security Council, which comes at a time
of growing awareness of the critical role of regional
organizations in responding to the changing dynamics
in the nature of conflicts and security threats. I would
also like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his briefing and for his commitment to supporting
the African Union (AU) partnership with the United
Nations.
The quest for peace and security remains the most
pressing among the many challenges facing Africa.
Over the past two decades, the continent has witnessed
a new set of threats, which include governance-related
intra-State conflicts and violence, terrorism and
transnational crime, piracy on both the East and West
coasts of Africa, border disputes and the effects of
climate change, as well as environmental degradation.
To address those challenges, sustained efforts have been
made to strengthen the capacities of the African Union
to respond to the ever-changing nature of the threats we
face. With the entry into force of the Protocol Relating
to the Establishment of the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union in 2003, the response to conflicts

30/32

18/08/2015

and threats has been greatly enhanced. Cooperation
between the Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council is of crucial importance in that regard.
In addition to the Peace and Security Council, other
pillars of the African Peace and Security Architecture
are already in place, including the Panel of the Wise,
the Continental Early Warning System, the African
Standby Force and the African Peace Fund. I am happy
to report that four pillars of the African Peace and
Security Architecture are already in place. Efforts to
operationalize the African Standby Force are ongoing,
and we expect that to be completed by the end of the
year. An exercise code-named Amani Africa II is
expected to take place in South Africa from 19 October
to 7 November to validate the full operational capacity
and rapid deployment capacity of the Standby Force.
The lessons learned from the peace operations
in Mali and the Central African Republic led to the
establishment of the African Capacity for Immediate
Response to Crises (ACIRC), which will significantly
strengthen both the speed and robustness of our
response to emergency situations. By January 2014,
ACIRC had been declared ready for operation. Member
States of the AU handed over the authorization of its
operation to the African Union Peace and Security
Council. The operationalization of ACIRC will not in
any way undermine the full operationalization of the
African Standby Force.
Between 2013 and 2015, an average of 30,000 to
40,000 uniformed personnel were serving annually
in African-led peace support operations. In addition,
Africa contributed personnel to United Nations
peacekeeping missions, increasing from 10,000
personnel in 2003 to over 35,000 in 2014, the majority
of whom have been deployed on the African continent.
Since 2002, the AU has deployed a number of
peace support operations in response to conflict
situations on the continent, notably in Burundi, Darfur,
Mali, the Central African Republic and Somalia. The
stabilization efforts carried out by those missions and
the sacrifices made by their personnel have greatly
paved the way for, and facilitated the task of, the United
Nations missions that eventually took over. In the case
of Somalia, our engagement in support of the Somali
Federal Government gave hope to the Somali people,
as the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
continues to expand and consolidate liberated areas.
Let me take this opportunity to extend our gratitude
to our partners, including the United Nations, the
15-25853

18/08/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

European Union and others, in ensuring AMISOM’s
effectiveness.
Let me mention cooperation with the regional
economic communities and regional mechanisms in
consolidating peace and security in Africa. Since the
signing of the memorandum of understanding among
the regional organizations and the African Union in
2008, a lot has been achieved in the coordination of
peacekeeping operations and prevention initiatives,
such as joint election observation, diplomatic missions
and secretariat-secretariat cooperation.
However, experience in recent years has amply
shown that one of the greatest constraints faced by
the African Union and its regional mechanisms is the
matter of flexible, sustainable and predictable sources
of funding for their peace efforts. It is therefore crucial
that an appropriate solution be urgently found to that
question, bearing in mind that the Security Council
has the primary responsibility in the maintenance of
international peace and security. The AU is striving to
have its member States increase their contributions so
that outside support, including from the United Nations
and our partners, is truly complementary.
In that context, the African Union welcomes the
report of the High-level Panel on Peace Operations
(see S/2015/446), chaired by Mr. José Ramos-Horta
of Timor-Leste, and looks forward to its formal and
in-depth consideration by both the General Assembly
and the Security Council during the Assembly’s
upcoming seventieth session.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to make this statement of behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM). At the outset, I
wish to express NAM’s appreciation to Nigeria for
organizing this open debate and for the useful concept
note (S/2015/599, annex) prepared for this important
meeting. We also appreciate the briefing by the
Secretary-General.
The
Non-Aligned
Movement
underscores
the important role that regional and subregional
arrangements and agencies, composed of non-aligned
and other developing countries, can play in the
promotion of regional peace and security, as well as in
economic and social development, through cooperation
among countries in the regions. We have always

S/PV.7505

highlighted the importance of synergy among regional
and subregional initiatives to ensure complementarity
and the added value of each process towards their
common goals, such as political stability, economic
growth and social and cultural development.
The Non-Aligned Movement has called for
the intensification of the process of consultations,
cooperation and coordination among the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations,
arrangements or agencies in accordance with Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, including
with regard to their mandate, scope and composition,
which is useful and can contribute to the maintenance
of international peace and security.
In that context, we welcome the determination
of the United Nations to enhance its relationships
and cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, in particular the African Union (AU),
in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter. The
Movement also expresses its support for the continuing
efforts to strengthen African peacekeeping capabilities
and emphasizes the importance of implementing the
Ten-Year Capacity-Building Programme and the joint
action plan for United Nations support to the African
Union in peacekeeping in the short, medium and long
terms, in all relevant areas.
The Movement takes note of the report prepared by
the African Union-United Nations panel on modalities
for support to AU peacekeeping operations and of the
report by the Secretary-General entitled “Support to
African Union peacekeeping operations authorized
by the United Nations”. The Movement recommends
the enhancement of effective partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union in order to
improve the planning, deployment and management of
African peacekeeping operations.
The Non-Aligned Movement welcomes the
adoption of the United Nations integrated strategy for
the Sahel and international efforts aimed at mobilizing
resources and assistance in support of the efforts of
States of the region to address the complex security,
political and humanitarian situation. The Movement
underscores that the strategy should be implemented
in close cooperation with the States of the Sahel, West
Africa and the Maghreb, as well as the African Union,
the Economic Community of West African States,
the Community of Sahel-Saharan States and the Arab
Maghreb Union.

15-2585331/32

S/PV.7505

Maintenance of international peace and security

As peace and development are mutually reinforcing,
NAM, recalling the United Nations Declaration on the
New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD),
calls upon the international community to renew its
commitment to NEPAD and other related initiatives for
Africa, noting the efforts exerted by the African Union
and other regional economic communities in the area of
economic integration.
The Movement also recalls international, regional
and national efforts aimed at, and advancing, the goal
of nuclear disarmament. In that regard, we note with
appreciation the efforts of the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States (CELAC), including
the adoption of a special declaration on nuclear
disarmament at its second Summit, held in Havana
on 28 and 29 January 2014, and further underline the
importance of CELAC as an international and regional
actor and a contributor to the region’s further integration
into the international arena.
The Non-Aligned Movement also welcomes
the entry into force of the Constitutive Treaty of the
Union of South American Nations (UNASUR) as a
contribution to the cultural, social, economic and
political integration of the region, and the observer
status for UNASUR in the General Assembly, which
began in 2011.
The Movement also notes the importance of the
Forum for East Asia-Latin America Cooperation as
the only forum between East Asia and Latin America
to enhance mutual understanding and trust and to
increase political, economic, social and cultural ties
and dialogue.

32/32

18/08/2015

We support the continued efforts and commitments
by the member States of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) to advance and strengthen
the ASEAN Community-building process and to
maintain and enhance ASEAN’s centrality in the
evolving regional architecture, so as to better meet
the challenges and dynamics of global development,
with the objectives of maintaining and promoting
peace, stability and prosperity in the region. We also
note ASEAN’s endeavours in developing the ASEAN
Community’s post-2015 vision for adoption by ASEAN
leaders at the end of 2015.
The Non-Aligned Movement also welcomes the
holding of the second and the third Africa-South
America Summit of Heads of State or Governments,
which took place, respectively, on Margarita Island,
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, on 26 and
27 September 2009, and in Malabo in February 2013,
as an expression of strengthening friendship, solidarity
and South-South cooperation between both regions.
In conclusion, NAM firmly believes that peace and
security, as well as economic and social development,
can be achieved through such cooperation among
regions.
The President: There are still a number of speakers
remaining on my list. Given the lateness of the hour,
I intend, with the concurrence of the members of the
Council, to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was supended at 1 p.m.

15-25853
