United Nations

S/PV.6712

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6712nd meeting
Tuesday, 7 February 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Menan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Togo)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Alzate
Mr. Briens
Mr. Berger
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Raguttahalli
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Zhukov
Mr. Mashabane
Mr. Parham
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2012/65)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-22477 (E)

*1222477*

S/PV.6712

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2012/65)
The President (spoke in French): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Roger
Meece, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2012/65, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
I now give the floor to Mr. Meece.
Mr. Meece (spoke in French): It is a great
privilege and honour for me to address the Council
following an important period of major events in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Recent months
have been characterized by many questions and
uncertainties, and I believe that this moment for
reflection and discussion is particularly important to
the mission, to the people of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and to the region.
(spoke in English)
The attention of the Congolese and the
international community has of course been heavily
focused on the holding of national presidential and
legislative elections late last year. As has been widely
reported,
despite
enormous
logistical
and
organizational challenges, voting got under way as

2

scheduled by the Congolese Independent National
Electoral Commission on 28 November. The campaign
period, however, was increasingly marked in some
areas of the country, including Kinshasa, by political
and inter-community tensions, too often fed by some
political leaders and others who engaged in public or
private rhetoric, exacerbating these tensions.
Indeed, scattered incidents of violence during the
campaign culminated in a day of particular tension and
violence at the end of the campaign period on Saturday,
26 November in Kinshasa, as well as violent incidents
in some other portions of the country, resulting in the
deaths of many Congolese, as well as injuries to others,
and contributing to post-election tensions as well. We
have been conducting a thorough investigation led by
our Joint Human Rights Office and involving several
other offices of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) and the United Nations to
look into all reports of election violence. We plan to
issue a detailed report of our findings in the near
future. For now, I would wish to reiterate our
condemnation of all acts of election-related violence
and other violations of human rights, and my heartfelt
condolences to the families and friends of those who
lost their lives, as well as all victims of the acts of
violence that have taken place.
As Council members are well aware, the elections
themselves were marked by numerous problems. The
late procurement and delivery of vital elections
materials complicated an already difficult and tight
election calendar. This prompted the mobilization of
substantial additional aircraft and other resources from
the Governments of South Africa, Angola and the
Republic of the Congo, as well as from MONUSCO, to
address logistical shortfalls and bolster the Independent
National Electoral Commission’s ability to successfully
conduct the elections. Furthermore, the South African
Government generously transported from South Africa
to various points in the Congo large quantities of
ballots, including supplementary orders to cover
shortages in some areas in response to problems
identified by the Commission.
Nonetheless, the Independent National Electoral
Commission was obliged to extend the period of voting
to provide access to polls by voters, in some cases for
several days. Various problems were reported in a
number of cases by accredited domestic and
international observer missions during this period, and

12-22477

S/PV.6712

particularly in the immediate aftermath during the
compilation and verification processes to determine
results.
While none of the observer missions have
determined that these problems necessarily would have
changed the reported presidential results, we and others
have expressed our strong concerns about the
irregularities reported by the various observer
missions, and believe a thorough and open review of
the preparations and conduct of the November
elections is important. it should provide as accurate as
possible an overview of the process, draw relevant
lessons and propose recommendations, and ensure that
improvements are put in place so that future elections
achieve the highest level of integrity possible. I would
note that the Independent National Electoral
Commission itself has already initiated action for the
arrest and prosecution of some of its employees, while
discussions of the broader review are proceeding.
At the same time, we have strongly emphasized
the importance of all parties and candidates utilizing
fully peaceful means and dialogue to deal with points
of contention. Only one candidate chose to deposit a
legal challenge with the Congolese Supreme Court
regarding presidential results. Provisional results for
the legislative elections were announced only last
week. We have again emphasized to all candidates and
parties the importance of utilizing legal channels for
those seeking to contest results, as well as pursuing full
dialogue and discussions among political leaders and
parties to address all differences of view, including
election-related issues. While it is essential that
Government authorities ensure that all Congolese
citizens fully enjoy their rights of freedom of
expression and other rights, violent confrontations will
not resolve any problems and only tend to propagate
further violence.
MONUSCO has provided all support possible to
the electoral process consistent with our mandate. This
included full logistics support, fulfilling all
commitments described in the original integrated
logistics plans established with the Independent
National Electoral Commission, and indeed additional
supplementary support as new challenges emerged in
the immediate run-up to the elections. In addition, the
Mission has financed and carried out the training of the
intervention units of the Congolese National Police,
and provided non-lethal equipment to enhance the
capacity of the Police to ensure the security of the

12-22477

electoral process. The Mission and the United Nations
Development Programme are continuing to provide
technical counsel and support to the maximum extent
possible, although we have no official role or
responsibility in the verification or ratification of
announced results.
We have also supported extensive efforts in a
variety of forums at the national and provincial levels
to promote dialogue among Congolese parties,
candidates, civil society and other stakeholders. It is
our intent to do all possible to facilitate a full review of
the election operations and, drawing from these and
external observations, to provide support to ensure that
improvements are implemented to achieve the
maximum credibility of future elections. In particular,
these will be immediately focused on the remaining
important provincial and local elections to complete
the current electoral cycle. I would note that although
the timings of these elections are now uncertain, the
importance of full, credible and transparent provincial
and local elections is very clear.
With the announcement of most recent
provisional legislative results by the Independent
National Electoral Commission, political attention in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is now shifting
to the new National Assembly, the consolidation of
coalitions, and the formation and ratification of a new
Government. The timing and specific composition of
the new structures are of course not yet clear, but
preliminary discussions among various individuals and
parties have certainly already been initiated. We
believe it very important that all newly elected officials
play an active and full role in these discussions and the
work of the new institutions in the interests of their
constituents and the country. We strongly encourage all
elected officials and political leaders to carry out fully
and actively their political and civic responsibilities on
behalf of the Congolese people.
The post-election environment has also of course
permitted MONUSCO and Congolese officials to
re-evaluate security conditions in the country, and in
particular the continuing threats to the civilian
population and general stability of the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The protection of
civilians, of course, remains MONUSCO’s highest
priority. In that regard, apparent renewed recent
activity by the Forces démocratiques de libération du
Rwanda (FDLR) movement has been of particular
concern. The January massacre of an estimated 54

3

S/PV.6712

civilians in remote areas of Shabunda territory, South
Kivu province, is a tragic and visible example of this
activity and the continuing predatory actions of the
FDLR. Our own analysis of these attacks suggest that
this indicates no underlying renewed strength of FDLR
capabilities, but rather a continuation of past patterns
of reprisals taken by FDLR forces against relatively
soft targets to intimidate civilians and seek to bolster
their positions.
In reality, however, the loss of some senior
commanders, continuing encouraging numbers of
FDLR combatants and dependents being processed for
repatriation to Rwanda, and information confirming
ongoing internal tensions and strains within the FDLR
leadership all suggest continuing relative weaknesses
in the organization. Working with the Democratic
Republic of the Congo authorities, we intend to pursue
all possible activity to achieve a further reduction in
FDLR capabilities.
A new point of concern has been the emergence
or growth of various Congolese groups in North and
South Kivu, some positioning themselves as so-called
self-defence groups targeting various perceived
opponents. As well, some existing groups, for example
Mayi Mayi Yakutumba in South Kivu, have also shown
increased armed and criminal activity, often in
combination with various arrangements with other
armed groups, including the FDLR and Burundian
Forces nationales de libération. All of them represent a
significant threat to civilians and to the general
security in the areas where they operate.
In north-eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the activities of the Ugandan Lord’s Resistance
Army (LRA) have in fact been reduced in recent
months, and extensive operations by MONUSCO and
the Forces armées de la République démocratique du
Congo (FARDC) were conducted to preclude largerscale potential end-of-year LRA attacks. Nonetheless,
the LRA clearly continues to pose a serious threat in a
region that includes portions of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Central African Republic and
South Sudan.
We welcome initiatives taken by the African
Union for a regional approach to the LRA threat, as
well as the deployment of United States military
personnel in support of operations to address that
threat. We will continue our active cooperation with
Congolese authorities and coordination with other

4

United Nations missions in pursuit of putting an end to
the LRA threat in the Congo, consistent with our
mandate.
The Allied Democratic Front/National Army for
the Liberation of Uganda also retains a significant
military capacity in northern North Kivu, as
underscored by a recent attack by the group targeting
an FARDC unit. In addition, the activities of some
ostensibly integrated FARDC elements that do not
accept or follow central command and State authority
also continue to pose a serious threat to stability and
security in the Kivus. That is particularly true of Bosco
Ntaganda and those allied to him, which represents a
significant challenge to the establishment of lasting
and secure conditions for the area.
We have recently been having some very
productive discussions with FARDC interlocutors
regarding a variety of actions to address the
aforementioned
threats
and
realize
lasting
improvements in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo. These include renewed military pressure
directed at the FDLR and other armed groups seeking
to realize further degradation of FDLR and other armed
group capabilities, the maximum possible repatriation
of foreign combatants, and the demobilization of
Congolese militia or other armed groups.
In that regard, I am pleased to report that the
recent addition of one South African and three
Pakistani military transport helicopters and the
expected arrival of four Ukrainian combat helicopters
in coming weeks will provide a much needed boost to
MONUSCO capabilities in the east, which have been
severely impacted in recent months by insufficient
military helicopter capability. I would like to express
my appreciation to all those involved in providing
those very important additions.
In our discussions with Congolese partners, we
have also been exploring ideas as to how overall
FARDC capabilities can be strengthened and
augmented. Military reform and strengthening are
clearly a key element to the achievement of druable
security conditions in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo. It is too early to comment specifically as
to what may be possible, but I will say that I am
encouraged by the ideas being considered. These, of
course, would be fully consistent with essential
programmes and activities being pursued in other key
security sector areas, including programmes to expand

12-22477

S/PV.6712

police training and generally augment Congolese
National Police capabilities, and to bolster justice and
corrections systems programmes. I believe that the
police and military justice systems already being
implemented by MONUSCO, in partnership with
relevant Congolese authorities, have been particularly
successful and shown demonstrable results in
augmenting Congolese National Police capabilities.
Rape and sexual violence continue to be a major
problem and the focus of Mission and United Nations
agency attention and activities. We have been
continuing to support an encouraging increase of
military and other prosecutions of those guilty of rapes
and other sexual violence, as well as other serious
human rights abuses, in order to put an end to
impunity. I assure you the Council that we will
continue to pursue every opportunity to bring those
guilty of such crimes to justice.
I must also note, however, that data increasingly
suggest that a great deal of the sexual violence,
including rape, in eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo and other regions of the country substantially
involves civilians committing those grave crimes
against women. I strongly believe that the issue
demands much greater attention from all of us involved
in that critically important area. I would urge all
Governments and organizations to consider increased
attention to the problem. None of us can afford to
reduce our level of activity in any way in that critical
area, as too many Congolese women, and as a result
Congolese society as a whole, suffer from this terrible
problem.
Prisons also remain a significant problem, and the
late 2011 escape of Mayi Mayi leader Gedeon in a
mass prison break underscores it, as he shows signs of
establishing a renewed militia presence in Katanga
province. It is very clear that there is much more to do
in that area. To the extent that we can mobilize
resources, work with other engaged partners to expand
general programmes, and generally maintain and
hopefully augment these programmes and others across
all segments of security sector issues, including
military programmes, significant progress can be
realized to establish the conditions needed for the
security of the civilian population and lasting security
for the region.
While I will not elaborate extensively today on
stabilization programmes, I believe that everyone in

12-22477

the Democratic Republic of the Congo is very aware of
the importance of progress across the spectrum in that
area as well. Implemented within the framework of the
Stabilization and Reconstruction Plan for Eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, those activities are
critical to the augmentation of State authority in
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and an
essential component of achieving sustainable security
conditions and providing for social and economic
development.
For other areas of the country, such activities are
no less important in addressing the urgent needs of the
Congolese population and supporting general
development. We believe that the early official
adoption of the Peace Consolidation Programme will
be an important component of that effort, and we will
be working through the close collaboration of
MONUSCO and United Nations agencies, along with
key bilateral and multilateral partners, to realize further
progress, always in partnership with Government
authorities and agencies, all non-governmental and
other organizations making their own contributions.
We will be very actively pursuing opportunities
to move forward in all these areas in the weeks and
months to come, focusing on civilian protection and
related security issues, associated reforms and
augmentation of State capacity and authority,
stabilization and development efforts, and successful
completion of the election cycle. Combating sexual
violence will continue to be a major specific focus of
our operations and programmes. Of course, as a new
Government is formed, we will also engage in active
dialogue with the new officials in order to move
forward in all areas. I am convinced, however, that
there are significant opportunities to take advantage of
now and in the immediate future, and I can assure
members that we will pursue all such openings to the
maximum extent possible.
(spoke in French)
To conclude, I should like to thank the members
of the Security Council and the international
community for their uninterrupted support to the
Mission. That support will be of extreme importance in
the months to come, when we will attempt to make
continued progress in response to the various
challenges I have just described. Similarly, I wish to
highlight my gratitude to the personnel of MONUSCO
and the United Nations agencies in the Democratic

5

S/PV.6712

Republic of the Congo. Their work is indispensable,
and I have the greatest admiration for it. Under the
pressure of the electoral process, their efforts have
been extraordinary and exemplary. Their work during
that period deserves our thanks and praise.
Strengthened by this support, I have no doubt that we
will be able to continue progress towards stability and
the establishment of a lasting peace, which are the
legitimate aspirations of the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Meece for his briefing.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mrs. Malenga (Democratic Republic of the
Congo) (spoke in French): At the outset, Mr. President,
allow me to express how pleased I am to see you
preside over the Security Council this month. I am
overjoyed that the Security Council has decided under
your presidency to consider the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2012/65) on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). I must also
commend the excellent work of your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of South Africa, in the
presidency of the Security Council last month. Allow
me also to highlight the extreme importance of the
Secretary-General’s report, dated 26 January 2012. The
briefing just given by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Meece — whose presence here
today I welcome — emphasized that importance.
The report before the Council today is significant
in that it contains factual information on the events that
have taken place in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo since the previous report of the SecretaryGeneral dated 24 October 2011 (S/2011/656). It covers
a crucial period in the history of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo — a period during which the
Congolese people, for the second time in five years,
went to the polls as scheduled and in a generally
peaceful atmosphere.
We welcome the recommendations contained in
the report, particularly since they generally reflect the
concerns already expressed by the Government, which
it is seeking to address with the help of its traditional
partners and MONUSCO. These relate in particular to
the joint efforts of the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo (FARDC) and MONUSCO in

6

the context of the process of disarmament,
demobilization,
repatriation,
resettlement
and
reintegration, as set out in paragraph 73 of the report;
the progress achieved by the Congolese judicial
authorities in the prosecution and punishment of crimes
of sexual violence, as noted in paragraph 76 of the
report; and the renewed commitment of the
Government to bolster stabilization efforts in the
eastern provinces of the country, as well as the
progress made in the implementation in areas emerging
from armed conflict of the Stabilization and
Reconstruction Plan for Eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo, as noted in paragraph 79 of the report.
But notwithstanding our overall satisfaction with
the report, we should like to make a number of
comments on four issues: elections and the security
situation; human rights and sexual violence; reform of
the Congolese judicial system; and armed groups and
peacebuilding.
I should like first to address the issue of the
elections and the security situation. On behalf of the
Government and the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, I should like to thank the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
for the support he has provided to the stabilization
efforts in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to
the elections of 28 November 2011. The work of his
Special Representative for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Mr. Roger Meece, as well as the logistical
and material support provided by MONUSCO to the
Independent National Electoral Commission, also
deserves mention.
In terms of the violence related to the electoral
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
paragraph 5 of the report contains information on
election-related incidents. While their negative
consequences for the security of individuals and their
property are regrettable, it should be noted that at the
time of their occurrence, the Government, through the
Minister of Justice and Human Rights, denounced a
number of violations and appealed to the Prosecutor
General of the Republic, the Prosecutors General in the
Appeals Court and the Auditor-General of the FARDC
to open investigations into those incidents.
In that respect, allow me to quote from the
Minister of Justice and Human Rights, who stated on
28 November 2011:

12-22477

S/PV.6712

“Serious acts have been committed: the
lynching of a number of individuals, both
politicians and police officers; the destruction of
electoral equipment and of State and private
property; the burning down of police stations; and
death threats by certain persons. Despite all of
those calls for reason, restraint and legality, we
witnessed in recent days another serious form of
intolerance that violates the right to life and
physical safety and to property.”
But looking beyond the unrest that prevailed
before and after the elections, it would be no
exaggeration to conclude that the country is resolutely
determined to follow a process of returning to
normality and that the Congolese people want only one
thing: peace.
Today, when we look back at what really took
place and when we look to the future, we can say with
certainty that the second round of democratic elections
represent a definitive end in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo of an era during which the transfer of
power was not based on democratic norms and the
funding of the electoral process was provided mainly
by the international community.
That reality was acknowledged by the head of
State, His Excellency Joseph Kabila Kabange, in his
speech of 20 December 2012:
“For the first time in our history, a
presidential term of office has ended without an
institutional crisis, with 95 per cent of electoral
costs funded by the Republic’s own resources.”
Despite the repeated calls to violence made by
certain political leaders during the electoral campaign
and following the elections, we were able to avoid a
serious deterioration in terms of peace and security in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo thanks to the
capacity of the Congolese National Police to avert and
respond to violence without resort to the excessive use
of force.
I should like here to pay heartfelt tribute to the
police and security forces, which, in particularly
difficult conditions, showed great professionalism
whenever they were called upon to ensure law and
order, which are prerequisites for an effective electoral
process. I wish also to take this opportunity to thank all
of our partners, including MONUSCO and the
European Union mission to provide advice and

12-22477

assistance for security sector reform in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, for their partnership with the
FARDC.
I should also like to highlight the support
provided by the European Union with a view to
ensuring security during the electoral process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo through its
delegation in Kinshasa, its member States and the
European Union Police Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We are also grateful for the
technical, financial and logistical contributions made
by a number of friendly countries, as well as foreign
partners including the Republic of South Africa, the
Republic of Angola, the Republic of the Congo and
MONUSCO.
Some setbacks were noted that in certain cases
led to the death of individuals; we deem those
regrettable, but we can draw lessons from them for the
future, particularly with respect to the provincial,
senatorial and local elections.
But in general terms, the reforms launched last
year in the security sector will be continued this year in
order to train a police force and an army that are fully
capable of ensuring security throughout the national
territory and to enhance conditions — which are
already favourable — for a return to economic and
social development.
In terms of human rights and sexual violence, I
would like to reaffirm my country’s commitment to the
purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations and in international law, which are the
basic foundations of a world that is more peaceful,
prosperous and just. In that regard, the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is determined to
ensure strict respect for the fundamental principles of
human rights and international humanitarian law, and
to ensure a just and lasting peace throughout the
country.
In paragraphs 46 to 54 of the report, the
Secretary-General makes reference to the human rights
violations that took place during the electoral process
and to many other such acts committed in the eastern
part of the country by armed groups. Reference is also
made to acts of sexual violence and mass rapes
committed in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
between 2010 and 2011.

7

S/PV.6712

With regard to human rights violations in general,
paragraph 72 of the report recommends that measures
be taken to ensure that the guilty are identified and
brought to justice. As I said earlier, that need for
justice is of the greatest concern to the Government, as
well to the authorities of the Independent National
Electoral Commission, who have spared no effort in
bringing before the courts cases involving electoral
workers who engaged in misconduct in the local results
compilation centres.
With regard to sexual violence, I should like to
remind the Council that the war that overshadowed the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for many years
generated many types of violence, including a new
type, the main victims of which are women and young
girls. In the eastern part of the country, which was most
affected by that violence, women are now targeted by
men in uniform and by criminals.
In response, all institutions in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, including the executive power,
the courts and Parliament, have mobilized to
counteract the scourge, against which the Government
has adopted a zero-tolerance policy. Even the highestranking military officers of the Congolese Army have
been brought to justice. In legislative terms, we note
the law of 20 July 2006, which was revolutionary
compared with the criminal code previously in force.
The most significant innovations include an increase in
the age of sexual consent for girls from 14 to 18 years
of age. In other words, a girl aged 18 is today
considered to be a legal minor, and anyone having
sexual relations with a girl of that age, with or without
her consent, is deemed to have broken the law.
Another important measure introduced in that law
is the irrelevance of the official status of the
perpetrator; in other words, no one in a position of
authority who commits a sexually violent act can claim
immunity before the law.
For their part, the courts and tribunals have
adopted new measures. For example, in the remote
areas of the eastern provinces, special courts have been
established to conduct investigations. Those courts are
mobile and able to operate in areas closer to the scenes
of crimes, thereby enabling women who have been
raped to see justice done. They convene outside, under
the trees, so as to enable members of the community to
participate. In addition, the Government is supporting
the establishment of five prosecution support cells,

8

which MONUSCO is launching to assist the victims of
sexual violence in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
In addressing the issue of Congolese judicial
reform, I am pleased to recall that, in its resolve to
once and for all end impunity for serious crimes
committed in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and
in
implementation
of
the
relevant
recommendations of the United Nations mapping
report of October 2010, the Government has taken the
initiative to set up special mixed chambers within the
Congolese legal system. These courts will be set up
within some provincial appellate courts and will be
responsible for handling cases involving grave human
rights violations in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
To that end, the Government has introduced a bill
in Parliament to establish special mixed courts to
prosecute such crimes. The special mixed courts will
have the potential to help not only to end impunity, but
also to improve victims’ access to justice and enhance
the overall capacities and will of the Congolese
national judicial system to effectively prosecute the
most serious international crimes.
Although established by the legislative branch on
the basis of a national law, the specialized mixed courts
would be more effective and credible if they were to
enjoy the strong support of the Security Council. Such
support would entail a Council decision under Chapter
VII of the Charter requiring Member States to
cooperate with the special mixed courts, particularly in
the arrest and rendition of suspects. A lack of
cooperation and the denial of justice could pose a real
threat to international peace and security.
Peacebuilding and the fight against armed groups
are the top priorities for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The threat of the Lord’s Resistance Army
must be addressed with the assistance of the countries
of the region. Initiatives must be urgently accelerated
to protect civilians from the atrocities committed by
the Ugandan rebel movement of Joseph Kony and his
henchmen. We believe that sufficient elements are now
in place to substantially reduce or entirely eliminate
the destructive capacity of that armed group, whose
reach spans the Central African Republic, Chad, the
Sudan, Uganda and my own country. It is possible to
do so and it must be done in order to make peace a
reality.

12-22477

S/PV.6712

In general terms, we reiterate that, in terms of
fighting armed groups, including Congolese outlaws,
substantial progress has undeniably been made in
reducing threats to the security of the people and in
improving the conditions in which the Government is
able to guarantee security. The normalization of
relations with neighbouring States is continuing.
Measures are being taken to distance destabilizing
elements from the border regions, but we would remind
the Council that, since February 2001, our consistent
position has been that all armed foreigners, regardless
of origin, must return to their home country.
It is now time to begin a new phase of economic
resurgence after many years of war. In that area as in
all others, as the Minister for International and
Regional Cooperation eloquently said in his statement
to the Council on 18 May 2011:
“However, essential it may be, all future
assistance from the United Nations, and
MONUSCO in particular, be conceived and
organized in a way that makes full use of the
investments
made
by
the
international
community. In this way, we can end the crisis of
legitimacy, relaunch the economy and rebuild a
State in the Democratic Republic of the Congo —
in other words, capitalize and build on the
remarkable if still precarious results that we have
achieved in this area by working together in the
past few years.” (S/PV.6539, p. 6)
The Democratic Republic of the Congo already
has the Stabilization and Reconstruction Plan for
Eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as

12-22477

the International Security and Stabilization Support
Strategy, which target North Kivu and extend to Haut
Uélé and Bas Uélé districts in Orientale province,
Maniema province, the North Tanganyika district in
Katanga province, and the South Ubangi and Equateur
districts in Equateur province. In our humble opinion,
the economic recovery, social rehabilitation and
reintegration components of these stabilization and
reconstruction programmes should be revisited and
redesigned. I refer in particular to STAREC and the
programme designed by the United Nations country
team, the objective of which is to consolidate and
develop the northern and western regions. Although
they are not experiencing conflict, those regions are
nonetheless facing the consequences of instability in
the north and the east of the country.
We call on the international community and
friendly countries that wish to do so to come to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, to invest heavily in
our country and to participate in its development and
economic growth. The potential of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the energy of its people
enable us to envisage a win-win type of cooperation.
Some countries have already understood that, and we
invite others to follow suit and to support us as we
move along that path.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
further names inscribed on my list. I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.50 a.m.

9
