A/RES/61/78

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
18 December 2006

Sixty-first session
Agenda item 90 (q)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 6 December 2006
[on the report of the First Committee (A/61/394)]

61/78.

Nuclear disarmament

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 49/75 E of 15 December 1994 on a step-by-step
reduction of the nuclear threat, and its resolutions 50/70 P of 12 December 1995,
51/45 O of 10 December 1996, 52/38 L of 9 December 1997, 53/77 X of 4 December
1998, 54/54 P of 1 December 1999, 55/33 T of 20 November 2000, 56/24 R of
29 November 2001, 57/79 of 22 November 2002, 58/56 of 8 December 2003, 59/77
of 3 December 2004 and 60/70 of 8 December 2005 on nuclear disarmament,
Reaffirming the commitment of the international community to the goal of the
total elimination of nuclear weapons and the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free
world,
Bearing in mind that the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and
on Their Destruction of 1972 1 and the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their
Destruction of 1993 2 have already established legal regimes on the complete
prohibition of biological and chemical weapons, respectively, and determined to
achieve a nuclear weapons convention on the prohibition of the development,
testing, production, stockpiling, loan, transfer, use and threat of use of nuclear
weapons and on their destruction, and to conclude such an international convention
at an early date,
Recognizing that there now exist conditions for the establishment of a world
free of nuclear weapons, and stressing the need to take concrete practical steps
towards achieving this goal,
Bearing in mind paragraph 50 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly, 3 the first special session devoted to disarmament,
calling for the urgent negotiation of agreements for the cessation of the qualitative
improvement and development of nuclear-weapon systems, and for a comprehensive
_______________
1

Resolution 2826 (XXVI), annex.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1974, No. 33757.
3
Resolution S-10/2.
2

06-49911

A/RES/61/78

and phased programme with agreed time frames, wherever feasible, for the
progressive and balanced reduction of nuclear weapons and their means of delivery,
leading to their ultimate and complete elimination at the earliest possible time,
Reaffirming the conviction of the States parties to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons 4 that the Treaty is a cornerstone of nuclear nonproliferation and nuclear disarmament and the importance of the decision on
strengthening the review process for the Treaty, the decision on principles and
objectives for nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament, the decision on the
extension of the Treaty and the resolution on the Middle East, adopted by the 1995
Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons, 5
Stressing the importance of the thirteen steps for the systematic and
progressive efforts to achieve the objective of nuclear disarmament leading to the
total elimination of nuclear weapons, as agreed to by the States parties in the Final
Document of the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons, 6
Reiterating the highest priority accorded to nuclear disarmament in the Final
Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly and by the
international community,
Reiterating its call for an early entry into force of the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty, 7
Noting with appreciation the entry into force of the Treaty on the Reduction
and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms (START I), 8 to which Belarus,
Kazakhstan, the Russian Federation, Ukraine and the United States of America are
States parties,
Noting with appreciation also the entry into force of the Treaty on Strategic
Offensive Reductions (“the Moscow Treaty”) between the United States of America
and the Russian Federation 9 as a significant step towards reducing their deployed
strategic nuclear weapons, while calling for further irreversible deep cuts in their
nuclear arsenals,
Noting with appreciation further the unilateral measures taken by the nuclearweapon States for nuclear arms limitation, and encouraging them to take further
such measures,
Recognizing the complementarity of bilateral, plurilateral and multilateral
negotiations on nuclear disarmament, and that bilateral negotiations can never
replace multilateral negotiations in this respect,

_______________
4

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
See 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, Part I (NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I) and Corr.2), annex.
6
See 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
Final Document, vol. I (NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I and II)), part I, section entitled “Article VI and eighth
to twelfth preambular paragraphs”, para. 15.
7
See resolution 50/245.
8
The United Nations Disarmament Yearbook, vol. 16: 1991 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.92.IX.1), appendix II.
9
See CD/1674.
5

2

A/RES/61/78

Noting the support expressed in the Conference on Disarmament and in the
General Assembly for the elaboration of an international convention to assure nonnuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons, and the
multilateral efforts in the Conference on Disarmament to reach agreement on such
an international convention at an early date,
Recalling the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the
Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons, issued on 8 July 1996, 10 and
welcoming the unanimous reaffirmation by all Judges of the Court that there exists
an obligation for all States to pursue in good faith and bring to a conclusion
negotiations leading to nuclear disarmament in all its aspects under strict and
effective international control,
Mindful of paragraph 64 of the Final Document of the Ministerial Meeting of
the Coordinating Bureau of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, held in
Putrajaya, Malaysia, on 29 and 30 May 2006, 11
Recalling paragraph 70 and other relevant recommendations in the Final
Document of the Fourteenth Conference of Heads of State or Government of NonAligned Countries, held in Havana on 15 and 16 September 2006, 12 calling upon the
Conference on Disarmament to establish, as soon as possible and as the highest
priority, an ad hoc committee on nuclear disarmament and to commence
negotiations on a phased programme for the complete elimination of nuclear
weapons with a specified time framework,
Reaffirming the specific mandate conferred upon the Disarmament
Commission by the General Assembly, in its decision 52/492 of 8 September 1998,
to discuss the subject of nuclear disarmament as one of its main substantive agenda
items,
Recalling the United Nations Millennium Declaration, 13 in which Heads of
State and Government resolved to strive for the elimination of weapons of mass
destruction, in particular nuclear weapons, and to keep all options open for
achieving this aim, including the possibility of convening an international
conference to identify ways of eliminating nuclear dangers,
Reaffirming that, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, States
should refrain from the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons in settling their
disputes in international relations,
Seized of the danger of the use of weapons of mass destruction, particularly
nuclear weapons, in terrorist acts and the urgent need for concerted international
efforts to control and overcome it,
Recognizes that, in view of recent political developments, the time is
1.
now opportune for all the nuclear-weapon States to take effective disarmament
measures with a view to achieving the elimination of these weapons;

_______________
10
A/51/218, annex; see also Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons, Advisory Opinion, I.C.J.
Reports 1996, p. 226.
11
A/60/1002-S/2006/718, annex I.
12
A/61/472-S/2006/780, annex I.
13
See resolution 55/2.

3

A/RES/61/78

2.
Reaffirms that nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation are
substantively interrelated and mutually reinforcing, that the two processes must go
hand in hand and that there is a genuine need for a systematic and progressive
process of nuclear disarmament;
Welcomes and encourages the efforts to establish new nuclear-weapon3.
free zones in different parts of the world on the basis of agreements or arrangements
freely arrived at among the States of the regions concerned, which is an effective
measure for limiting the further spread of nuclear weapons geographically and
contributes to the cause of nuclear disarmament;
Recognizes that there is a genuine need to diminish the role of nuclear
4.
weapons in strategic doctrines and security policies to minimize the risk that these
weapons will ever be used and to facilitate the process of their total elimination;
Urges the nuclear-weapon States to stop immediately the qualitative
5.
improvement, development, production and stockpiling of nuclear warheads and
their delivery systems;
Also urges the nuclear-weapon States, as an interim measure, to de-alert
6.
and deactivate immediately their nuclear weapons and to take other concrete
measures to reduce further the operational status of their nuclear-weapon systems;
Reiterates its call upon the nuclear-weapon States to undertake the step7.
by-step reduction of the nuclear threat and to carry out effective nuclear
disarmament measures with a view to achieving the total elimination of these
weapons;
Calls upon the nuclear-weapon States, pending the achievement of the
8.
total elimination of nuclear weapons, to agree on an internationally and legally
binding instrument on a joint undertaking not to be the first to use nuclear weapons,
and calls upon all States to conclude an internationally and legally binding
instrument on security assurances of non-use and non-threat of use of nuclear
weapons against non-nuclear-weapon States;
Urges the nuclear-weapon States to commence plurilateral negotiations
9.
among themselves at an appropriate stage on further deep reductions of nuclear
weapons as an effective measure of nuclear disarmament;
10. Underlines the importance of applying the principle of irreversibility to
the process of nuclear disarmament, and nuclear and other related arms control and
reduction measures;
11. Underscores the importance of the unequivocal undertaking by the
nuclear-weapon States, in the Final Document of the 2000 Review Conference of
the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, to
accomplish the total elimination of their nuclear arsenals leading to nuclear
disarmament, to which all States parties are committed under article VI of the
Treaty, 14 and the reaffirmation by the States parties that the total elimination of
nuclear weapons is the only absolute guarantee against the use or threat of use of
nuclear weapons; 15

_______________
14
2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
Final Document, vol. I (NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I and II)), part I, section entitled “Article VI and eighth
to twelfth preambular paragraphs”, para. 15:6.
15
Ibid., section entitled “Article VII and the security of non-nuclear-weapon States”, para. 2.

4

A/RES/61/78

12. Calls for the full and effective implementation of the thirteen steps for
nuclear disarmament contained in the Final Document of the 2000 Review
Conference;6
13. Urges the nuclear-weapon States to carry out further reductions of nonstrategic nuclear weapons, based on unilateral initiatives and as an integral part of
the nuclear arms reduction and disarmament process;
14. Calls for the immediate commencement of negotiations in the
Conference on Disarmament on a non-discriminatory, multilateral and
internationally and effectively verifiable treaty banning the production of fissile
material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices on the basis of the
report of the Special Coordinator 16 and the mandate contained therein;
15. Urges the Conference on Disarmament to agree on a programme of work
that includes the immediate commencement of negotiations on such a treaty with a
view to their conclusion within five years;
16. Calls for the conclusion of an international legal instrument or
instruments on adequate security assurances to non-nuclear-weapon States;
17. Also calls for the early entry into force and strict observance of the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty;7
18. Expresses its regret that the 2005 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons was unable to achieve any
substantive result and that the 2005 World Summit Outcome adopted by the General
Assembly 17 failed to make any reference to nuclear disarmament and nuclear nonproliferation;
19. Also expresses its regret that the Conference on Disarmament was unable
to establish an ad hoc committee to deal with nuclear disarmament at its 2006
session, as called for in General Assembly resolution 60/70;
20. Reiterates its call upon the Conference on Disarmament to establish, on a
priority basis, an ad hoc committee to deal with nuclear disarmament early in 2007
and to commence negotiations on a phased programme of nuclear disarmament
leading to the eventual total elimination of nuclear weapons;
21. Calls for the convening of an international conference on nuclear
disarmament in all its aspects at an early date to identify and deal with concrete
measures of nuclear disarmament;
22. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
sixty-second session a report on the implementation of the present resolution;
23. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-second session
the item entitled “Nuclear disarmament”.
67th plenary meeting
6 December 2006

_______________
16
17

CD/1299.
See resolution 60/1.

5
