S/2007/347*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 June 2007
Original: English

Letter dated 11 June 2007 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General
I have the honour to inform you that the members of the Security Council have
decided to send a mission to Africa from 14 to 21 June 2007. The mission will travel
to Addis Ababa, Khartoum, Accra, Abidjan and Kinshasa. The members of the
Council have agreed on the terms of reference of the mission (see annexes).
Following consultations with the members, it has been agreed that the
composition of the mission is as follows:
Ambassador Olivier Belle (Belgium)
Ambassador Wang Guangya (China)
Mr. Lazare Makayat-Safouesse (Congo)
Ambassador Jean-Marc de La Sablière (France)
Ambassador Leslie Christian (Ghana)
Mr. Rachmat Budiman (Indonesia)
Ambassador Aldo Mantovani (Italy)
Ambassador Alfredo Suescum (Panama)
Ambassador Jorge Voto-Bernales (Peru)
Mr. Tariq Ali Faraj H. Al-Ansari (Qatar)
Ambassador Konstantin Dolgov (Russian Federation)
Ambassador Peter Burian (Slovakia)
Ambassador Dumisani Kumalo (South Africa)
Ambassador Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom)**
Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad (United States)***
I should be grateful if you could have this letter and its annex circulated as a
document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Johan C. Verbeke
President of the Security Council

* Reissued for technical reasons.
** Addis Ababa, Khartoum, and Accra only. Mr. Michael Hoare will represent the United Kingdom
on the Abidjan and Kinshasa legs of the mission.
*** Addis Ababa, Khartoum and Accra only. Mr. William Brencick will represent the United States on
the Abidjan and Kinshasa legs of the mission.

07-38050* (E) 130607

*0738050*

S/2007/347

Annex I
Security Council mission to Addis Ababa and Accra: terms
of reference
Led by Ambassador Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom) and
Ambassador Dumisani Kumalo (South Africa)
1.
Exchange of views on how best to maximize the relationship between the
United Nations Security Council and regional organizations, in particular the
African Union, including in respect of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations.
2.
Discuss mechanisms for elaborating closer ties in the fields of conflict
prevention, mediation and good offices, peacekeeping and post-conflict
reconstruction, including peacebuilding, and identify areas where particular focus is
needed to make further progress.
3.
Discuss ways and means of supporting and improving in a sustained way the
resource base and capacity of the Peace and Security Architecture of the African
Union.
4.
Exchange of views on wider African situations of interest to both the United
Nations Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council,
welcoming enhanced cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union
on issues including, but not limited to:
• The Sudan: facilitation of the implementation of the phased approach to
peacekeeping, including the deployment of the African Union/United Nations
hybrid operation
• Somalia: national reconciliation process; the African Union Mission to
Somalia — progress and challenges; future role of the United Nations
• Chad/Central African Republic: prospects for deployment of a United Nations
mission
• Côte d’Ivoire: political transition, including elections
• Democratic Republic of the Congo: post-election progress and challenges
• Ethiopia-Eritrea: implementation of the decision of the Eritrea-Ethiopia
Boundary Commission
• Great Lakes (Lords Resistance Army): the threat from the Lords Resistance
Army and ongoing efforts to resolve this problem.
5.
Commend the efforts of the African Union to achieve lasting peace in Africa,
and consider how best to develop closer relations between the United Nations and
the African Union, in line with the 10-year plan for capacity-building with the
African Union.

2

07-38050

S/2007/347

Annex II
Security Council mission to the Sudan: terms of reference
Led by Ambassador Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom) and
Ambassador Dumisani Kumalo (South Africa)
1.
To reaffirm the Security Council’s commitment to the sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity of the Sudan and the international community’s determination to
help Sudan achieve a peaceful and prosperous development, and to review the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement.
2.
To encourage the Government of Sudan and the non-signatory parties to
engage constructively in the Darfur Peace Process with a view to finding lasting
peace in the Sudan, in particular support for the forthcoming talks to be convened
by the United Nations and African Union special envoys on Darfur.
3.
To encourage the efforts of the African Union, the United Nations in
consultation with the Government of Sudan to achieve without delay full agreement
on and full implementation of the Addis Ababa Outcome that provided for a
re-energized political process, a strengthened ceasefire and a three-phased approach
to peacekeeping: the Light Support Package (phase I), the Heavy Support Package
(phase II) and the Hybrid Operation (phase III).
4.

To encourage all parties to fully implement the ceasefire agreement.

5.
To underscore the need for full implementation by all parties of international
obligations, in the political, security and humanitarian fields.

07-38050

3

S/2007/347

Annex III
Security Council mission to Côte d’Ivoire: terms of reference
Led by Ambassador Jorge Voto-Bernales (Peru)
1.
To welcome the ownership of the peace process by the Ivorian parties in the
framework of the Ouagadougou Agreement.
2.
To encourage the parties to implement fully and in good faith all the
provisions of the Agreement and of the subsequent agreements, and to express the
readiness of the Council to help them in this regard.
3.
To welcome the fact that Ivorian parties as well as the Facilitator stressed that
continued United Nations assistance was essential to the peace process. To
determine with Ivorian parties, and in liaison with the Facilitation, the role of the
United Nations in the follow-up of the peace process. To underline the importance
of meeting the agreed timelines.
4.
To stress the importance of a lasting and final settlement of the crisis, and
therefore, of the credibility of all the process. To reaffirm, in particular, the
commitment of the Security Council to the credibility of the elections, that shall be
guaranteed by the certification of key steps of the electoral process. To recall the
necessity to implement in a credible manner the operations of disarmament of
ex-combatants and militia, of identification of the population and registration of
voters, as set out in the Ouagadougou Agreement.
5.
To call upon the parties to ensure an environment favourable to the holding of
free, open, fair and transparent elections, in particular by guaranteeing that the
media remain neutral.
6.
To point out that the Council will examine the sanctions regime in order to
contribute to the peace process, taking into account the peaceful implementation of
the Ouagadougou Agreement.
7.
To encourage the Ivorian parties, in implementing the Ouagadougou
Agreement, to ensure the protection of vulnerable civilians, in particular children,
women, internally displaced persons and other groups affected by the crisis.

4

07-38050

S/2007/347

Annex IV
Security Council mission to the Democratic Republic of the Congo:
terms of reference
Led by Ambassador Jean-Marc de La Sablière (France)
1.
To reaffirm the commitment of the Security Council to help the Congolese
authorities to consolidate peace, democratic governance and the rule of law in the
post-transitional period in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. To stress that the
new mandate of the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) set out by resolution 1756 (2007) constitutes a
significant contribution by the United Nations to this endeavour.
2.
To welcome the adoption of the programme of the Government, in particular
the governance contract included therein, and to emphasize the need for the
Government to rapidly implement the contract and to deliver peace dividends to the
Congolese population.
3.
To urge all political parties to remain committed to the political process and
national reconciliation in accordance with the constitutional framework and the law.
To call on the democratically elected authorities to respect the space and role
conferred on the opposition parties by the Constitution in order to ensure their
effective participation in the national political debate.
4.
To stress the importance of developing as a matter of urgency a national
security strategy and planning and carrying out the security sector reform in order to
establish professional security organizations in the areas of defence, police and the
administration of justice that are well managed, protect civilians and act in
accordance with the Constitution and with respect for the rule of law, human rights
and international humanitarian law. To stress also the importance of disarming,
demobilizing, resettling or repatriating, as appropriate, and reintegrating Congolese
and foreign combatants. To explore the next steps to be taken by the Congolese
authorities and their international partners in this regard.
5.
To discuss with the Congolese authorities the ways and means of defusing
current tensions and engaging in a plan for the long-term stabilization of the eastern
part of the country, particularly in the Kivus and Ituri regions. To call on the
Congolese authorities to step up their efforts to put an end to impunity and to ensure
effective protection of the population throughout the territory.
6.
To express the Council’s concern at the persistence of violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law, in particular those carried out by
Congolese militias and foreign armed groups but also by elements of the Congolese
security forces.
7.
To encourage the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
establish with its principal international partners an effective arrangement for
regular consultations promoting a political dialogue.

07-38050

5

S/2007/347

8.
To welcome the signing in Nairobi on 15 December 2006 of the Security,
Stability and Development Pact for the Great Lakes region, and to encourage the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to continue to work with its
neighbours to resolve in a constructive manner the shared security and border
problems of countries in the region. To encourage the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to ratify the Stability Pact and to fully resume
diplomatic relations with all neighbours.

6

07-38050
