S/PV.9420

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9420th meeting

Friday, 15 September 2023, 10.25 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Dautllari. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Albania)

Members:

Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. França Danese
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. Olmedo
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Korbieh
Mrs. Shino
Mr. Camilleri
Mr. Afonso
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Ms. Shaheen
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Wood

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in South Sudan (S/2023/657)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-26911 (E)
*2326911*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9420

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in South Sudan (S/2023/657)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of South Sudan to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Nicholas
Haysom, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for South Sudan and Head of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan; Ms. Edem Wosornu,
Director of Operations and Advocacy, Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs; and Ms. Racheal
Juan, civil society representative.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2023/657, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in South Sudan.
I now give the floor to Mr. Haysom.
Mr. Haysom: I thank you, Madam President, for
the opportunity to brief the Security Council.
With 15 months remaining until the elections
that are scheduled to end the transitional period,
time is of the essence for South Sudan. The country
anticipates holding its first elections in December
2024. However, key institutions and legal frameworks
have yet to be put in place and critical questions remain
unanswered. Resolving those questions requires no
material resources, only the political will to reach
compromise and consensus is what is needed. Such
questions include the type of elections to be held, voter
registration requirements, how electoral boundaries
will be determined, the nature of the participation of
refugees and internally displaced persons, the allocation
of security responsibilities and how electoral-related
disputes will be managed.
2/17

15/09/2023

One particularly important issue is the stalled
constitution-making process, to be carried out in an
environment that respects freedom of expression,
association and peaceful assembly and encourages civic
engagement. The process is 12 months behind schedule,
according to the road map of the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. The need to recalibrate or resolve priorities
within the remaining time of the transitional period is
now urgent. However, that sense of urgency needs to
come from the parties to the Revitalized Agreement,
not from the international community.
Since my previous briefing (see S/PV.9353)
there has been modest progress in some areas. They
include the passage of the National Elections Act;
the establishment of a joint task force between the
Revitalized Transitional Government of National
Unity and the trilateral group of the African Union,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) and the United Nations to coordinate support
to the implementation of the constitution-making and
electoral processes; the commencement of electoral
security planning, which needs retention; initial
election budgetary discussions have taken place; and a
recent agreement on the deployment of the first batch
of the newly graduated necessary unified forces has
been reached.
While in the assessment of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) the delays on
key decisions can be attributed to foot-dragging by
the signatories, we have also noted a lack of capacity
in establishing the required institutions and in the
complexities of electoral planning. However, in his
Martyrs’ Day statement, President Kiir made a clear
commitment that South Sudan will not return to war,
that the path forward includes holding elections in
December 2024 and that all the parties must work
to emerge from perpetual transitional Government
status. He has committed to holding the elections on
time. A level playing field is therefore now required
for a credible, inclusive and peaceful election. The
situation currently privileges one party above others,
and I note that campaigning has begun in some states.
That reinforces the urgent need to establish the Political
Parties Council as the body responsible for registering
parties so that they all have equal opportunity, access
and rights, by law, to mobilize support.
Relatedly, I want to caution that unilateralism and
brinkmanship are toxic to the practice of post-conflict
23-26911

15/09/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

unity coalition governance, which requires compromise,
mutual trust and confidence-building. I recognize
the collective responsibility of the political class, as a
whole and in general, including the opposition parties,
in progressively unlocking the blockages in the road
map. Some of them were outlined by the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement in Opposition in a statement
issued this week. We would also acknowledge, however,
that a pre-eminent responsibility rests on the ruling
party — to resist unilateral interpretations of the peace
agreement and to make full use of available public
resources and decision-making committees to advance
the implementation of the agreement.
Looking ahead, further steps that must be taken
by the country’s political leadership include passing
priority elections-related legislation in Parliament;
allocating a national budget for elections; reconstituting
and resourcing key electoral institutions — the National
Constitutional Review Commission, the National
Elections Commission and the Political Parties
Council; and completing essential benchmarks in
the road map, especially related to the transitional
security arrangements.
Despite all those challenges, an independent
perception survey commissioned by UNMISS showed
that there remains significant popular demand for
elections. Civil society organizations across the nation
have expressed to UNMISS their desire for elections,
but not without reservations about the overall status
of the implementation of the peace agreement. They
have identified a role for themselves in monitoring
and supporting its implementation and in conducting
civic education campaigns. But to do that, they need a
secure environment, as well as resources to partner in
expanding civic and political space.
I note that during a recent political parties forum
in Wau, supported by UNMISS and its partners,
stakeholders across the political spectrum reaffirmed
their commitment to a more open political space,
including through local mechanisms to support freedom
of expression, association, assembly and movement. A
stable security environment is essential for creating
a conducive environment, both for elections and for
future sustainable development. The reconstituted Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission has reported
that since the graduation of the first phase of the
necessary unified forces in January, little progress has
been registered. However, positively, UNMISS takes
note that, this week, the Joint Defence Board has called

S/PV.9420

for graduated personnel of the necessary unified forces
to return to their training centres within seven days
for onward deployment and has summoned recruits for
phase 2 of the integration process.
In summary, the importance of sustaining the
country’s overall stabilization, through continued
international engagement and support to the
implementation of key road map benchmarks, including
electoral preparations, must be underlined. For our
part, UNMISS has been mandated by the Council to
support an enabling environment for South Sudan to
carry out its first national elections since independence.
We are currently seeking, including within our existing
resources, to support a two-phase approach to assist
South Sudan in preparing for its elections.
In the first phase, the United Nations will focus
on capacity-building for standing up key institutions
and expanding civic and political space. The second
phase, support to the electoral process itself, will be
contingent on Member States’ support and progress
during the first phase, when and if a national electoral
framework matures.
Against that backdrop, the ceasefire is largely
holding across the country. There has been a substantial
reduction in conflict between the signatories since the
signing of the Revitalized Peace Agreement in 2018.
But intercommunal and subnational violence remains
an overall impediment to peace consolidation, as does
sporadic fighting between the government forces and
non-signatories, absent the latter’s integration into the
peace process.
While I am confident that the Mission’s more
robust posture has contributed to a limited decrease in
violence in South Sudan, the expanded protection-ofcivilians mandate in resolution 2677 (2023), coupled
with a reduced aviation operability and a static budget,
has put our mobility enhancement under strain. In that
context, the Mission requested an external review of our
protection-of-civilians capacity, which has validated
the need for increased capability requirements.
UNMISS, nevertheless, continues to strengthen its
approach towards the protection of civilians, including
an enhanced coordination mechanism for whole-ofmission responses to early-warning indicators. We
are also expanding our uniformed presence across the
country by adding six additional operating bases.
The impact of the crisis in the Sudan, along
the political, economic, humanitarian and security

23-269113/17

S/PV.9420

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

dimensions, continues to loom. The situation has
exacerbated existing conflict drivers in South Sudan,
such as competition over limited resources. South Sudan
needs additional support from international donors
for support to the Sudan crisis, but I also call for the
unity Government to allocate national budget funding
to meet its own humanitarian and public service needs
and restart support for the onward transportation of
people who have crossed into South Sudan. I note that
an overall squeeze in humanitarian funding continues,
and reductions in anticipated food distribution have
already sparked tensions and protests in the camp for
internally displaced persons in Bentiu.
While I will defer detailed briefing on the
humanitarian situation to my colleague from the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, it must
be said that, after four years of recurrent flooding
and drought, the impact of climate change has been
unrelenting. That has a significant bearing on the
security environment, given that the majority of South
Sudan’s population relies on climate-sensitive sectors
for their livelihoods, such as agriculture, pastoral
activities, fishing and forestry.
That suggests that addressing humanitarian
needs alone is insufficient. We are increasingly
emphasizing coordinated approaches across the peace,
humanitarian and development nexus, focusing on
enhancing community resilience to conflict-, climateand food-related shocks, finding durable solutions to
displacement and strengthening community violence
reduction, including through project platforms such
as the reconciliation, stabilization and resilience trust
fund, and building institutions in proper alignment
with the United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework.
In all those efforts, I wish to thank our
partners — IGAD, the troika, the European Union and
its member States, the reconstituted Joint Monitoring
and Evaluation Commission, the African Union and the
United Nations country team as a whole.
The inspirational success and popularity of South
Sudan’s national basketball team, the Bright Stars,
illustrates how the people of that country yearn for their
nation-building moment. It is time for the political class
and signatory parties to marry that dream with reality,
and for the international community and the United
Nations to stay the course towards that objective.
The President: I thank Mr. Haysom for his briefing.
4/17

15/09/2023

I now give the floor to Ms. Wosornu.
Ms. Wosornu: I thank you, Madam President, for
this opportunity to address the Security Council on the
humanitarian situation in South Sudan. I am grateful to
brief members, alongside Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Haysom, whom I also thank for his
comments on the humanitarian situation.
Since our last briefing to the Council (see
S/PV.9274), the humanitarian situation in South Sudan
has continued to encounter major challenges. The
conflict in neighbouring Sudan has deeply complicated
the humanitarian picture. The Special Representative
of the Secretary-General has touched on it. I will go
into further detail, as he noted.
At the beginning of the year, more than 9.4 million
people in South Sudan, or 76 per cent of the population,
required humanitarian assistance owing to various
factors, including subnational violence, physical and
other access constraints and climatic shocks, such as
flooding and drought-like conditions.
However, as of 5 September, more than 260,000
people had arrived in South Sudan seeking protection
and safety. The majority — more than 91 per cent — are
South Sudanese nationals fleeing violence in their
neighbour, the Sudan. Many describe a perilous and
challenging journey southward, including being
subjected to harassment, physical violence and yet
again, particularly in the case of women and girls,
sexual violence. Most made the journey with little or
no assistance along the way. I do want to commend the
Government of South Sudan for its efforts in supporting
those arriving from the Sudan. The Government has
collaborated with humanitarian workers, including
through assistance with transportation — albeit not
enough — for people as they make their onward journeys.
We urge the Government to continue strengthening
that critical support, including the provision of basic
services at crossing points and in areas of return.
The massive influx of returnees and refugees
comes against a backdrop of funding challenges. That
has imposed a huge burden on support systems and
services that are already stretched, leaving insufficient
capacity to meet the wide range of needs. For example,
as the Special Representative said, the lack of funding
has hampered transport services in their efforts to
move approximately 500 people on a daily basis. The
release of $33 million — $18 million from the Central
Emergency Response Fund and $15 million from the
23-26911

15/09/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

South Sudan Humanitarian Fund — has enabled those
and other important services to continue. But that is
only a temporary fix. It was originally envisaged that
the emergency response plan for the South Sudan crisis
would assist 180,000 people over three months at a cost
of $96 million. However, with 600,000 people expected
by the end of this year, a revision was necessary. The
response plan now requires $356 million between May
and December if vital support services are to continue,
an issue I will address later in my statement. I would like
to convey our deepest gratitude to the donors without
whose support that could not have been sustained.
The crisis in the Sudan is also having a deeply
damaging impact on South Sudan’s trade and economy,
with serious knock-on effects. They include the
disruption in cross-border trade between the Sudan,
South Sudan and other countries, leading to increases
in food prices of between 20 and 75 per cent. That
affects the 8 million people in South Sudan — 64 per
cent of the population — who are already food insecure.
Furthermore, rising market prices have increased the
overall cost of the humanitarian response, putting
further pressure on limited resources and reducing
our ability to adequately respond to the needs. Nearly
740,000 pregnant and breastfeeding women will have
acute malnutrition this year, compared to 675,000 in
2022 and half a million in 2021. Nearly 80 per cent
of the 1.9 million displaced people are female-headed
households that are food insecure and are facing
unstable livelihoods and acute malnutrition. We have
also seen the rise in food insecurity increase genderbased violence. The interconnectedness of the Sudan
and South Sudan’s economies and supply chains
highlights the need for coordinated efforts to address
the economic consequences of the conflict and ensure
access to essential commodities for the people affected.
To meet the needs of the most vulnerable people
across South Sudan, the humanitarian community
needs unimpeded humanitarian access. That means that
issues related to the safety and security of humanitarian
workers, physical access and bureaucratic impediments
should not limit our ability to reach people in need.
However, 34 humanitarian access incidents were
reported across the country in July alone, compared
to a total of 33 incidents at the same time in 2022.
Furthermore, physical access continues to present
major constraints. For example, in Unity state, the
gradual deterioration of roads due to rainfall affected
the delivery of humanitarian supplies to the 900,000
people in need. The movement of returnees in various

S/PV.9420

locations, particularly in Koch, Leer, Mayendit and
Payinjiar counties, has also been affected. We are
grateful to the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
for its efforts to mitigate some of those issues. In
addition, the unresolved status of Abyei also continues
to present challenges, especially as humanitarian access
to the northern part of the box has been difficult since
the Sudan crisis began, impacting at least a quarter of
a million people.
Under the wider yearly humanitarian response plan
for South Sudan in 2023, $1.7 billion is required to meet
the needs of 6.8 million of the most vulnerable people
in the country. Again, while we deeply appreciate the
generosity of donors, particularly in these challenging
economic times, the plan has received only $782 million,
46 per cent of the funding requirements. I particularly
appreciate the call on 13 September from a few key
donors for partnerships in addressing humanitarian
needs in South Sudan. The humanitarian community
will continue its work alongside the Government
of South Sudan to meet the needs of its people and
reprioritize activities to focus on those most in need.
Despite the underfunding, I am pleased to note that
approximately 4 million of the 6.8 million women, girls,
men and boys in need across South Sudan received some
form of humanitarian assistance in the first six months
of 2023. We urgently need the international community
to step up and support the humanitarian response and to
invest in longer-term solutions for sustainability.
The people of South Sudan want to move beyond
humanitarian support, stand on their own two feet
and thrive and flourish as an independent nation. We
hear that consistently from people in Wau, Malakal
and Bentiu. Farmers want to farm again. People want
to re-establish careers and businesses. The Special
Representative mentioned the basketball team as
an example. Everyone, including displaced women
and young people, wants to be able to provide for
themselves and their families. They are working to help
themselves. Despite the challenges, about 62 dynamic
South Sudanese civil-society organizations, including
local women-led organizations, are working diligently
for their communities. They are providing front-line
emergency life-saving services and informing their
own humanitarian priorities.
The humanitarian community in South Sudan is
working closely with the Government and the people
of South Sudan on some of their initiatives to support
self-reliance. The initiatives include collaborating

23-269115/17

S/PV.9420

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

more closely across the humanitarian, peace and
development sectors and working with local leaders
and communities to move decision-making closer to
the people affected. It also includes the Inter-Agency
Standing Committee Flagship Initiative, which is a
pilot approach launched this year. That approach is
designed to put communities and organizations affected
at the forefront in driving humanitarian priorities and
delivering the humanitarian response.
I will conclude by saying that we have a
responsibility to support the aspirations of the South
Sudanese to fend for themselves and live a peaceful
and dignified life. It is our hope that with the steadfast
support and investment of the international community,
South Sudan will make the progress it deserves. We
count on the international community’s support in
addressing the drivers of humanitarian issues, such as
conflict — including what is currently happening in its
neighbour the Sudan — and natural disasters, which
are undermining peace, development and stability and
increasing humanitarian needs.
The President:
her briefing.

I

thank

Ms.

Wosornu

for

I now give the floor to Ms. Juan.
Ms. Juan: I am very honoured to be given the
opportunity to brief the Security Council today on
developments in my country, South Sudan, and I would
like to thank the United Nations for its commitment to
supporting peace in my country.
As a young South Sudanese woman, I have grown
up against the backdrop of a country at war. For most
of my life, and the lives of many other young people,
who make up more than 70 per cent of our population,
we have become all too familiar with the violence
that surrounds us — the violence of weapons, sexual
violence and violence induced by climate change. It
may be easy to resign oneself to accepting the status
quo, but I choose not to. Allow me to outline three key
issues that could contribute to putting South Sudan on
a trajectory towards sustainable peace.
First, there is the widening of the civic space. I am
saddened that young people and civil-society actors still
cannot speak openly without fear. That is not conducive
to building the nation we want to see. Widening the civic
space is important, especially as we look to advance
key processes of the road map on the implementation
of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. Both ideas and
6/17

15/09/2023

criticism are necessary for building our country. I call
on Council members to prioritize the need for ensuring
the protection of civic space and civil-society actors in
their engagement with South Sudan’s political leaders.
My second point concerns community-led peace
initiatives. As the Advocacy and Peace Coordinator
at the South Sudan Council of Churches, which is an
ecumenical body with a mandate to seek and promote
peace, I have been privy to the positive impacts of
church-led community peacebuilding and conflict
resolution efforts. I have facilitated local peace talks
and witnessed defining peace agreements between
communities beginning a journey towards reconciliation
and to healing trauma. However, those efforts must be
sustained. I urge the Security Council to increase the
funds allocated to peacebuilding initiatives, particularly
for community peace initiatives.
Thirdly, inclusion is a principle that should be
prioritized as South Sudan seeks to complete the
pending tasks of the road map. I am impressed by the
incredible contributions of South Sudanese women
in uniting our nation, but I am dismayed by the
untapped potential of our youth. Women and young
people continue to be excluded in decision-making
and nation-building spaces. I acknowledge the 35 per
cent affirmative-action quota for women’s engagement,
but numbers alone are not enough. What we need is
the active and meaningful participation of women and
young people in all processes. I strongly encourage the
inclusion of civil society, women, youth and faith-based
institutions in the implementation of the road map. I
would particularly like to emphasize the need for their
inclusion in the ongoing process of the joint task force
for the elections.
If we are to achieve the sustainable peace that we
desire as a country, South Sudan needs the Council’s
support. In February, South Sudan was privileged
to host the ecumenical peace pilgrimage, including
Catholic, Episcopal and Presbyterian leaders led by
His Holiness Pope Francis. It was a visit where South
Sudanese national leaders were reminded of their
responsibility to their people first. One of the ways in
which we have paired our efforts with the work of the
international community is through our partnership
with the Community of Sant’Egidio. The partnership
has facilitated the Rome initiative — a political
dialogue between the transitional Government and
the non-signatories to the peace agreement — while
23-26911

15/09/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV.9420

including the voices of young people and women in
conversations happening in the mediation room.

to ensure a balanced approach that takes account of the
needs of all groups.

In conclusion, I call for Council members’ support
to promote and achieve sustainable peace in South
Sudan. I urge them to keep supporting humanitarian,
peacebuilding and development efforts. Please do not
give up on my people or my country. I am confident
that South Sudan will eventually attain the peace that
we so long for.

Turning to the political transition, the United
States remains disappointed with the lack of progress
by the Transitional Government’s implementation of
the 2018 Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan and
the 2022 road map. With only 15 months remaining
until the December 2024 elections, it is not clear that
South Sudan will be prepared to hold elections under
conditions consistent with President Kiir Mayardit’s
commitments. An open political space for a genuine
campaign free of intimidation and violence does not
exist. The Transitional Government has failed to detail
the budget revenue that it will dedicate to electoral
administrative tasks, and needed legislation has not
been adopted.

The President: I thank Ms. Juan for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Haysom and Ms. Wosornu
for their comprehensive briefings today. I also thank
Ms. Juan for her insights on South Sudan. The United
States reaffirms its appreciation for the dedication
and commitment of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS), including its peacekeeping
troops and police and civilian staff, together with its
humanitarian partners, who serve to protect civilians in
South Sudan, deliver assistance and mitigate conflict in
many volatile areas.
As we heard from our briefers today, the fighting
in Sudan continues to have a severe impact on South
Sudan’s resources, humanitarian needs, security and
infrastructure, owing to the fact that more than a
quarter of a million returnees and refugees are seeking
refuge in border towns and camps for internally
displaced persons (IDPs), including the UNMISS
protection-of-civilians site. An additional 26,000
displaced South Sudanese have fled violence and
food insecurity in Ethiopia’s refugee camps, further
straining resources and food supplies. Rising tensions
between new arrivals and residents are contributing to
the violence, as evidenced by clashes at the Malakal
protection-of-civilians site and IDP camps. The United
States remains gravely concerned about the congestion
and overcrowding in border towns such as Renk and in
the IDP camps, as well as the lack of adequate shelter
and medical aid for the displaced. In that regard, we
strongly urge UNMISS, the Revitalized Transitional
Government of National Unity and humanitarian
partners to strengthen their efforts to provide returnees
and displaced persons with the sufficient shelter, food,
medical and relocation services. We also urge the
parties to continue to provide assistance and services
to host communities and those less recently displaced

We look forward to the 15 October release of the
report of the Secretary-General, which will provide
the United Nations assessment of the factors that have
caused the delays in the implementation of the peace
agreement. We also deplore the fact that sexual violence
remains an ongoing issue that must be addressed. This
reporting period highlighted 18 cases of conflictrelated sexual violence, the victims of which included
12 women, eight girls and one man. The United States
strongly condemns any form of gender-based violence.
We call on the Government to take immediate steps
to strengthen rule-of-law institutions and increase
survivors’ access to services.
In conclusion, the Transitional Government must
seize this opportunity to give the South Sudanese
people a hopeful future. The people of South Sudan
deserve to live without violence, feel safe and contribute
to the betterment of their country. We reiterate our call
on transitional leaders to expand the civic space and
create conditions under which all political parties,
civil society, internally displaced persons and South
Sudanese citizens, including women, young people and
the displaced, can be fully, equally and meaningfully
included in the peace process that will shape South
Sudan’s future. The United States remains committed
to the cause of peace and to the people of South Sudan.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS). I would also like
to thank Ms. Edem Wosornu, Director of Operations
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian

23-269117/17

S/PV.9420

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Affairs, and civil-society representative Ms. Racheal
Juan for their presentations.
My delegation is very concerned about the refugee
crisis in South Sudan, which remains the largest such
crisis in Africa, with more than 2.3 million refugees
in neighbouring countries. We deplore the continued
attacks on humanitarian convoys and restrictions on
humanitarian personnel and reiterate our call for rapid
and unhindered humanitarian access to be guaranteed
throughout the country at all times.
Turning to the political aspects, while we welcome
the statements of support for the elections, that support
must be complemented by tangible progress on national
legislation. Political will and decisiveness are needed
if progress is to be made in those critical areas. We are
concerned about the possibility that delays in achieving
the objectives that have to be reached in the lead-up
to the holding of elections could subject the country to
serious political instability, with possible outbreaks of
violence. In that regard, we support the meetings held
in mid-August under the leadership of UNMISS and
aimed at promoting democratic governance, sustainable
peacebuilding, peaceful coexistence and the expansion
of political and civic space. We should emphasize the
women participants’ involvement in those events and
recall the commitments undertaken in the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan on gender provisions. Women’s
participation is key in electoral processes and the
transition process towards peace. Greater efforts must
therefore be made to ensure their inclusion and that
of a gender perspective in the discussions. I also want
to reiterate that it is especially necessary to preserve
dialogue itself, without restrictions on freedom of
thought or opinion. It is also essential to open more
avenues enabling journalists, media correspondents,
human rights defenders and humanitarian workers to
carry out their work.
The sexual violence, murders and kidnappings that
we are seeing are alarming and must be punished. We
continue to support the work of UNMISS and all efforts
to reduce violence perpetrated by the military through
an appropriate accountability mechanism. Finally,
I should point out that illicit trafficking in weapons
worsens the situation of the civilian population and
threatens security in other countries in the region,
causing fragile areas to deteriorate further. It is time to
silence the guns in South Sudan and pave the way for a
civilian democratic transition in the country.
8/17

15/09/2023

Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Haysom,
Director Wosornu and Ms. Juan for their briefings today.
This September marks five years since the South
Sudanese parties came together to sign the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan. The United Kingdom
welcomes the progress that has been achieved since
then and the fact that disputes are now largely resolved
through political dialogue rather than conflict.
Nevertheless, we remain concerned about the fact that
progress is too slow and too limited. The past five
years have been characterized by missed deadlines and
multiple extensions. We therefore call on South Sudan’s
leaders to demonstrate the political will to deliver
the free and fair elections that the South Sudanese
people deserve.
The United Kingdom welcomes the recent
establishment of an election security committee
and the presentation of the National Elections Act to
Parliament. However, as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Haysom highlighted, in addition to
adopting the necessary legislation and reconstituting
the relevant electoral bodies, there are fundamental
decisions and logistical preparations that require urgent
attention. We call on the South Sudanese authorities to
create the necessary political and civic space to allow
for free and credible elections.
As the horrifying violence continues across the
border in the Sudan, more than 260,000 people have
now been registered as arriving in South Sudan,
adding to what were already unprecedented levels
of humanitarian need there. The United Kingdom
commends the Government of South Sudan on its
provision of transportation and the United Nations
system and humanitarian partners on their response to
the crisis. We urge the South Sudanese Government to
create a more enabling environment for humanitarian
action and to commit to longer-term, more durable
solutions that address the increasing humanitarian
needs. In conclusion, at this important time in South
Sudan’s history, we urge South Sudan’s leadership
to deliver on the outstanding tasks in order to make
democratic elections a reality.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): I have the honour of
delivering this statement on behalf of the three African
members of the Security Council (A3).
23-26911

15/09/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS), Mr. Nicholas Haysom, for
his comprehensive briefing. We our deeply grateful
to Ms. Eden Wosornu, Director of the Operations and
Advocacy Division of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs. We express our appreciation
to Ms. Racheal Juan, the civil-society representative,
for her important remarks.
Since its independence, South Sudan has made
significant progress in consolidating its institutions.
The security situation in South Sudan remains
fragile. The Secretary-General’s report (S/2023/657)
indicates that intercommunal violence persists in the
Greater Upper Nile, Greater Equatoria and Greater
Bahr El Ghazal regions. The violence continues to cause
fatalities, injuries and the displacement of thousands
of people.
Additionally, the conflict in the Sudan has had a
bearing on the security situation in South Sudan. That
is largely due to the influx of returnees and refugees
leading to the competition for the already scarce
resources, which has been one of the drivers of the
intercommunal violence that we are witnessing.
Taking that reality into account, we welcome the
approach of the Government of South Sudan of engaging
local and traditional leaders to de-escalate tensions
and facilitate conflict resolution. Community-based
solutions are likely to be more effective in inducing
positive change at a local level, thus contributing to a
more sustainable peacebuilding process.
Considering the negative effects of those conflicts
on civilians, we encourage UNMISS to continue
implementing its mandate to protect civilians, mitigate
violence and support peace dialogues, thus ensuring
complementarity with the South Sudanese authorities.
This could be one of the most memorable moments
in the history of South Sudan: the preparation of its
first electoral process. Although the challenges are
daunting, we encourage South Sudan to persevere in
its commitment to holding free, fair, transparent and
inclusive elections in December 2024. To achieve that
goal, we urge all stakeholders to engage constructively
in this process, prioritizing the interests of the people
of South Sudan, who yearn for peace and stability in
the country.

S/PV.9420

We reiterate our call on the parties to honour their
commitments and expedite the implementation of
the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, including the
completion of the outstanding tasks required prior to
the end of the transitional period.
Mindful of the complexity of the challenges faced
by South Sudan and the current regional dynamics, we
encourage close cooperation between UNMISS and
other relevant actors, such as the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, the African Union, and
other United Nations missions and entities in order to
address those challenges holistically.
Regrettably, the humanitarian situation in South
Sudan continues to deteriorate. The pressure caused
by the influx of refugees and returnees from the
Sudan and the internal displacement resulting from
intercommunal violence make it more challenging to
manage the humanitarian crisis that the country has
been experiencing for years.
We note that, according to the Secretary-General’s
report, as at 31 August, at least 249,403 people have
crossed the border between the Sudan and South Sudan
since April. While we admire the South Sudanese people
for their humanism towards the people of the Sudan,
we cannot overlook the effects that this high number of
refugees and returnees can have on the already fragile
social fabric of some communities in South Sudan.
Moreover, climate shocks have further exacerbated
the vulnerability of the populations. Although it is
challenging to harmonize our views on this matter,
the reality is that in South Sudan climate shocks are
leading to insecurity, conflicts and displacement,
which worsens an already fragile situation.
It is imperative that the humanitarian response
to the Sudan is coordinated with neighbouring
countries such as South Sudan, Chad and the Central
African Republic.
It is also fundamental to ensure the safety of
humanitarian actors, at all times. In that connection,
the A3 strongly condemns attacks against humanitarian
personnel. We welcome their commitment, despite the
security situation. We call on all parties to respect
international humanitarian law and continue to grant
unhindered access to humanitarian organizations,
whether they are local or international.

23-269119/17

S/PV.9420

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

We encourage UNMISS to continue to support the
South Sudanese authorities in their efforts to facilitate
humanitarian assistance to the people in need.
In conclusion, we reiterate the A3’s full support
to South Sudan and its people in their efforts towards
peace, stability prosperity and nation-building.
Mr. Camilleri (Malta): I would like to thank
Mr. Haysom, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Wosornu, Director of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, and Ms. Juan
for their briefings.
South Sudan has reached a decisive point. The tasks
set forth by the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan should
remain at the core. Those include constitution-making
and preparations for elections in December 2024. We
are concerned that the National Elections Act has not
yet fully passed.
Free, fair and credible elections require an
inclusive civic space. We urge women’s full, equal,
and meaningful participation in constitution-making
and election processes. We commend the efforts of
the Ministry of Gender, Child and Social Welfare
to implement the Protocol to the African Charter on
Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women
in Africa. Malta welcomes the establishment of the
Government’s trilateral joint task force, a solid platform
that aims to scale up implementation of those tasks. It
also addresses issues such as voter registration and the
inclusion of the displaced population in the country. We
also underline the timely deployment of the recently
graduated necessary unified forces.
Malta remains deeply concerned about the continued
outbreaks of intercommunal violence in South Sudan,
particularly in the Upper Nile and Greater Equatoria
regions. We commend the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) for stepping up security at the
Malakal protection-of-civilians site.
Violations of international humanitarian law and
abuses of human rights must stop and be condemned.
Those include extrajudicial executions and sexual and
gender-based violence. We support the deployment
of mobile courts, facilitated by UNMISS, as part of
a broader strategy in ensuring a survivor-centred and
gender-responsive transitional justice process.
The extensive recruitment of children by armed
groups and forces remains of utmost concern. All
10/17

15/09/2023

parties must immediately end and prevent all violations
against children, and the comprehensive action plan
must be fully implemented. We support the engagement
of UNMISS on this front, including the conduct of child
protection training.
An alarming 76 per cent of the population in South
Sudan needs humanitarian assistance. That marks a
sharp increase of another half a million people when
compared to last year. The conflict in the Sudan is
also exacerbating South Sudan’s humanitarian needs.
We remain committed to diversified funding that
reaches those most in need. To that end, the European
Union (EU) has launched a series of projects this
year, amounting to €82 million. Those are in addition
to €108 million secured last month through the EU’s
multi-annual indicative programme for South Sudan.
Despite increasing humanitarian needs, the situation
in the country remains one of the most dangerous for
humanitarian aid workers. Malta strongly condemns all
attacks against humanitarian personnel. We also thank
UNMISS for providing force protection and logistical
support to ensure conducive conditions for the rapid,
safe and unimpeded delivery of assistance.
The link between climate, peace and security in
South Sudan is also strong. Climate-induced disasters,
irregular rainfall and flooding impact already scarce
natural resources and exacerbate food and water
insecurity. Those conditions fuel further displacement
and farmer-herder tensions. Malta continues to support
the analysis of risks associated with climate change
in the implementation of the mandate of UNMISS.
We also emphasize the need for comprehensive risk
assessments and risk management strategies, including
through engagement with local communities.
In conclusion, Malta once again expresses its
support to Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Haysom and UNMISS. We also reiterate
our call on South Sudan to reinvigorate its political
will and commitment towards a peaceful, secure and
prosperous future.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Haysom, Director Wosornu and Ms. Juan for their
briefings and welcome the participation of the Permanent
Representative of South Sudan in today’s meeting.
In the light of the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2023/657), I would like to highlight the
following points.
23-26911

15/09/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

First, the political transition of South Sudan is at a
critical stage. China supports South Sudan in working
with the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) to jointly promote the implementation
of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan and
its joint task force with the African Union and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development to
facilitate the constitution-making and the preparation
for general elections.
China welcomes the recent positive gesture shown
by South Sudan’s leaders with regard to political
transition and elections and calls on all parties to
consolidate consensus, address disputes properly and
based on the Revitalized Agreement and extended
road map and step up work in key areas, thereby
continuously creating favourable conditions for the
holding of elections.
At the same time, as the youngest country in the
world, South Sudan is faced with many difficulties and
challenges in national governance. The international
community should maintain the necessary patience,
respect the sovereignty and ownership of South
Sudan and provide support in its political process and
election preparations.
The Secretary-General’s report highlights that the
security situation in many places in South Sudan is
dire. Intercommunal violence and conflicts between
farmers and herders still sporadically occur. Improving
the security capacity-building of South Sudan is the
priority. The Council should lift its arms embargo on
South Sudan at an early date to remove its negative
impact on security capacity-building.
Secondly, South Sudan is faced with multiple
challenges in areas such as food, security, diseases,
floods and violent conflicts. Its humanitarian situation
is dire. Armed conflicts in the Sudan and the huge
influx of refugees have exacerbated the humanitarian
difficulties. Meanwhile, the humanitarian funding
for South Sudan is seriously inadequate, which
is concerning. In yesterday’s Council meeting on
humanitarian issues (see S/PV.9418), many countries
called on traditional donors, especially developed
countries, to honour their assistance commitments
to ease the humanitarian difficulties in developing
countries. The international community should listen
carefully to those calls and help South Sudan to address
its humanitarian challenges.

S/PV.9420

The development and management of South
Sudan’s oil resources have an impact on its economy
and livelihoods and should be decided by the people
and the Government of South Sudan. Countries outside
the region should not interfere or intervene.
Thirdly, under the leadership of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Haysom,
UNMISS has overcome difficulties and made significant
contributions in the implementation of the Revitalized
Agreement, the protection of civilians and supporting
humanitarian operations. As a major troop-contributing
country to UNMISS, China is ready to continue to
make unrelenting efforts to that end. At the same time,
some countries in recent years have continued to push
for the expansion of the mandate of UNMISS, some of
which clearly goes beyond the capacities of the Mission
and has had an impact on the mutual trust with the
host country. In particular, in the relevant mandate, too
much emphasis has been placed on the use of force as
a priority method to protect civilians, which has led
to controversies. UNMISS, in delivering its mandate
should fully consider the realities on the ground and
focus on its core mandate.
In the upcoming review, the United Nations
Secretariat should comprehensively and objectively
review the protection of civilian mandate so as to set
out the right direction for the work of UNMISS.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Haysom, Director of
Operations and Advocacy of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
Ms. Wosornu, and civil society representative Ms. Juan
for their insightful briefings.
Japan takes note of the recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2023/657) on the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), which describes
progress and challenges in South Sudan and highlights
the relevance of the mandate of the Mission.
Japan would like to thank all UNMISS personnel
for their service in protecting civilians and mitigating
violence in a challenging environment. As a troopcontributing country, we are committed to our
continued deployment to UNMISS.
I would like to make the following two points
concerning the long-term peace, security and stability
of South Sudan, which are closely linked to the mandate
of UNMISS.

23-2691111/17

S/PV.9420

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

First, it remains crucial to implement the
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan. The implementation
should be in line with the timelines established in the
adopted road map as the basis for sustained peace in
South Sudan. In the light of that, we are concerned
that the implementation of the Agreement has been
delayed, as we heard from the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, and, moreover, no significant
progress has been made during the reporting period.
We are particularly concerned about the impact of the
delays on the upcoming national election scheduled for
December 2024. Elections are supposed to consolidate
the people and give legitimacy to the Government.
However, if the election were held with inadequate
preparation and insufficient credibility, it could
become a catalyst for national division. Therefore, it
is necessary to ensure an adequate civic and political
space for all citizens. Given that the remaining time
is running out, the Transitional Government should
urgently address that point.
Secondly, the humanitarian crisis in South Sudan
remains at an extremely dangerous level, as we heard
from the OCHA representative. At the same time,
the emergence of new conflicts in the region and
other parts of the world and the repeated extensions
of the Agreement without major progress in its
implementation have led to a decline in the international
community’s interest in and assistance to South Sudan
compared to previous years. In order for South Sudan
to overcome this difficult situation, it is imperative
to regain renewed attention from the world. In that
regard, the transitional Government needs to achieve
more tangible, concrete and significant results quickly,
steadily and continuously, while the international
community needs to recognize that South Sudan is
approaching an extremely critical time.
In conclusion, Japan stands by the transitional
Government and the people of South Sudan in their
endeavours to steadily implement the agreement and to
realize their aspirations for a dignified life. We strongly
support UNMISS and the humanitarian players that are
tirelessly working for South Sudan.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Nicholas Haysom, and the
Director of Operations and Advocacy in the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Edem
Wosornu, for their briefings. We also listened to the
12/17

15/09/2023

briefing by the representative of South Sudanese civil
society. We welcome the participation in today’s meeting
of Mr. Akuei Bona Malwal, Permanent Representative
of South Sudan to the United Nations.
We share the Secretary-General’s concern about the
humanitarian situation in South Sudan. The country is
experiencing major repercussions from the conflict in
the Sudan. The number of refugees and South Sudanese
returnees has already exceeded 250,000. Their influx
has significantly exacerbated the already difficult
humanitarian situation in the northern states and has
become a major challenge for the country as a whole.
We note the efforts by the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS), humanitarian workers and
the Government of South Sudan to overcome that
challenge in a context of limited resources. Moreover,
Juba is making an important contribution to the efforts
to address the situation in its neighbouring country of
the Sudan.
Despite the difficult humanitarian situation, the
South Sudanese political process is moving forward
incrementally. The Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan continues to be implemented, albeit to a limited
extent. We note the efforts made by the South Sudanese
authorities to implement provisions on issues related to
State-building, the drafting of a permanent Constitution
and fully launching the work of the transitional
parliament and the national human rights council.
We note the intention of the Revitalized
Transitional Government of National Unity to hold
the first general elections in the country’s history. We
consider it important to increase support for Juba in
that area, without any preconditions. In that regard, we
welcome the launching of the tripartite task force of
the African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) and UNMISS and the
establishment of an electoral security committee.
We believe that the provisions the Agreement
and its road map must be implemented. We note the
delays in implementing the agreed timetable. The
establishment of the National Constitutional Review
Commission is six months behind schedule and that of
the Political Parties Council is 11 months behind. There
has been no progress in the establishment of a highlevel standing committee on the implementation of the
road map. Despite those delays, it is very important that
the ceasefire in the country holds. However, we cannot
fail to note the incoming reports of ongoing outbreaks
23-26911

15/09/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

of violence in a number of peripheral regions of the
Republic of South Sudan, as well as local clashes and
intercommunal armed conflict. We strongly condemn
any violations of the peace agreement and acts of
violence against civilians, including humanitarian
workers active in the country.
We support national and international steps to
stabilize the situation and the work of the peacekeeping
mission. We call on the peacekeepers to pay greater
attention to combating intercommunal violence and
coordinating humanitarian assistance to Juba. We note
the proposal by the Head of the Mission to support the
electoral process. We believe that the Blue Helmets
should have all the resources necessary, both to carry
out their protection-of-civilians mandate and to provide
technical assistance in organizing the elections. We
look forward to further negotiations between the South
Sudanese authorities and the non-signatories to the
Agreement through the Community of Sant’Egidio.
We believe that the Government’s focused efforts
to form a unified armed force as a guarantor of further
progress in the peace process and the successful holding
of elections remain a priority. We welcome the progress
in that area as well. We call on the South Sudanese
parties to intensify their efforts to establish a unified
command structure for the army.
At the same time, we are convinced that the
sanctions regime imposed on the Republic of South
Sudan complicates the deployment of joint armed forces
units and the strengthening of State security structures.
More decisive steps are needed to review those
restrictions, in accordance with Juba’s request, which
has received support from the African Union and IGAD.
We categorically oppose the use of Security Council
sanctions to exert pressure and interfere in the internal
affairs of the country, just as we oppose supplementing
them with illegal unilateral restrictive measures.

S/PV.9420

the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. Preparing for the elections is first and foremost
the responsibility of the signatories to the Revitalized
Agreement, namely, all the political forces in South
Sudan, without exception. That process must include
civil society, including women and young people.
We are counting on the United Nations to provide
an assessment of the preparations for the elections
in the Secretary-General’s report in October. The
support of partners will be forthcoming only if the
authorities create the conditions for debate and credible
democratic elections.
On the situation in the region, we share the concern
of many others here today about the impact of the
conflict in the Sudan on the stability of South Sudan.
We welcome South Sudan’s hosting of refugees, with
the support of the United Nations. France and the
European Union stand in solidarity with the countries
of the region. The European Union has provided
€81 million in humanitarian assistance to South Sudan
in 2023. We also recognize South Sudan’s mediation
efforts in the crisis in the Sudan, within the framework
of the quartet of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) and the ministerial mechanism of
neighbouring States, initiated by Egypt. We encourage
all international actors to pool their efforts to achieve
a lasting ceasefire, the establishment of humanitarian
corridors and the resumption of a political process.

Mr. Olmedo (France) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank Special Representative Nicholas
Haysom, Director Edem Wosornu and Racheal Juan
for their briefings. I also welcome the participation
of the Permanent Representative of South Sudan in
this meeting.

South Sudan must demonstrate the political will
to complete its transition, which is now due to end in
February 2025. We support the work of the African
Union and IGAD and call on the region to maintain its
focus on South Sudan as decisive deadlines approach
for the country. We also support the work of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan, which is essential
in the protection of civilians and capacity-building in
South Sudan. France is playing its part by supporting
concrete reintegration projects and training in weaponsstockpile management. But those partnerships will be
effective only if the South Sudanese authorities take
advantage of them in order to move beyond the status
quo, by speeding up the implementation of the political
transition and taking action to combat impunity for
human rights violations.

On the political front, the lack of progress in
drafting a permanent Constitution and preparing
for the elections in South Sudan is worrisome. The
general elections are the final step of the transition
period provided for in the Revitalized Agreement on

Ms. Shaheen (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank Special
Representative Mr. Nicholas Haysom and Director of
Operations and Advocacy Ms. Edem Wosornu for their
valuable briefings. We also appreciate the statement

23-2691113/17

S/PV.9420

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

delivered by Ms. Racheal Juan. I welcome the presence
of the Permanent Representative of South Sudan in
today’s meeting.
This month marks five years since the signing of the
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in South Sudan, and our meeting is taking place at a
time when the country and the region are experiencing
serious security and humanitarian challenges. We
therefore believe this is an important opportunity
to reiterate the need for the signatory parties to be
committed to fully implementing the Agreement and
making tangible progress towards lasting peace. The
Secretary-General notes in his report (S/2023/657) that
little progress has been made in that implementation,
and it is therefore important that the parties continue to
work together in the coming months to overcome their
differences and resolve the main issues outstanding in
the peace agreement, in accordance with the road map
and its timeline. That includes the start of phase II of
the deployment of the necessary unified forces. Political
will and commitment to dialogue remain essential to
achieving those objectives.
It would be remiss of me not to mention the important
role played by regional and international partners in
supporting South Sudan. We hope that the efforts of
the recently established Government-trilateral joint
task force aimed at supporting the constitution-making
and electoral processes will help the parties make
progress in completing them. Alongside those efforts,
it is also vital to address the security challenges that
are impeding the establishment of lasting peace
and stability in South Sudan, especially the cycle of
violence among the various communities. That requires
understanding and addressing the root causes of
violence, including competition over limited resources,
while also promoting dialogue and peaceful coexistence
among the communities. In that context, we encourage
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
to continue its communication with local communities,
facilitate dialogue and promote confidence-building, as
we saw recently in Central Equatoria.
We continue to value the ongoing efforts of
UNMISS to protect civilians in an integrated and
coordinated manner, including by working alongside
the Government to de-escalate tensions and enhance
security at the Malakal protection-of-civilians site.
As appropriate, we encourage UNMISS to coordinate
with humanitarian organizations to ensure the safe
delivery of relief assistance and civilians’ ability to
14/17

15/09/2023

access it safely. We are also deeply concerned about
the harsh reality that many women and girls are dealing
with due to sexual violence. As Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Pramila Patten confirmed
during her visit to South Sudan earlier this week, those
heinous crimes are unacceptable, and their perpetrators
must be held accountable. It is important for UNMISS
to continue to fulfil its mandate to protect women and
children, prevent sexual violence and support victims.
We are encouraged by the growing interest
in addressing climate change in South Sudan, as
evidenced by the current discussions at the community
level and the initiatives announced by the Government
of South Sudan during the Africa Climate Summit,
held this month. The initiatives are aimed at increasing
the production of renewable energy and using smart
agriculture systems to reduce the damaging effects
of climate change. According to the United Nations
Environment Programme, South Sudan is among the
five most climate-vulnerable countries in the world.
We also welcome the Secretary-General’s inclusion
in his report of an analysis on climate and peace and
security in South Sudan, in line with resolution 2677
(2023). We hope those efforts will combine to help
to strengthen resilience in the face of the extreme
weather patterns that have so far led to the internal
displacement of 2 million people in South Sudan, in
addition to exacerbating community tensions resulting
from competition for resources.
In conclusion, we reaffirm that ensuring sustainable
efforts aimed at enhancing security and stability in
South Sudan requires addressing immediate challenges
while also focusing on enabling long-term recovery in
areas such as economic revitalization. In that context,
we believe that holding the first National Economic
Conference and implementing its recommendations are
some of the steps that will help to reduce humanitarian
needs and promote development in South Sudan.
Mr. França Danese (Brazil): I thank Special
Representative Nicholas Haysom, Ms. Edem Wosornu,
Director of Operations and Advocacy in the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, and
Ms. Racheal Juan for their briefings. I also welcome
Ambassador Malwal and the South Sudanese delegation
to today’s meeting.
We are concerned about the fact that the conflict in
the Sudan has led to a deteriorating security situation in
South Sudan. The surge in the levels of violence in Lakes,
Unity, Upper Nile and Warrap states is particularly
23-26911

15/09/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

troubling. In that context, the crucial role of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) becomes
even more important in improving security all over
South Sudan. The peacekeeping operation is responsible
for implementing a complex, multidimensional
mandate. It deploys its peacekeepers across a number
of areas where violence remains a source of concern
and thereby provides stability throughout the country.
The Council’s continued support for UNMISS should
therefore be firm and clear.
We believe that efficient deployment of the South
Sudanese necessary unified forces will be particularly
important, given that intercommunal tensions are
unfortunately still common in many South Sudanese
states. Brazil encourages South Sudan to prioritize the
first phase of the deployment of the necessary unified
forces and adequate training of their second phase,
which is crucial, including as a way to enable the forces
to become a major asset in peacebuilding. On that vital
aspect, we commend the institutional strides that South
Sudan has made in making peacebuilding a national
priority. We trust that its increasing involvement
with the Peacebuilding Commission will facilitate
a security-sector transformation that sustains peace
across South Sudan.
The unforeseen influx of returnees and refugees
who have fled the conflict north of the border, coupled
with poor infrastructure in many places, is a serious
challenge for South Sudan. The late arrival of the
rainy season has increased the need for humanitarian
assistance even further. We commend UNMISS for
creating conditions conducive to the safe delivery of
aid in many areas. We strongly deplore the frequent
attacks on humanitarian personnel. Such assaults and
crimes underline the dangerous conditions faced by
essential workers.
The forthcoming general elections will be a
defining moment for South Sudan. Like other Council
members, we encourage the South Sudanese authorities
to take all appropriate measures to draft, negotiate and
adopt the legal frameworks necessary for free, fair
and credible national elections. The world in general,
and the Council in particular, will be following those
elections with close attention, interest and hope. We
also commend the establishment of the Governmenttrilateral joint task force aimed at supporting the
constitution-making and electoral processes. We
encourage South Sudan to take full advantage of the

S/PV.9420

assistance provided by UNMISS, the African Union
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development.
The people of South Sudan deserve a safe,
democratic and prosperous future. The international
community must continue to do its best to help the
South Sudanese people in that challenging but crucial
and urgent goal.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I would like to join my colleagues in thanking
Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, and Ms. Edem Wosornu,
Director of Operations and Advocacy at the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, for
their briefings. I welcome the presence here today
of the Permanent Representative of South Sudan.
We would also like to thank Ms. Racheal Juan for
her remarks on behalf of the South Sudan Council of
Churches — a much-appreciated and long-standing
partner of Switzerland — and to express our gratitude
for her efforts to promote an inclusive dialogue, which
is so useful and essential for her country.
South Sudan is in a critical phase of peacebuilding,
as we have heard, and at a decisive moment in its
history, with the first general elections since it gained
independence in sight. I would like to emphasize three
aspects that we consider essential in that regard.
First, despite some progress, key stages of the
political transition have yet to be completed. It is
important to ensure that the deadlines set out in the
road map are met and the necessary legal frameworks
and relevant bodies, such as the National Constitutional
Review Commission, put in place without delay. As the
Chair of the National Elections Commission pointed
out last week, political will and a spirit of compromise
are essential if progress is to be made. In addition, as
Ms. Juan also said, a free political and civic space,
guaranteeing freedom of expression, assembly and the
press, is fundamental. We commend the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) for facilitating
round tables and radio programmes to provide that
space. We encourage the Mission to continue to amplify
the voices and contributions of the women who are so
actively involved in the transition process.
Secondly, security and stability are essential
conditions for the success of the political transition
and the holding of free and fair elections. We remain
concerned about the persistence of subnational violence,
extrajudicial executions, sexual and gender-based

23-2691115/17

S/PV.9420

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

violence and the high number of serious violations
of children’s rights. It is imperative to strengthen the
protection of civilians, and we look forward to the
assessment of the implementation of the UNMISS
protection-of-civilians mandate, while recalling that
the primary responsibility for the protection of civilians
falls to the Government. The work of UNMISS in
strengthening the rule of law is also to be commended.
We are also deeply concerned about the
deteriorating humanitarian situation and condemn
the repeated attacks on humanitarian personnel and
convoys. All the parties must respect international
humanitarian law. Safe, rapid and unhindered passage
for humanitarian relief must be authorized and
facilitated. As Ms. Wosornu emphasized, the conflict in
the Sudan is putting further pressure on humanitarian
needs, particularly in border areas, but also on the
economy and social cohesion. International partners
must do more to meet those needs. We welcome the
solidarity shown by South Sudan with those fleeing the
conflict, as well as the Government’s efforts to support
a peaceful resolution of the conflict in the Sudan.
Thirdly, there is a clear link between climate
change and security in South Sudan. Flooding,
particularly in Jonglei, Unity and Lakes states, and
droughts in Central Equatoria are increasing food
insecurity, competition for natural resources and
community tensions. The Informal Expert Group on
Climate and Security has discussed those factors in
depth, as well as possible preventive measures. As part
of that preventive approach, Switzerland is supporting
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, which maps migration routes and coordinates
the management of natural resources in order to
strengthen communities’ resilience to climate shocks.
In that respect, we welcome UNMISS’s commitment
to raising the issue of climate change in community
dialogues, as it did in Bor in June. That not only makes
it possible to identify preventive measures but also to
build confidence.
Time is running out. The coming months will
require joint efforts on the part of all players to complete
the tasks needed to achieve a lasting peace. As we have
heard today, the people of South Sudan aspire to a
normal life, with the opportunity to do everything from
playing on a basketball team to pursuing a professional
career. Switzerland reiterates its full support for
UNMISS and its continued commitment to supporting
the Government and people of South Sudan.
16/17

15/09/2023

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Albania.
I join others in thanking Mr. Nicholas Haysom,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
and Ms. Edem Wosornu, Director of Operations
and Advocacy at the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, for their informative briefings.
I thank Ms. Racheal Juan for giving us a clear picture
of the challenges on the ground — from the ongoing
violence to the shrinking civic space. We also welcome
the participation of the representative of South Sudan
in this meeting.
As the Secretary-General has highlighted, South
Sudan is at a defining moment in its history, with its
first-ever general election since its independence on
the horizon. We commend the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) for its leadership and the
electoral assistance provided to South Sudan. However,
the limited progress on the implementation of the road
map is concerning. Many provisions necessary for
elections, including a permanent Constitution, are still
outstanding. We encourage the transitional Government
of South Sudan to focus on advancing the electoral
process by establishing the necessary legal frameworks.
We welcome the formation of the joint task force of
the Government and the trilateral group, which is a
positive step towards strengthening national ownership.
However, as we heard today, civic space is shrinking.
The Government must ensure an inclusive civic and
political space to hold free, fair and credible elections.
Gender provisions must be implemented, as required
by the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, while also
ensuring the full, equal and meaningful participation
of women and young people.
The implications of the conflict in South Sudan’s
neighbour, the Sudan, cannot be overstated. South
Sudan has seen an influx of weapons and received
around 260,000 refugees, putting further strains on
its already fragile and protracted humanitarian crisis.
We are deeply concerned about the possibility that
those factors are contributing to rising tensions and
violence. It is imperative that South Sudanese leaders
not lose focus where addressing their own challenges
is concerned. While we welcome the Government’s
announcement that it is advancing the transitional
security arrangements, that needs to be translated
into action. Forces must be deployed with adequate
resources, command-and-control structures resolved
23-26911

15/09/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

and phase II enacted. Those are all critical if South Sudan
is to hold safe and credible elections. Intercommunal
violence and sexual violence are still persisting in parts
of the country, and the lack of protection for civilians
and humanitarian workers remains a key concern.
We remind the Government that it bears the primary
responsibility to protect, and we urge for accountability
measures to fight impunity.
South Sudan remains among the most
climate-vulnerable countries in the world, as was
also stressed in the joint media stakeout on climate
and peace and security held before today’s meeting.
Climate-induced shocks, tensions over resources and
increased humanitarian needs have led to displacement,
with women and girls the most vulnerable. We commend
UNMISS for supporting South Sudan in addressing the
complex challenges it is facing, from climate resilience
to the rule of law. During this important phase, South
Sudan’s progress towards holding credible elections in
2024 hinges on ensuring a resolute surge in political
determination and unwavering commitment. The
people of South Sudan rightly deserve the opportunity
to express their will at the ballot box.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of South Sudan.
Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): As this is the first
time I have taken the floor since Albania assumed the
presidency of the Security Council for this month, I
would like to congratulate you, Madam President, and
your delegation, and to assure you of my delegation’s
support. On the same note, allow me to recognize
the presence of our briefers, Mr. Nicholas Haysom,
Ms. Edem Wosornu and our sister, Racheal Juan, from
Juba. We thank them for their briefings.
My delegation takes note of the report of the
Secretary-General on situation in South Sudan
(S/2023/657), submitted pursuant to resolution 2677
(2023).

S/PV.9420

Despite the slow implementation of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan, the parties to the Agreement
remain committed to its full and logical conclusion
in both letter and spirit, with the implementation of
the road map as a priority that will allow for general
elections to be held on time in December 2024.
The humanitarian situation in South Sudan is
dire and has been caused by conditions beyond the
Government’s control, as has been mentioned several
times today in this Chamber. The conflict in the Sudan
has directly affected markets, especially in the northern
states, which have close cross-border trade and
commerce with the Sudan. Furthermore, the influx of
refugees and returnees in the hundreds and thousands
and the fact that there are limited resources to attend
to their immediate needs continue to be a challenge.
South Sudan, with its limited capacity, cannot afford
to address those challenges alone. Therefore, through
the Council, we call on the international community to
continue its efforts to help those in need.
The negative impact of climate change also
continues to cause devastation, suffering and insecurity
in South Sudan. As Council members are aware, over
the past four years, parts of my country have been
under water, which resulted in displacement and loss
of property, animals and livelihoods. The delay of the
rainy season this year will have a direct impact on food
security, while regions that have traditionally served
as the country’s bread basket and have not undergone
floods have been hit by floods. Therefore, climate
change has become a major destabilizing factor.
In conclusion, the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan has been a close partner with the Government and
the people of South Sudan. That has been demonstrated
by the close working relations and the support that the
Mission has extended towards the implementation of the
Revitalized Agreement. It is a working relationship that
we will endeavour to widen and deepen for the common
good and interests of the people and the country.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

23-2691117/17
