S/PV.7069

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7069th meeting

Monday, 25 November 2013, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Liu Jieyi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(China)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Bliss
Mr. Musayev
Mr. Araud
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Sul Kyung-hoon
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Gasana
Mr. Menan
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power

Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the Central African Republic pursuant to
paragraph 22 of Security Council resolution 2121 (2013) (S/2013/677)

13-58017 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1358017*

S/PV.7069

The situation in the Central African Republic

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the Central
African Republic submitted pursuant to
paragraph 22 of Security Council
resolution 2121 (2013) (S/2013/677)
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Central
African Republic to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Ahmad Allam-mi, Secretary-General of the
Economic Community of Central African States, to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Adonia Ayebare, Senior Adviser for Peacebuilding
and Development of the Office of the Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2013/677, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the Central African Republic
submitted pursuant to paragraph 22 of Security Council
resolution 2121 (2013).
I welcome the Deputy Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Jan Eliasson, and I give him the floor.
The Deputy Secretary-General: I thank you, Sir,
for this opportunity to brief the Council on the rapidly
deteriorating situation in the Central AfricanRepublic.
We face a profoundly important test of international
solidarity and of our responsibility to prevent atrocities.
A country in the heart of Africa is descending into
complete chaos before our eyes. The situation requires
prompt and decisive action to place the protection of the
people of the Central African Republic at the centre of
our attention. That is why the Secretary-General issued
a strong warning to the Council last week, and that is

2/8

25/11/2013

why he has asked me to present a more detailed report
today on the findings of the technical assistance team
that has recently returned from the Central African
Republic, and on our observations on these findings.
In the past few days, he has also been in contact with
African leaders, who have expressed their concern over
the situation and the need for a robust international
response to it.
As the report before the Council (S/2013/677)
shows, the country faces a desperate security situation.
There is a breakdown of law and order. The population
is enduring suffering beyond imagination. As we see
far too often, women and children are at the greatest
risk. The use of child soldiers is rising. Sexual violence
is growing. There are widespread reports of looting,
illegal checkpoints, extortion, arbitrary arrests, torture
and summary executions. The Secretary-General is
particularly concerned over the alarming increase in
intercommunal violence. Traditional harmony among
communities has been replaced by polarization and
widespread horror. The manipulation of religious
affiliations for political purposes has fuelled neverbefore-seen sectarian violence between Muslims and
Christians, particularly in the north-west and southeast of the country.
Former Séléka elements are deemed responsible
for most humanitarianman rights violations against the
civilian population. Yet we are also deeply concerned by
abuses by “anti-balaka” — well-organized self-defence
or vigilante groups. This confrontation may develop
into a conflagration. The influence of religious leaders
to prevent violence is diminishing as the conflict has
brought to light years of the marginalization of and
discrimination against the northern, predominantly
Muslim population.
I welcome the efforts of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Babacar Gaye, and the
transitional authorities to establish mediation and
reconciliation committees and take other steps to find
practical solutions and to defuse tension in Bossangoa
and elsewhere. As recognized by the Council in
resolution 2121 (2013), the human rights capacity of the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the
Central African Republic is sorely inadequate. It is also
hampered by a lack of access in the present security
situation. We welcome the upcoming deployment of a
United Nations human rights monitoring missionand
a planned joint mission by the offices of the Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict and

13-58017

25/11/2013

The situation in the Central African Republic

the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict.
In his report, the Secretary-General calls for urgent
measures to end the pervasive impunity and to ensure
accountability. I appeal to the Council to respond to this
end by considering accountability mechanisms, such
as a commission of inquiry and/or targeted sanctions.
At the same time, humanitarian needs are escalating.
Virtually the entire population of 4.6 million people
has been affected by the emergency. One out of three
people in the country is in dire need of food, protection,
health care, water, sanitation and shelter.
Access to populations in need remains difficult, and
funding is woefully short. The consolidated appeal of
$195 million has received less than half of the funding
required. And the needs keep rising. Our humanitarian
colleagues have developed a six-point action plan at the
global, regional and national levels, and I call for an
urgent response to this humanitarian crisis.
The restoration of security, law and order is a
precondition for addressing the political, human
rights and humanitarian problems. The capacity of the
country’s armed forces and security services to prevent
and confront such threats is virtually non-existent.
According to the Ministry of Defence, nearly 7,000
of the Forces armées centrafricaines have returned
to Bangui but are neither deployed nor operational.
Former Séléka units have assumed the responsibility of
the national defence and security forces. Some 5,000
former Sëléka are to be integrated into the security
services.
However, there is no agreed plan or budget for
the reconstitution of the national security forces. The
Central African Republic is becoming a breeding
ground for extremists and armed groups in a region that
is already suffering from conflict and instability. If this
situation is left to fester, it may develop into a religious
and ethnic conflict with long-standing consequences, or
even into a civil war that could spread into neighbouring
countries. It is critical for the international community
and the Council to act now.
The need for decisive action is also essential
for ensuring that preparations for the elections can
proceed in accordance with the transitional charter. As
reiterated by the Council and the International Contact
Group, the elections should be held within 18 months of
the inauguration of the Head of State of the Transition,
that is, by February 2015. We have no time to lose.

S/PV.7069

In response to 2121 (2013), the Secretary-General
dispatched an interagency technical assessment mission
to the Central African Republic from 27 October to
8 November, led by the Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Edmond Mulet, who is
present here today. The mission was tasked to develop
options for international support to the Africanled International Support Mission for the Central
African Republic (MISCA), including its possible
transformation into a United Nations peacekeeping
operation, subject to appropriate conditions on the
ground and to the decision of the Security Council.
We thank the African Union and the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS), who
were a critical part of the mission, and we are gratified
that the African Union is represented here today by
Ambassador Ayebare. We also welcome the presence
here today of the Secretary-General of ECCAS,
Mr. Ahmad Allam-mi. I also thank the authorities of the
Central African Republic for welcoming the mission,
and am pleased to see them represented here today. The
African Union and ECCAS agree that there is an urgent
need for the international community to act, and that
a United Nations peacekeeping mandate with a robust
mandate will be required.
As I mentioned earlier, in recent days the SecretaryGeneral has had productive discussions with the African
Union Commission Chairperson, Ms. Dlamini-Zuma,
President Deby Itno of Chad and Mr. Ahmad Allam-mi
to underline his deep concerns about the situation and
his agreement with them that a strong peacekeeping
force is needed in the Central African Republic.
While in the country, the mission listened to a
wide range of national and international stakeholders,
who were unanimous in their calls for rapid action,
including the deployment of an effective and impartial
force to protect civilians, deter human right violations,
restore security and prevent the occurrence of mass
violence. The technical assessment mission observed
that, despite its best efforts, the capacity of the
ECCAS-led peacekeeping force — the Mission for the
Consolidation of Peace in the Central African Republic
(MICOPAX) — to protect civilians is seriously limited.
While the recent deployment of MICOPAX has had a
deterrent effect in some locations, some contingents are
perceived as siding with particular communities based
on religion. MICOPAX troops are also struggling with
limited logistical support, with a shortfall in equipment
and means of communication, and with mobility

13-580173/8

S/PV.7069

The situation in the Central African Republic

constraints. Significant external support would
therefore be required to enable MISCA to implement
its mandate and stabilize the situation.
The report before the Council presents five options
for international support to MISCA: first, bilateral and
multilateral support arrangements; secondly, United
Nations support funded through a trust fund, in addition
to a bilateral and multilateral support; thirdly, limited
United Nations support, funded through assessed or
voluntary contributions combined with bilateral and
multilateral support; fourthly, a comprehensive United
Nations support package funded through assessed
contributions; and fifthly, the transformation of MISCA
into a United Nations peacekeeping operation.
The majority of those with whom the mission
met called for the fifth and last option — a United
nations peacekeeping operation. Support for this
option has also been requested by a number of civil
society organizations. The transformation of MISCA
into a United Nations peacekeeping operation with an
estimated strength of 6,000 troops and 1,700 police
personnel would lay the foundation for transparent,
accountable and resilient institutions. A United
Nations peacekeeping operation would ensure a
multidimensional integrated approach and, we would
hope, enhance the international community’s ability to
apply political leverage.
Since the mission was deployed and the SecretaryGeneral’s report was issued, the Head of State of the
Transition has written to inform the Secretary-General
of his request for assistance from France. The Head of
State of the Transition has characterized the current
situation as a threat to international peace and security.
The virtual meltdown in the Central African Republic
requires a coherent, integrated and multidimensional
response that would address both the root causes
and the present manifestations of the crisis. In the
Secretary-General’s assessment, the response must
be commensurate with the complexity of the crisis
and the protection needs of the population. It must be
robust and prevent what has a high potential to result in
widespread atrocities.
The Secretary-General has recently renewed
the commitment of the United Nations to upholding
our responsibilties whenever there is a threat of
large-scale violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law. He is committed to bringing such
serious violations to the attention of the appropriate

4/8

25/11/2013

United Nations bodies, in particular when national
authorities are unable to respond. Reporting to the
Council today is part of that commitment to placing
rights up front, as fundamentally laid down the
principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights.
We believe that a United Nations peacekeeping
operations will be needed in the Central African
Republic. However, the transformation of MISCA
into a United Nations peacekeeping operation would
require some lead time for necessary preparations. We
therefore urge the international community not only to
support MISCA in as comprehensive and predictable
a manner as possible, but to also to begin considering
the option of a United Nations peacekeeping operation.
The people of the Central African Republic have
hardly ever had the opportunity to fully experience
peace and security. They need our help. Some call this
a forgotten crisis. The world is haunted by the horrors
of crises spiralling into atrocities as we have watched
from a distance. The United Nations, the African Union,
ECCAS and the Central African Republic authorities
all recognize the urgent need to stop this crisis from
escalating beyond control. It is now for the Council to
decide how it can best contribute to this goal.
The President: I thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Central African Republic.
Mr. Dembassa Worogagoi (Central African
Republic) (spoke in French): I should like on behalf of
the Central African people to thank the Council for its
special attention to our country in its current difficult
situation. As we say at home, it is in difficult times that
one recognizes true friends. The report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2013/677), the latest developments on the
ground, and the French and American positions all
warn of genocide if nothing is done.
The Central African Republic therefore expresses
its gratitude to each of the 15 members of the Council in
general and in particular to all bilateral and multilateral
partners, including the Economic Community of
Central African States, its Mission for the Consolidation
of Peace in the Central African Republic, the African
Union, the European Union, the International
Organization of la Francophonie, the United Nations,

13-58017

25/11/2013

The situation in the Central African Republic

France, the United States and the United Kingdom,
which have to date assumed the heavy responsibility of
managing this crisis.
The transition leading to the holding of free,
transparent and credible elections within 18 months
of 18 August is threatened by severe instability in
the country. Despite the efforts of the transitional
authorities to restore security in the country through
the dissolution of the Séléka, to canton former rebels
in localized sites and to undertake other tasks, the
security situation remains precarious. That is why the
support of the United Nations remains crucial to saving
the country from its multiple ills.
The stability of the Central African Republic
depends on success in helping the transition to
implement resolution 2121 (2013), and in particular to
respect the road map established by the International
Contact Group until the elections are held. In that
context, the highest authorities of the transition have
written to the Secretary-General and the members of
the Security Council to inform them of and seek their
agreement to their request that France provide military
assistance in support of the African-led International
Support Mission for the Central African Republic
(MISCA).
The Central African nation aspires only to peace
and security. The African-led MISCA is being deployed
in the field. We should like to see it supported and
equipped by the United Nations, with the logistical
support of France, so as to assist it in fully securing
Bangui, restoring peace to the interior of the country,
and restructuring the Central African army. It must have
a strong mandate under Chapter VII of the Charter that
will help it in its heavy but noble mission in the service
of peace and stability in the Central African Republic.
That is the appeal of the Central African people to the
Security Council so that they may one day dare to hope
in the future of their country.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to Mr. Allam-mi.
Mr. Allam-mi (spoke in French): At the outset,
allow me to welcome the recent report of the
Secretary-General introduced by Deputy SecretaryGeneral Eliasson (S/2013/677), to which the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) made
its contribution. I also thank you, Sir, and the other
members of the Council for having allowed me to
participate in this meeting on Central Africa.

S/PV.7069

ECCAS is also gratified to see that the situation
in the Central African Republic is now of concern to
the international community at the highest level, in
particular the Security Council. Indeed, while Central
Africa has been tending to the Central African Republic
for more than a decade and is desperately attempting to
find a lasting solution to the crisis, with the support
of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in the Central African Republic (BINUCA) and its
European friends, including France, it would seem that
the international community has suddenly grasped
the scope of the crisis following the toppling of the
Bozizé regime by the Séléka coalition. The alert was
sounded at the high-level meeting held here in New
York on 25 September following the deterioration of the
humanitarian and security situation, which had become
disastrous.
Today, the Central African Republic is a failed
State run by a fragile transitional Government that
is powerless, given the daunting task of bringing
the country out of the crisis. Without a doubt, the
Government needs help in stabilizing the country, but
we must continue to demand that our expectations be
met regarding the protection of civilians and respect
for human rights. In that regard, it is also crucial to
bring the Central African political class to the table,
as well as the opinion-makers, so that they can bolster
the political consensus formed through the National
Charter for Transition, adopted by the National Council
for Transition, in the framework of implementing the
political agreement of Libreville of January 2013 and
the N’Djamena declaration of April 2013. The Economic
Community of Central African States is pleased that the
transition authorities in the Central African Republic
have transformed that consensus into a transition road
map that lays out various actions to be undertaken, as
well as timetables for them.
I travelled to New York today to thank the Security
Council for its support for the Economic Community of
Central African States, which has untiringly addressed
the issue of the Central African Republic. I also request
that that support continue in the future. We hope to be
able to continue, alongside the African Union, to help
political actors and other stakeholders to reach some
kind of reconciliation and agree on a common path,
so that the Central African Republic can regain its
security, stability and democracy.
Bearing in mind the examples of the African
Union Mission in Somalia and, more recently, the

13-580175/8

S/PV.7069

The situation in the Central African Republic

Regional Brigade of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, ECCAS believes its Mission for the
Consolidation of Peace in the Central African Republic
(MICOPAX), within the International Support Mission
in the Central African Republic (MISCA), will
effectively contribute to restoring peace in the country,
if its future mandate provides it with the necessary
prerogatives and bolsters its capacities in line with
the recommendations of the most recent joint United
Nations-African Union-ECCAS evaluation.
The generation of troops for ECCAS will provide
it with more than 4,000 troops in the theatre of
operations, including an aerial unit. I would like to
recall that the financing of MISCA — also known as
MICOPAX II — has been underwritten by ECCAS
since 1 August, when MISCA was established. The
situation in the Central African Republic is under the
control of MICOPAX II but continues to be of concern.
Total disaster has been averted, but the risks of the
situation deteriorating and sliding into chaos, general
civil war and ethnic and sectarian conflicts are real .
Free and transparent elections will not be enough to
extricate the Central African Republic from the crisis
that it has been undergoing for over a decade. We must
address the root causes of the conflict.
First, a legitimate and representative democracy
must be established in the Central African Republic
that serves the general interest of the Central African
people, rather than those of a clan or ethnic or religious
group. One of the causes of the ongoing conflict
stems from the seizure of power and resources of the
country by a group of Central Africans who came to
power through violence and/or elections. That led to an
uprising of marginalized people.
Secondly, they must establish genuine Government
defence and security forces that are professional,
balanced and representative, instead of clan-based
militias.
Thirdly, they must re-establish an ongoing
dialogue among the political actors, with the assistance
of the international community and in the framework
of a follow-up committee and on the basis of a shared
political agreement to save the Central African
Republic. The Central African political actors must
participate in the transition, and then later support
the elected authorities, instead of engaging in public
smear campaigns against one another or counting on

6/8

25/11/2013

the international community to solve their problems in
their stead. The international community can only help
them, but it cannot act in their stead.
Fourthly, financial, economic and humanitarian
assistance must be mobilized immediately in order to
address the multiple security issues in the country and
tackle the poverty in which those people live. For let us
not forget that one of the root causes of the conflict in
the Central African Republic is the abject poverty of
marginalized people, who live extremely difficult lives,
thus being forced to take up arms and resort to violence
in order to obtain their needs by attacking the affluent.
The emergency deployment of a multidimensional
mission is absolutely necessary in order to save the
Central African Republic and its people in distress.
MICOPAX II/MISCA needs to be strengthened. The
planned United Nations option should provide for
substantial support to MISCA, build its operational
capabilities and guarantee its financing. Allow me
to also reiterate the request of the Heads of State and
Government of ECCAS at their recent summit in
N’Djamena on 21 October for a robust mandate under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, so as
to enable MICOPAX, which is the core of MISCA, to
fully carry out its stabilization mission in the country
and create the best conditions possible for the civilian
component of MISCA, with the support of a reinforced
BINUCA.
There is no longer time for useless criticism of
the stark reality affecting the Central Africans people,
nor for shedding crocodile tears regarding their
misfortunes. The time has come to act and to support
France, ECCAS and the African Union in their efforts
to help the people, help the transition in the country
to succeed and ensure the implementation of the road
map to overcome the crisis affecting the country. The
international community should provide MISCA/
MICOPAX with the necessary means to take action and
support the transition, while ensuring, of course, that
the process be productive and transparent, so that our
goals are achieved, namely, peace and security for the
Central African people, who are the innocent victims of
a hellish reality, lasting stabilization and the rebuilding
of their country, thereby strengthening security and
stability in the countries of the region.
In conclusion, let me reiterate ECCAS’s willingness
to continue its legitimate efforts to achieve a lasting
and final solution or settlement of the Central African

13-58017

25/11/2013

The situation in the Central African Republic

crisis in the framework of a mechanism of effective
cooperation and coordination with the United Nations
and the African Union, without forgetting our
participation in the international contact group and our
mediation role taken up by the Congo.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to Mr. Ayebare.
Mr. Ayebare (African Union): At the outset, I thank
the Security Council for convening this meeting at a
key turning point in the history of the Central African
Republic. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
report on the situation in the Central African Republic
(S/2013/677) and more generally for his efforts towards
the promotion of peace, security and stability on the
African continent in general.
This meeting is taking place against the background
of a particularly worrisome situation in the Central
African Republic. As we all know, the situation is
marked by a total collapse of public law and order and
by widespread and continued abuses against the civilian
population by elements of the ex-Séléka rebellion,
including extrajudicial killings, forced disappearances,
arbitrary arrests and detention, acts of torture and
sexual violence, as well as the recruitment and use of
child soldiers. That has led to the emergence of selfdefence groups and other armed groups.
The African Union (AU) is actively seized of the
situation in the Central African Republic. We have
worked closely with the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS) and fully supported
regional efforts to address the situation following the
resumption of armed hostilities in December 2012
by the Séléka rebellion, in violation of the decisions
of the leaders of the region. Those efforts resulted
in the landmark Libreville Global Peace Agreement
of January 2013, which provided a viable basis for a
lasting solution to the crisis facing the country.
As early as December 2012, the AU drew attention
to the danger that the resumption of hostilities would
pose. We indeed feared that it would undermine
the efforts of the leaders of the region and result in
widespread violence against the civilian population,
and that it could heighten tensions among the different
communities, with far-reaching consequences for the
country and the region as a whole. Following the entry
of the Séléka rebellion into Bangui, the AU Peace and
Security Council took immediate action to suspend the
country from participating in AU activities and adopted

S/PV.7069

targeted sanctions against some individuals. We sought
Security Council support in that regard.
Over the past few months, we have been working
closely with ECCAS in support of the efforts of the
leaders of the region. Allow me at this juncture to once
again express the AU’s deep appreciation to Chadian
President ldriss Deby Itno, current Chair of ECCAS,
and to Congo President Denis Sassou Nguesso, Chair
of the ECCAS follow-up committee on the Central
African Republic. The region has demonstrated the
utmost commitment in addressing the situation. ECCAS
has convened peace talks, deployed peacekeepers and
provided financial assistance in support of the Central
African Republic. That proactive engagement should
be acknowledged and fully supported by the Council.
The decisions of ECCAS provide the basis
upon which the transition in the country should be
managed. We should insist once again on the need for
the transitional authorities to fully comply with those
decisions, in particular with respect to the duration of
the transition of 18 months and the ineligibility of the
current authorities to compete in the elections that will
be organized to restore constitutional order. We would
insist that the transitional authorities fully assume their
responsibilities, notably with regard to the protection of
the civilian population and the control by the State of
its sources of income.
Together with ECCAS, we continue to mobilize
the international community through the International
Contact Group on the Central African Republic. The
Group has met three times so far. The most recent
meeting, convened in Bangui on 8 November, outlined
a number of steps to be taken by the transitional
authorities. It is critical that the Security Council lend
its support to those steps.
Given the precarious security situation on the
ground, the AU, working closely with ECCAS, decided
to enhance the Mission of the Economic Community of
Central African States for the Consolidation of Peace
in the Central African Republic (MICOPAX) through
the deployment of an African-led International Support
Mission in the Central African Republic (MISCA). With
a total strength of 3,652 military, police and civilian
elements, the Mission is mandated to assist in restoring
law and order, stabilizing the country, protecting the
civilian population, reforming the defence and security
sector, and creating conditions for the delivery of
humanitarian assistance. In so doing, the force will

13-580177/8

S/PV.7069

The situation in the Central African Republic

build on the sustained efforts made by MICOPAX in a
particularly challenging environment.
The AU and ECCAS have closely worked together
to facilitate the transition from MICOPAX to MISCA.
Following consultations with ECCAS, the Chairperson
of the Commission appointed the leadership of the
Mission. The transfer of authority between the two
Missions is scheduled to take place on 19 December.
Permit me to emphasize this point: the AU and ECCAS
are working hand in hand to ensure that the continent
effectively addresses the challenges at hand. We are
one, and we are on the same page. Central African
challenges are Africa’s challenges. Overcoming them
successfully requires the mobilization of the entire
continent.
Against that backdrop, the priority of the
international community, particularly the United
Nations, should be to enhance the current efforts
through the provision of adequate support for the
deployment and sustenance of MISCA. Such support
will be consistent with the provisions of Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations on the role of regional
arrangements in the promotion and maintenance of
international peace and security. We take note of
the options contained in the report of the SecretaryGeneral. In taking a decision, it is important that the
Security Council bear in mind the need for predictable
and sustainable support for the Mission.
I would like to express our appreciation to the AU
partners that have already expressed their commitment
to supporting the Mission. I wish to refer here to the
European Union, France and the United States of

8/8

25/11/2013

America. On the ground, we will work out the modalities
for operational coordination with the French forces.
The AU Peace and Security Council, at its meeting of
13 November, looked forward to that cooperation with
MISCA. I would call on AU partners to come forward
and extend much needed support for MISCA.
It is our conviction that the effective support of the
United Nations will go a long way towards enabling
the Mission to create the required conditions for the
deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping operation
that would support the long-term stabilization and
reconstruction of the country. We call on the Security
Council to extend its full support to the political
efforts of ECCAS. The leaders of the region have
never relented in their efforts. They deserve full and
continued international support.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the AU’s
determination, working closely with ECCAS, to address
the situation in the Central African Republic. In this
endeavour, it is our expectation that the international
community will extend the required support and
assistance. We look forward, in that respect, to the
early adoption of a Security Council resolution that
would enhance the joint efforts of ECCAS and the AU
and underline the active international solidarity with
the suffering people of the Central African Republic.
The President (spoke in Chinese): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 3.50 p.m.

13-58017
