S/2018/322

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 April 2018
Original: English

Russian Federation: draft resolution
The Security Council,
Recalling the Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating,
Poisonous or other Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods of Warfare, and the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use
of Chemical Weapons and on their Destruction (CWC) ratified by the Syrian Arab
Republic on 14 September 2013, and the Council’s resolutions 1540 (2004), 2118
(2013), 2209 (2015), 2235 (2015), 2314 (2016), and 2319 (2016).
Expressing its deep concern with regard to the alleged incident with use of toxic
chemicals as weapon in Douma in the Syrian Arab Republic on 7 April 2018
reportedly causing large-scale loss of life and injuries, affirming that the use of
chemical weapons constitutes a serious violation of international law, and stressing
that those responsible for any use of chemical weapons must be held accountable.
Condemning in the strongest terms any use of any toxic chemical as a weapon
in the Syrian Arab Republic, and elsewhere.
Recalling that in resolution 2118 (2013) the Council decided that the Syrian
Arab Republic shall not use, develop, produce, otherwise acquire, stockpile or retain
chemical weapons or transfer, directly or indirectly, chemical weapons, to other States
or non-State actors and underscored that no party in Syria should use, develop,
produce, acquire, stockpile, retain or transfer chemical weapons.
Welcoming the readiness of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) to immediately send its Fact Finding Mission (FFM) to the site of
the alleged incident in Douma to gather and analyse information on this incident and
report its findings to the OPCW Executive Council.
Taking note of the invitation of the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to
the FFM experts to visit the site of the alleged incident in Douma without any delay.
Reaffirming its determination to identify and hold accountable all those
responsible for the use of chemicals as weapons on the territory of the Syrian Arab
Republic.
Noting with due consideration the assurances of the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic and the military authorities of the Russian Federation in Syria to
provide the FFM experts with full security arrangements for a safe access to the site
of alleged incident in Douma.
1.
Reiterates its condemnation in the strongest terms of any use of any toxic
chemical as a weapon in the Syrian Arab Republic;

18-05676 (E)

110418

*1805676*

S/2018/322

2.
Expresses its alarm at the allegations of use of chemical weapons in the
Syrian Arab Republic, in particular the alleged incident in Douma on 7 April 2018,
notes its outrage that individuals reportedly continue to be killed and injured by
chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic, and reiterates its determination that
those responsible must be held accountable;
3.
Welcomes the decision of the OPCW Director-General to send the FFM
experts for investigation in accordance with the CWC to the site of the alleged
incident in Douma and adjacent areas and requests the FFM to report the results of
this investigation to the OPCW Executive Council as soon as possible and further
requests the Director-General to keep the Security Council informed of the progress;
4.
Expresses its full support to the OPCW FFM, demands that all parties in
the Syrian Arab Republic shall without any delay facilitate free and safe access for
the FFM to relevant sites as well as provide any information and evidence, including,
but not limited to, medical records, interview tapes and transcripts, and documentary
material, in accordance with resolution 2118, in relation to the alleged incident in
Douma and adjacent areas;
5.
Recalls that in its resolutions 2118 and 2235 it decided that all parties in
the Syrian Arab Republic shall cooperate fully with the OPCW and the United
Nations;
6.
Emphasises that this includes the obligation of all the parties in the Syrian
Arab Republic of complying with their relevant provisions, by accepting personnel
designated by the OPCW or the United Nations, by ensuring the security of activities
undertaken by these personnel and providing these personnel with immediate and
unfettered access to the site of the alleged incident in Douma and adjacent areas;
7.
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Council on the
implementation of this resolution, and on compliance by all relevant parties in the
Syrian Arab Republic, within 15 days of adoption of this resolution and thereafter
within the framework of its reporting on resolution 2118 (2013).

2/2

18-05676
