S/PRST/2003/1

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
6 February 2003
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4703rd meeting of the Security Council, held on 6 February 2003, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Security Council
resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)”,
the President of the Security Council made the following statement on behalf of the
Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms its continued commitment to the full and
effective implementation of United Nations Security Council resolution 1244
(1999). The Council notes the transformation of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia into Serbia and Montenegro and, in this context, reaffirms that
resolution 1244 (1999) remains fully valid in all its aspects. Resolution 1244
(1999) continues to be the basis of the international community’s policy on
Kosovo.
“The Security Council further reaffirms its commitment to the objective
of a multiethnic and democratic Kosovo and calls upon all communities to
work towards this goal and actively participate in the public institutions as
well as the decision-making process, and integrate into society. It condemns all
attempts to establish and maintain structures and institutions as well as
initiatives that are inconsistent with resolution 1244 (1999) and the
Constitutional Framework. The Council calls for the authority of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) to be respected
throughout Kosovo, and welcomes the establishment of UNMIK’s authority in
the northern part of Mitrovica. It encourages the establishment of direct
dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade on issues of practical importance to
both sides.
“The Security Council condemns the violence within the Kosovo
Albanian community, as well as the violence against the Kosovo Serb
community. It urges local institutions and leaders to exert influence on the
climate for the rule of law by condemning all violence and actively supporting
the efforts of the police and the judiciary. It underlines the responsibility of the
majority to make the minority communities feel that Kosovo is their home too,
and that the laws apply equally to everyone. The minority community
representatives must join and work within the institutions to benefit from them.
The Council stresses that all communities must make renewed efforts to inject
momentum into improving inter-ethnic dialogue and promoting the

03-23911 (E)

060203

*0323911*

S/PRST/2003/1

reconciliation process, not least through full cooperation with the International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia.
“The Security Council welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on
the activities of UNMIK and recent developments in Kosovo (S/2003/113) and
the briefing of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on the
status of implementation of the benchmarks for Kosovo. The Council reiterates
its full support for the “Standards before Status” policy with postulated targets
in the eight key areas: functioning of the democratic institutions, the rule of
law, freedom of movement, the return of refugees and IDPs, economy, property
rights, dialogue with Belgrade, and the Kosovo Protection Corps. The Council
welcomes the presentation of a detailed plan for its implementation that will
provide the appropriate baseline against which progress can be measured, as
discussed with the Special Representative of the Secretary-General during the
Council’s Mission in December 2002. The fulfilment of these targets is
essential to commencing a political process designed to determine Kosovo’s
future, in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999). The Council strongly rejects
unilateral initiatives which may jeopardize stability and the normalization
process not only in Kosovo but also in the entire region. It urges all political
leaders in Kosovo and in the region to shoulder responsibility for
democratization, peace and stability in the region by rejecting all initiatives
contravening resolution 1244 (1999). The Council rejects any attempts to
exploit the question of the future of Kosovo for other political ends.
“The Security Council welcomes progress made in 2002, as outlined in
the Secretary-General’s report. It supports the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General’s continued efforts including in such priority areas as
revitalizing the economy through investment, combating crime and illegal
trafficking, and building a multi-ethnic society, while ensuring conditions for
the sustainable return of refugees and IDPs.
“The Security Council welcomes the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General’s intention to transfer remaining competencies to the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government (PISG) by the end of the year,
except those reserved for the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
under resolution 1244 (1999). It calls on the Kosovo PISG as well as all
Kosovars to take on their responsibilities and genuinely cooperate for this
transfer to be successful.
“The Security Council reiterates its full support for the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and urges Kosovo´s leaders once
again to work in close cooperation with UNMIK and the international Security
Presence (KFOR) for a better future for Kosovo and stability in the region.”

2
