S/PV.7501

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7501st meeting

Friday, 7 August 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Ogwu. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Nigeria)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Lamek
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Churkin
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Power
Mr. Méndez Graterol

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 25 February 2015 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2015/138)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-24834 (E)
*1524834*

S/PV.7501

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 25 February 2015 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2015/138)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2015/602, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by France, Jordan, Lithuania, Malaysia, New
Zealand, Spain, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and the United States of America.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/138, which contains a letter dated
25 February 2015 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, Chad, Chile, China, France, Jordan,
Lithuania, Malaysia, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
The President: The draft resolution received 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2235 (2015).
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.
Ms. Power (United States of America): Today
the Security Council has taken another step aimed at
stopping the use of chemical weapons in Syria. That
step is necessary because, despite our previous efforts

2/9

07/08/2015

to stop the use of chemical weapons, the attacks have
continued. Those efforts have included the Council’s
adoption in September 2013 of resolution 2118 (2013),
which required the Syrian regime to dismantle and
destroy its chemical weapons programme under
international supervision. But while the resolution
made significant progress towards that end, the attacks
continued. Our efforts also included the adoption of
resolution 2209 (2015), which condemned the use of
chlorine as a chemical weapon and made clear that
such attacks were a violation of the Chemical Weapons
Convention and resolution 2118 (2013).
Yet still the attacks continued. We know that those
chemical attacks continued not only because of the
testimonies of survivors and medical professionals,
such as the harrowing account members of the Council
heard in a closed meeting in April from Dr. Tennari, a
physician from Sarmeen, who described his inability to
resuscitate three siblings, ages one to three, following
once such attack in March. We know not only because
of the gruesome footage of those suffering from the
effects of such attacks, including seizures, asphyxiation,
foaming at the mouth — footage that we have all seen.
We know for a fact because the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) has carried
out thorough and impartial investigations into alleged
attacks and ultimately concluded that chemical weapons
were used.
Let me read briefly from a report from one of
those investigations lest we forget just how grotesque
the effects of chemical weapons are. According to the
OPCW’s third fact-finding report (see S/2015/138),
when the village of Talmenes was attacked on 21 April
2014, residents described seeing what they called
a “honey wax-to-yellow coloured gas” (S/2015/138,
enclosure IV, annex 2, para. 5.15) rise from the point of
impact reaching above the minaret of the town’s mosque
up to 75 metres in the sky. Survivors next described a
pungent irritating smell, like chlorine.
A seven-year-old boy, who lived approximately
15 metres from the place the bombs hit, died almost
immediately. Residents told investigators that his body
showed no signs of physical trauma but “turned blue in
colour” (ibid., para. 5.17). A teenage girl from the same
house died days later, as did an elderly woman from a
neighbouring home. Their bodies, like the boy’s, showed
no physical trauma. Olive, pomegranate and fig trees
shed their fruit, and their leaves dried and shrivelled
and turned yellow shortly after exposure. Younger

15-24834

07/08/2015

The situation in the Middle East

animals died immediately; fully grown animals a few
hours later. Some 200 people rushed to a Talmenes field
hospital with nearly identical symptoms — symptoms I
would note that were just like the ones that Dr. Tennari
described treating following the attack in Sarmeen:
a burning sensation in the eyes, face, throat and on
their exposed skin, tearing, blurred vision, shortness
of breath, a feeling of suffocation, nausea, vomiting,
abdominal pain, diarrhoea, headache, generalized
weakness, drowsiness, disorientation, and a loss of
consciousness. This is what a chemical attack looks,
smells and feels like.
Witness accounts, photographs and videos of the
attacks and their victims, as well as other forms of
evidence, led the OPCW to determine that there was
“compelling confirmation that a toxic chemical was
used as a weapon, systematically and repeatedly,
in the villages of Talmanes, Al Tamanah, and Kafr
Zeta” (ibid., enclosure III, annex 2, par.29)
between April and August 2014. The OPCW reported
that 32 witnesses saw or heard the sound of helicopters
over the three opposition-held towns right before the
attacks occurred.
Until we adopted resolution 2235 (2015) today,
there was no mechanism to take the obvious next
step — determining who was involved in such attacks.
Even when there were obvious signs pointing to the
parties responsible, investigators were not empowered
to point the finger. This has compounded an already
rampant sense of impunity in Syria.
Pointing the finger matters. Let us imagine for a
moment if we asked an investigative team to determine
whether certain atrocities had occurred — such as
rapes, tortures or executions — but did not ask that
team to determine who was involved in such brutal
acts. As we all know, that determination ties the
perpetrator to the action, and that link is essential to
eventual accountability and to helping prevent future
abuses from occurring. That is what the new United
Nations-OPCW Joint Investigative Mechanism will
do in response to incidents in Syria that involved or
likely involved the use of chemicals as weapons. The
Mechanism will gather evidence aimed at identifying
the individuals and entities that have a hand in such
attacks, and it will do all it can to name those individuals
or entities.

S/PV.7501

Now, we all know that we currently lack an effective
mechanism for holding criminally accountable those
responsible, but when the day comes that we have
one — and that day will come — the evidence gathered
by the Joint Investigative Mechanism will stand as
a record not just of what has been done but of who
has done it. Those who think that impunity will last
forever for the perpetrators and all others involved in
chemical-weapons attacks — those who order chemical
attacks, those who fill munitions with chemicals, and
those who drop chemical weapons — should look at
all the perpetrators today who find themselves being
forced to answer for acts committed years or even
decades ago. They should look at those who have been
convicted for carrying out the genocide and war crimes
in the Balkans, or those now being prosecuted in The
Hague. They should look at Hissène Habré, who is
currently standing trial for atrocities he carried out in
Chad three decades ago.
Let me conclude. Resolution 2235 (2015) was
adopted today with the Council’s unanimous support.
This sends a clear and powerful message to all those
involved in chemical-weapons attacks in Syria — the
Joint Investigative Mechanism will identify you if you
gas people. It bears repeating as well that we need
to bring the same unity that we have shown today to
urgently find a political solution to the Syrian crisis.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The effective implementation of the decisions
of the Security Council and its resolution 2118 (2013), on
the destruction of Syria’s chemical arsenal — adopted
at the initiative of Russia and the United States of
America — is one of the Council’s most significant
successes and reaffirms the possibility of engaging in
productive joint work on the most urgent problems of
our time.
Against that backdrop, the Council could not
ignore reports of the alleged use in Syria of toxic
chemicals as chemical weapons. In the spring of
2014, under the auspices of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), the FactFinding Mission in Syria began its work, which, with
a great deal of certainty, confirmed the use of chlorine
as a weapon in several populated areas of Syria. The
Russian Federation decisively condemns such acts. We
believe that they are unacceptable and run counter to
the Chemical Weapons Convention.

15-248343/9

S/PV.7501

The situation in the Middle East

At the same time, the question of who used chlorine
remains unanswered, partly because the existing
mechanisms of the United Nations and the OPCW
are not mandated to identify those participating in
such acts. Moreover, we have heard many politicized
statements in that regard, which have clearly been
meant as propaganda. It was necessary to close that
gap, as was done with the adoption of resolution 2235
(2015) today, creating the preconditions for the launch
of the Joint Investigative Mechanism of the United
Nations and the OPCW.
We believe that today’s decision is above all
preventive, and lays the foundations for ending any
use of toxic chemicals as weapons in Syria. We believe
that the Mechanism will work impartially, objectively
and professionally, as guaranteed by the successful
experience of the Secretary-General and the OPCW
Director-General in destroying Syria’s chemical
arsenal, as well as the successful cooperation of the
United Nations and the OPCW in the framework of their
joint mission, within which their responsibilities had
been clearly delineated. We believe that this principle
should guide the further work of the Joint Investigative
Mechanism.
Taking into account the complex political and
military situation in Syria, we believe that it will
be extremely important for the Joint Investigative
Mechanism to develop appropriate relationships within
the country, without which the Mechanism will be
unable to work in the field. We are convinced that
Damascus, as it has done in the past — as repeatedly
confirmed in the documents of the OPCW and the
United Nations — will extend the necessary assistance
to the Joint Investigative Mechanism and the OPCW
Fact-Finding Mission to establish evidence of potential
use of chlorine as a chemical weapon. We expect the
opposition to adopt that approach.
In conclusion, I wish to emphasize that any effort
in the Syrian issue must be in line with the logic of
assisting the search for a political solution to the
conflict and should not further antagonize the parties.
The priorities continue to include the fight against
terrorism and in finding a political solution to the crisis
in Syria.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the Council’s unanimous adoption of
resolution 2235 (2015). China’s position on chemical
weapons is clear and consistent. We resolutely

4/9

07/08/2015

oppose the use of chemical weapons by anyone in
any circumstance. We express our concern over the
use in Syria of chlorine gas as a weapon, as verified
by the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW). We support the objective, just and
professional investigation of that incident and bringing
the perpetrators to justice when there is hard evidence.
In that process, the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Syria must be respected and the
OPCW and the United Nations should play their full
roles in the investigation. China expects the SecretaryGeneral soon to submit his report on the establishment
of the Joint Investigative Mechanism, as called for in
resolution 2235 (2015).
A political settlement is the only way to resolve
the Syrian issue. At present, Special Envoy De Mistura
is working tirelessly to advance a political settlement
to the Syrian issue. The international community, and
the Security Council in particular, should stay the
course, never waver in striving for a political solution
and unanimously support the United Nations role in
that process, and Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
Special Envoy De Mistura in their good offices.
China hopes that resolution 2235 (2015), which was
adopted by consensus, will help to further unanimity
among Council members on the Syrian issue and
give new impetus to the search for a comprehensive,
enduring and appropriate settlement of the matter
through political means at an early date. China shall
continue to play a positive and constructive role to that
end.
Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): I shall be very brief and concise.
I wish to express my satisfaction and that of
my country at the adoption today of resolution
2235 (2015), which was co-sponsored by Spain. In
adopting the resolution by consensus, the Council
has demonstrated that it is both serious and resolute.
Of primary importance is our seriousness in insisting
that there can be no impunity, particularly for those
who commit grave violations of international law that
can be considered to be war crimes or crimes against
humanity; those who violate the most basic and sacred
norms of international law and trust, and those who
ignore the Security Council’s resolutions, all of whom
must be made accountable for their actions. Today the
Security Council has lived up to its responsibilities. If
we are to ensure our seriousness, we as a Council must

15-24834

07/08/2015

The situation in the Middle East

act consistently in the future. Today we have taken a
first step in calling on the Secretary-General to begin
work on setting up a Joint Investigative Mechanism, but
once the Mechanism is under way, we must act on its
recommendations and findings.
Secondly, today we have sent a message to the
international community that we are determined to do
everything possible to put an end to the worst conflict
of the twenty-first century. The unity we have shown
today must also be translated into other areas of the
Syrian conflict, and today’s success should push us to
continue to work together to reach the only possible
solution to it, which is a political one. I would therefore
like to conclude by saying that we reiterate our firm
support for the work being done by Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank the United States delegation for introducing
today’s resolution 2235 (2015), establishing a
Mechanism to investigate the use of chemical weapons
in Syria.
The adoption of the resolution is important for
several reasons. First, it enables the Security Council
to find some unity on Syria during a conflict, the worst
since the twenty-first century began, that has lasted more
than four years. The Council could not remain silent in
the face of the fact that despite two resolutions (2118
(2013) and 2209 (2015)) condemning them, hideously
cruel chemical attacks continued to occur repeatedly
in Syria in 2014 and 2015. Several investigations by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) in The Hague have confirmed cases of the use
of chlorine gas in Syria, but without a mandate they
could not identify the perpetrators of the attacks. But
the investigations contained disturbing details about the
systematic presence of helicopters during the attacks,
and we know very well which party to the conflict
is the only one with that kind of capacity. The Joint
Investigative Mechanism we have set up today will
enable us to authorize a neutral and independent body
to establish who has been responsible for the chemical
attacks in Syria in the past few years. It will work in
close cooperation with the OPCW.
Our vote for this Investigative Mechanism is also
important because it marks progress in the efforts to end
impunity for attacks on the Syrian civilian population.
We will be able to identify the perpetrators of these
particularly grave crimes. Without that fear of justice,

S/PV.7501

the criminals in Syria who are using these inhumane
weapons can rest easy in the certainty that they will
not have to answer for their crimes. In April several
doctors came to testify at an Arria Formula meeting of
the Security Council. Their stories, and the images they
showed at that time of children asphyxiated by chlorine,
still haunt us. We all understood that we owed it to them
and to those who gave us their testimonies to respond.
Finally, this vote is important because it sends a
clear message of deterrence to all the parties to the
Syrian conflict. These inhumane attacks must stop.
The conflict has killed more than 230,000 people,
most of them civilians. Beyond the chemical attacks,
indiscriminate and disproportionate attacks on civilians
have continued, such as those happening now in
Zabadani, in violation of international humanitarian law
and Council resolutions. It is crucial that we commit to
ending the violence in Syria and resuming the dialogue
and political process as soon as possible. In that regard,
we are giving our full support to the ongoing efforts of
the Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura. For
all those reasons France sponsored today’s resolution
and voted in favour of it.
Mr. Méndez Graterol (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Venezuela voted in
favour of resolution 2235 (2015) in the firm belief
that the use of toxic substances as chemical weapons
is a war crime and a crime against humanity that
we categorically condemn wherever and however it
occurs. My country is a party to the Chemical Weapons
Convention and fully committed to its purposes and
principles. My delegation wishes to emphasize the
importance of fulfilment by the Syrian Government
of its plan for eliminating chemical weapons on its
territory and the cooperation of the Syrian authorities
with the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW), as referred to in the OPCW’s report
on the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013). We
believe that those links between Syria and the two
organizations will continue to be strengthened within a
framework promoting international peace and security.
We hope that the Joint Investigative Mechanism of
the United Nations and the OPCW, to be established
pursuant to resolution 2235 (2015), will enable them
to throw light on the allegations of the use of chlorine
against the civilian population, with the goal of
identifying the people and entities, whether groups
or Governments, that have used or ordered the use of
chemical substances as weapons in Syria. In fulfilling

15-248345/9

S/PV.7501

The situation in the Middle East

its mandate, the Investigative Mechanism must respect
the principles of impartiality, transparency and
objectivity, in accordance with the terms agreed on by
the Secretary-General with the OPCW, with the goal of
achieving concrete results based on the investigation of
the issue.
Venezuela reiterates that any solution to the
armed conflict in Syria must be political, peaceful and
negotiated. That is the only way to preserve peace and
stability there with the full cooperation of the people of
Syria and their Government. We must ensure respect
for its sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence, as laid down in the Charter of the
United Nations. Syria has been a victim of barbaric
terrorists whose acts of violence are designed to
impose their totalitarian ideologies and inciting hatred
and religious intolerance. Venezuela firmly condemns
such acts. It is well known that the use of chemical
weapons can be traced to terrorist groups with foreign
financing whose goal is to overturn the legitimate
Government of President Bashar Al-Assad. If those
terrorist organizations should succeed in imposing
their totalitarian solutions, the consequences for the
Syrian people and the Middle East would be even more
devastating than what is currently going on in Libya.
That is why the international community must support
the Syrian Government and people in their fight against
the terrorism afflicting this brother country.
In conclusion, the Security Council should support
every effort aimed at promoting peace and stability in
Syria and reconciliation for its people. In that regard,
we support the diplomatic activities of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan
de Mistura. We believe his efforts will help to put the
country on a path to peace.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Two
years ago, the international consensus enabled us to
respond quickly and effectively to the reports of the
use of chemical weapons in the conflict in Syria, whose
shocking images have remained with us, images of
Syrian civilian victims of chemical weapon attacks in the
Guta area of Damascus. International diplomatic efforts
resulted in a historic decision taken by the Executive
Council of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) on dismantling the Syrian
chemical weapons programme and endorsed by the
Security Council through its adoption of resolution
2118 (2013). The unity, particularly in its objective,
demonstrated by the Council, aimed at making concrete

6/9

07/08/2015

progress regarding the issue of Syria’s chemical
weapons, helped to ensure the resolution’s adoption.
However, despite our adoption of resolution
2209 (2015) today, we are seeing new and extremely
disturbing reports of the use of chlorine gas as a
chemical weapon in Syria, undermining the progress
that has been made by flagrantly ignoring the views
of the international community as a whole and all our
human values. There is a need to address this issue in
the context of cooperation with the OPCW in a precise
and effective manner. Silence would only distance us
further from the international community’s goal of
ending such crimes.
Jordan voted in favour of resolution 2235 (2015) on
the basis of its firm condemnation of the use of chemical
weapons in Syria. The use of toxic chemicals, such
as chlorine gas, contravenes the Chemical Weapons
Convention, international humanitarian law and the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council. Jordan
wants the United Nations to remain seized of this
question, in line with the Security Council’s Charter
mandate and its own resolutions.
It will therefore be necessary to follow the work
of the Joint Investigative Mechanism as closely as
possible so as to ensure that it addresses all occurences
of the use of chemical weapons. We must all cooperate
with the Mechanism and impose the relevant measures.
A failure to implement the provisions of resolution 2118
(2013) would require long-term follow-up to ensure
that such acts do not recur. Those who have used such
weapons must be brought to justice and held accountable
for their actions.
In conclusion, the adoption of resolution 2235
(2015) is intended to end the use of chemical weapons
in Syria, but our brothers and sisters there continue to
suffer horrifically every day. We therefore hope that
henceforth the consensus reached on this dossier will
enable us to move forward and progress in the United
Nations efforts to find a political solution to the Syrian
crisis, based on the first Geneva conference, so as to
fulfil the hopes of the brotherly people of Syria that
they will find a role to play in a new era, that stability
can be restored and the social fabric repaired, and that
the refugees can return voluntarily to their country.
Ms.
Murmokaitė
(Lithuania):
Lithuania
co-sponsored and voted in favour of resolution 2235
(2015), establishing the Joint Investigative Mechanism

15-24834

07/08/2015

The situation in the Middle East

to identify those involved in the use of chemicals as
weapons in Syria.
Despite the fact that the complete prohibition of the
use of chemical weapons is at the core of the Chemical
Weapons Convention, to which Syria has been a
State party since October 2013, and the prohibitions
contained in the resolutions 2118 (2013) and 2209 (2015)
to use, develop, retain or transfer chemical weapons in
Syria, the use of toxic chemicals has continued with
disturning frequency. Civilians remain the primary
targets of such attacks, while spreading fear remains
their main objective.
When in August 2013 hundreds died in Ghouta after
the Syrian regime used sarin against its own people,
a formidable effort was launched by the international
community to destroy the regime’s declared stockpiles
of chemical weapons. For some time, there was hope
that Ghouta would be the last time we would ever see
chemical weapons use in Syria or anywhere else for that
matter. But after Ghouta came Talmenes, Al Tamanah,
Kafr Zita, Idlib and others — more helicopters
overhead, the whistling sound of falling barrels, and
orange plumes of noxious chlorine gas rising above
civilian neighbourhoods.
The attacks did not stop either after the conclusion
was reached by the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons Fact-Finding Mission in September
2014 that a toxic chemical was used as a weapon,
systematically and repeatedly, in the villages of northern
Syria, or when the Council — barely five months
ago — adopted a second resolution on the subject, in
which it stressed that those responsible for any use
of chemicals as weapons must be held accountable
and reiterated its readiness to impose measures under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations in the
event of non-compliance.
The resolution we have just adopted is about
accountability. The Joint Investigative Mechanism
that is to be established will provide a clear path to
identifying those responsible for attacks involving
chemical weapons in Syria, whoever they are. That
is a crucial step forward, since it will enable us to
drag the perpetrators out of the shadow of their ugly
deeds, put a face on those criminals and thereby send
a clear message to other would-be perpetrators that the
international community will no longer tolerate such
crimes.

S/PV.7501

The Council must take all the steps necessary to
make sure that those responsible for the chemical attacks
are brought to justice. Accountability, however, should
not be limited only to those responsible for chemical
weapons attacks, but extend to all those who have
caused death, destruction and unimaginable suffering
to the Syrian people during the conflict that started
some four and a half years ago. The Council must stand
firm for accountability. We owe it to the memory of the
hundreds of thousands who have lost their lives and to
the millions left destitute and displaced by the carnage
in Syria.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom is pleased to have co-sponsored resolution
2235 (2015). We strongly support the establishment of
a Joint Investigative Mechanism into alleged uses of
toxic chemicals as weapons in Syria. This Mechanism
is a vital step forwards. Through our actions today, we
have moved closer to ending impunity and to holding to
account those who have used these barbaric weapons.
The Mechanism we have established today will
be impartial, it will be independent and it will be
comprehensive. It builds logically on past investigations.
It has a clear mandate to identify individuals, entities,
groups or Governments that are perpetrators, organizers
or sponsors of the use of chemicals as weapons in Syria.
This includes chlorine and any other toxic chemical.
Launching this impartial Mechanism shows our
commitment to a rules-based international system
where the hard facts will identify those responsible for
these crimes. This is an important step forward, but
there is more to do. We look forward to the Mechanism
starting its work promptly, and we reiterate the Council’s
call on all States to cooperate fully with United Nations
investigators, as well as with the Fact-Finding Mission
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons. They will play a key facilitating role in the
work of the Joint Investigative Mechanism.
In establishing the Mechanism today, we have
demonstrated that the Council can find common
ground; we look forward to building on this in order
to tackle the other challenges we face on Syria, and to
bring an end after so long to the suffering of the Syrian
people.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): New Zealand
was pleased to support and co-sponsor resolution 2235
(2015), which we have just adopted.

15-248347/9

S/PV.7501

The situation in the Middle East

Chemical weapons are an appalling weapon. The
international community showed its revulsion of these
weapons and its determination to stamp them out in
the negotiation and adoption of the Chemical Weapons
Convention. The adoption of resolution 2118 (2013) was
a highly important step by the Council in responding
to reports confirming the use of chemical weapons in
Syria. The Syrian regime’s acceptance of that resolution
and its decision, albeit belated, to join the Chemical
Weapons Convention and to cooperate in the destruction
of its chemical-weapons stocks were welcome. A major
international effort led by the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons has been under way
to remove and destroy those weapons.
Yet, reports have continued to come out of Syria
that chemical weapons continue to be used. This is
monstrous, even in the context of that thoroughly
horrible conflict. Accordingly, it is right and proper that
the Council has now adopted a Mechanism to enable
the identification of those responsible and to hold them
to account. Those who use or authorize the use of such
weapons must be held to account for their dreadful
deeds. We welcome agreement on the text of resolution
2235 (2015) as an all-too-rare example of collective
Council action on the Syrian conflict. We hope that the
spirit of cooperation that underlies the resolution will
embue the Council’s efforts to address and resolve the
wider Syrian conflict.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Nigeria.
Nigeria notes that the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) FactFinding Mission mandated to establish the facts
surrounding the alleged use of chemical weapons in
Syria has concluded “with a high degree of confidence”
(S/2015/138, annex 2, para. 29) that toxic materials
have been used as a weapon in Syria. We also note that
the Fact-Finding Mission does not have the mandate
to attribute responsibility for those actions, which
constitute a gross violation of international law. That
lack of attribution has left a gap that must be filled in
order to determine those behind the use of chemical
weapons in Syria. Resolution 2235 (2015), which the
Security Council has just adopted unanimously, seeks
to fill that gap through an OPCW-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism. That is why Nigeria voted in
favour of its adoption.
We deem it necessary to affirm that, while we support
the establishment of a Joint Investigative Mechanism,
8/9

07/08/2015

we have neither preconceptions nor prejudices
concerning who is behind the chemical weapons
attacks in Syria. We are confident that those facts can
be established by the Joint Investigative Mechanism.
Our wish is to see to it that the perpetrators are brought
to justice. We call on all parties in Syria — and, indeed,
on the international community — to cooperate with
the Joint Investigative Mechanism in the execution
of its mandate. We reaffirm our strong condemnation
of the use of chemical weapons by anyone under any
circumstances.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Today marks 70 years since the United States
Army used a nuclear weapon against Hiroshima and
Nagasaki. Seventy years ago, humankind discovered
the scope and the horror of that destructive weapon.
Since that time, Governments have taken pains to
come to terms with it, adopting the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons in 1968. My
country became a signatory to the Treaty that very
year. That was followed by the discovery of a new type
of weapon — biological weapons. Governments once
again worked hard, adopting the Biological Weapons
Convention in 1975 to ban such weapons. My country
has adhered to that Convention. Then came chemical
weapons, and Governments exerted themselves for a
third time to adopt the Chemical Weapons Convention
in 1993. My country adhered to it recently. The Syrian
Government has not used any such weapons — nuclear,
biological or chemical.
When we served as a member of the Security Council
in 2003, my country’s commitment was evidenced by
our submission to the Council and to Member States
of a draft resolution to make the Middle East a zone
free of all types of weapons of mass destruction,
including nuclear, chemical and biological weapons.
Unfortunately, our draft resolution was objected to by
a Council member, an influential country, with the aim
of protecting Israeli nuclear weapons.
In my statement today, my aim is to paint a
complete picture of the situation, not a partial one.
We have many times drawn the Council’s attention
to, and warned it of, the danger of the use of chemical
weapons in Syria by terrorist groups, some of which
are affiliated with Al-Qaida. We have expressed our
15-24834

07/08/2015

The situation in the Middle East

grave fear that certain regimes that support terrorism
and terrorists may provide chemical weapons to armed
terrorist groups, and then pretend that it was the Syrian
Government that had used such weapons. In that regard,
I recall the Syrian Government’s initiative in asking
the Secretariat to conduct an inquiry into the attack on
Khan Al-Asal village near Aleppo. Unfortunately, that
inquiry has yet to be conducted, in spite of the Syrian
Government’s agreement to send Mr. Sellström to carry
out an investigation on the specific incident that took
place two years ago. After two years, still no inquiry
has been carried out on the events in Khan Al-Asal. The
perpetrators of that horrific crime remain unknown and
have so far escaped any form of accountability. I also
recall that dozens of official letters sent by the Syrian
Government to the Security Council, its committees
and to the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) included tangible proof of the use of
chemicals. On 5 August, we provided a file containing
all 13 official letters, which can be found in the United
Nations archives and with delegations.
Syria has upheld its commitments flowing from its
adherence to the Chemical Weapons Convention as well
as to those under resolution 2118 (2013). From the very
beginning up to today, Syria has consistently cooperated
and positively, transparently and flexibly meet its
commitments, in spite of the terrible challenges posed
by an extremely complex, difficult and even provocative
security situation — the result of the bellicose positions
taken by certain regional and international parties.
Without Syria’s constructive cooperation with the
OPCW Fact-Finding Mission, its work would not have
been successful. Ms. Sigrid Kaag has herself attested to
that. The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic has
repeatedly reiterated to the Secuirty Council and to the
OPCW Executive Council its condemnation of the use
of chemical weapons and weapons of mass destruction
by anyone anywhere. In that regard, I reiterate once
again that the Syrian Government and the Syrian army
have never used chemical weapons, and never will.
Contrariwise, Syria’s army and its civilians have
been targeted with toxic chemicals and chemical
weapons, including chlorine gas, by armed terrorist
groups, such as Daesh and the Al-Nusra Front, in many
parts of Syria, as part of their criminal and terrorist
acts in our country and the region.
The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
reiterates that neutrality, transparency, credibility
and integrity, while refraining from politicization, as

S/PV.7501

well as cooperation and coordination with the Syrian
Government, must be the guiding principles for the
Joint Investigative Mechanism established pursuant to
resolution 2235 (2015), which the Council just adopted.
We say that based on our experience with previous
missions, which flouted all those principles in their
practices, and in particular because they based their
work on false, fabricated statements made by parties well
known to all. Those missions have carried out partial
and biased investigations — outside Syria — without
a modicum of coordination with the Syrian authorities.
For example, various Council members have
spoken of helicopters. That is a very important point
that is a typical example of the fabrication included
in various documents of witnesses purporting to
have heard helicopters — in Turkey, not over Syrian
territory. That makes such statements questionable, for
reasons known to all. In addition, two years ago in the
Council we showed a film, taken in Turkish territory,
in which rabbits were used as test subjects for chemical
weapons. According to one of the people in the film,
the terrorists claimed to have carried out those tests in
order to enable them to use chemical weapons in Syria.
Unfortunately, that is precisely what happened.
The facts show that the Syrian Government
has upheld all of its commitments under all of the
resolutions adopted by the Council — be it with regard
to chemical weapons, the humanitarian situation or
combating terrorism. At the same time, however, certain
States — in the region and beyond, and including
some mentioned by name in various reports, including
reports of Council committees — are inflaming the
situation and attracting foreign terrorist fighters to
Syria from more than 100 countries. Those parties have
not implemented any of the Council’s resolutions.
We in Syria we are suffering from those parties’
violations, in an unprecedented context of political
blackmail that is prolonging the people’s suffering
and exacerbating the crisis. In the context of the
adoption of today’s resolution, we reiterate our appeal
to the Security Council to call on all Member States
to fully implement the provisions of all the Council’s
resolutions, in particular resolutions 2170 (2014), 2178
(2014) and 2199 (2015). We ask the Council and the Joint
Investigative Mechanism it has just created to cooperate
and coordinate its actions with the Syrian Government
in order to ensure accountability and transparency.
The meeting rose at 10.55 a.m.

15-248349/9
