UNITED

NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-SIXTH

YEAR

2281”

MEETING:

13 JUNE

1981

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda12281) . . . ..I.....................,,..,.,,...

I

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

I

Complaint by Iraq:
Letter dated 8 June 1981from the ChargC d’affaires of the Permanent Mission
of Iraq to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/14509) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S’PV.1181

NOTE
Symbols 01? United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements
of the OfJ7cial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1%4, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions
of the Security
Council.
The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1%5, becamefully operative
on that date.

2281a MEETING

Held in New York on Saturday, 13 June 1981, at 10.30 a,m
Presidenr: Mr. PorfirioMUNOZ LED0 (Mexico).

I have received letters from the representativesof
Bulgaria, Guyana, Somalia, Viet Nam and Zambia in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda, In
conformity with the usual practice 1propose, with the
consentof the Council, to invite those representatives
to participatn in the discussion, without the right to
vote, in accordancewith the relevant rovisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provPsional rules of
ptoC0dure.

Present: The representativesof the following States:
China, France,German Democratic Republic, Ireland,
Japan, Mexico, Niger, Panama, Philip ines, Spain,
Tunisia, Uganda, Union of Soviet SocialPst Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britahl and Northern
Ireland, United Statesof America.

Provi8ional agendaWAgendal22W
I. Adoption of the agenda

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Tsvetkov
(Bulgaria), Mr. Sinclair (Guyana), Mr. Adan (Somalia), Mrs. Nguyen Ngoc Dung Wiet Nam) and
Mr. Mutukwa (Zambia) took the places resewed for
them at the side of the Council chamber.

2. Complaint by Iraq:
Letter dated 8 June 1981 from the Charg6
d’affaires of the PermanentMission of Iraq to
the United Nations addressedto the President
of the Security Council (5114509)

3. The PRESIDENT finterpretation from Spanfsh):
I should like to draw the attention of membersof the
Council to tho following documents: S/14522, letter
dated 12June 1981from the ro resentativoof Zambia
to the President of the CounciP; S/14527,letter dated
12 Juno from the representative of Hungary to the
President of the Council; S/14528,letter dated 12 Juno
from tho representativeof Romania to the President of
tho Council; and S/14529,letter dated 12June from the
representative of Yemen to the President of the
Council.

The meeting was called to order at 11.25 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Cemplalnt by lraqr
Letter dated 8 June 1981frem the Charg6 d’affalrea

dtbePermanentMlwbndInqtetheUnuod

Nationa addread

to tba FraWnt

ClJmtcu(S/14809)

of tba Security

4. Thotlrst s or is the Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Pomign Affairs of Kuwait, Sheik S&ah
Al-Ahmad Al-J&r Al-Sabah, Chahman of the Council of the League of Arab War, on whosebehalf he
will rpeak. I warmly woicano bim and invite him to
take a place at the CouncU table and to make his
atuement.

1, The PRESIDENT (in~erpre~a~lon from Spanish):
In accordancewith dociriona taken at the Council’s
2280thmeeting, I invite the mpmsentativos of Iraq and
Israel to take placer at the Council table and 1 invite
tba mpmsontaUv08 of Algeria, Broil. Cuba, Indir,
Jor6u1, Kuwait, Lebanon, Fakittan, Romania, the
Sudan, Turkey and Yugoslavia to take the places

5. Mr. AL-IABAH

resewedfor them at the side of the Council chamber.

(Kuwait):*

It &iv08 ma great

pleasure, at the outset, to congratulate you, Sir, on

your assumption
of your dutiesas Presidentof the
SecurityCouncilfor the monthof June.

Al the invitutiot? of’ the Presidettr, Mr. Hatnrnadi
(Iraq) atld Mr. Bltttn (Israel) took places at #re Courrcil
rable and Mr. Bedjaoui (Algeria), Mr. Corrba du
COSU (Brazil), Mr. Koa Kouri (Cuba), Mr, Krishtrutt
(India), Mr. Nuseibeh (Jordan), Mr. Al-Sabah
iKuw&t), h4r. TuPtti (Lebatrortj, Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan), Mr. rCloritresctr(Rottirotia), Mr. Abdallrc (Sudott),
Mr. Kirco (Titrkey) uttd Mr. Komatina (Yugoslavia)
took /he places reserved for them ut Ike side of rhe
Couttcil chumber.
2. The PRESIDENT(itrterprefalion from Spanish):

I shouldlike to inform members
of the Councilthat

1

6. I washonouredby the Councilof the Leagueof
Arab Statesduring its emergencysessionheld at
Baghdad on 11June1981withthe chairmanship
of the
delegationentrustedwith the task of participatingin
theemergency
meetings
of theSecurityCouncilcalled
at the requestof theIraqi Governmentto considerthe
aggression
committedby the IsraeliAir Forceagainst
Iraq lastSunday.
-* Mr. Al-Sabah
spoke in Arabic.
The English
statemeat ws supplied
by the delegation.

version

of his

7, The Foreign Minister of Iraq has clearly explained
that attack in detail[228&hmeeting]and thereis no

12. Allow me to emphasize here the serious implications of the aforementioned Israeli concept of security.
needfor mato elaborateanyfurtheronthisaggression I have no hesitation in saying that it is an uncivilized
againsta StateMemberof the UnitedNations.What concept which runs counter to all the values of

1wishto affirmin my presentation
beforethisaugust
body is the fact that the raid launchedby Israeli
aircraft againstIraq wasnot, despiteits very grave
nature,something
new;rather,it wasonein aseriesof
aggressive
actswhichIsraelhascommittedagainstthe
ArabStatesover a longperiodof time. Israel’sPrime
Ministerhasevendeclaredthat theZionistentity will

clvilieation and which showsenmity and hostility
towards the Arab States for no other reason than the

fact that they are seekingto adopt projects of
development

of building up their economies and attaining prosperity
for their societies.

launch such acts of aggression in the future against
any Arab countrywheneverit findsit in its interestto

13. That is the real aim behind the Israeli attack
against the Iraqi nuclear installation, an attack which
denies every Arab country the right to practise what
other countries practise in the field of social, scientific
and technological development and the serious endeavour of Arab countries to narrow thedevelopme&
tal gap between them and the developed countries.

do so.

8, Thiscaseis thereforenot confinedsolelyto Iraq
but a plies also to all the Arab countries, because they
are aPI equallyandexplicitly threatened,asis evident

in officitil ltiaeli pro&mcitions,The sourceof the
problem lies in the perceptions of the Zionist entity

and its attitudetowardsthe Statesof the region,as
wellasin its definition of its security requirements in

14. Representatives are fully aware that the Israeli
theory of security violates the moral values that our
age believes in and that the United Nations tries
diligently to promote. The reason for this lies in the
fact that Israel considers its security to be dependent
upon the continuation of the state of war which
enables it to fulfil its aims, including its desire to
destroy every project which helps the people of the
region in overcoming the technological gap from which
they suffer.

terms of time and place.

9. In termsof location, Israel considersall Arab
countries to be a target for its strikes, irrespective of

the distancethat separates
it from them.As for the
timingof its aggression,
Israelhasnofixed patternof
considerations
butfollowsanillusorylogicof fictitious
probabilities
whicharevoid of anyrationaleor proof.
Thisisevidentfromthe Israeliaggression
againstthe
Iraqi nuclear installation,

and growth, which rest upon proper

principlesof scienceandtechnology,for the purpose

despite the fact that the

installationis an enterprisewhich servespeaceful IS. That is the true nature of Israeli objectives and
purposes,
as is certifiedby the FrenchGovernment, goals, its method of violence and terroiism and its

which assists in its oaeration, and bv the International
Atomic Energy Age&y (IAEA), which is responsible
for the supervision of the installation by virtue of the

violation of freedom. One wonders if Israel would be
able to pursue its practices without the unconditional
political, economic, technological and military support
ihat it receives fiorn a num%er of States which-are
represented in the Council, es cially the Government
of the United States. Until t r is dav the Council has
been unable to impose any sanctidns against Israel,
despite its aggression Popinst the Arab States and
despito the fact that it has uprooted the Palestinian
people and left it homeless and despairing of international ]uiustiM.

fact that Iraq is a signatoryof theTreaty on the NonProliferationof NuclearWeapons [Gene& Assembly
2373 (XXII), annex].
Israel, it should be
noted, has reflrsed to sign that Treaty. The Council
should be very well aware of the seriousness of this
practice, which enables the Israeli Air Force to attack
any part of the region, and of what that entails in terms
af the Israeli determination to spread its influence over
the entire region, thus indicating tsrael’s ambition to
expand its borders from the Nils to the Euphrates, as
has been declared by various Zionist lead&.
resoluriun

16. There is no doubt that, had the Council imposed
the necessary sanctions against Israel in the past, it

wouldnot havebeenableto perseverein its various
IO. It is clear that Israel’sdefinitionof its security formsof aggression
againstthe sovereigntyof Leband bordersconstitutesa seriousthreat to the peace anon and its territorial
integrity in an attempt to
and securityof the region,because
sucha definition jeopardizethe unity of its people;nor wouldIsrael
neccssilates
the inevitable resort to uninterrupted havebeenableto threatenSyriaor resortto sabotdgaggression
andviolenceto solveany problemwhich ingthe development
effortsundertaken
by Iraq within
mayarise.The so-calledIsraelisecuritypolicy is not the context of internationallegitimacyover the past
defensivebut an aggressive
and expansionist
policy few years.
whichcontinuouslythreatensinternationalpeace.
11, In the light of this, Israeldoesnot at all desire 17. In the light of the foregoing,we can only
peace,unlessthe Statesof the regionbecomesub- concludethat Israelisanaggressive
State-aggressive
servient10its owndefinitionof peace,whichis based not accidentally,but throughplannmgandcontinued
upon violence and dominationand which utterly preparationfor aggression,
becauseit considersits
securityto be baseduponaggression.
disregards
the normsof internationallaw.
2

will thus reinforce in the minds of weak peoples the
conviction that the principles and rules embodied in
international charters are different from those of the
real world. There is no doubt that such a situation
would jeopardize the chances for mutual respect and
confidence among different peoples as well as the settlement of conflicts in various harts of the world.

18, In the face of those Israeli Practices. the superPowers and the great Powers have to shoulder iheir
responsibllitv with firmness because it is their duty to
utifize all nieans for the preservation of peace and
security in all regions of the world,
19. There is no other way to deter Israel from the
aggressive course it is pursiing but the adoption of the
necessary measures that are bound to put a limit to its
aggression. Israel is a Member of the United Nations
and must therefore respect the Charter and abide by
the rules of international law in accordance with which
the Organization was created and to which it owes its
existence.

25. We ask ourselves:how long will the United
Statescontinueto armIsraelwith advancedweapons,
expertiseand technology?How longwill the United
States continueto o&look the seriousexcesses
perpetrated
by Israel?How longwill the UnitedStates
continueto overlook Israelipracticeswhich aim at
violatingthe principlesof internationallaw and the
legitimaterightsof the peopleof the area?Wesayail
thisbecause
the UnitedStatesis a permanent
member
of the Councilandbecause
it is a super-Power
whose
responsibilityis the preservationof international
peace, not the encouragement
of aggressionand
destruction.We alsosay ail this becausethe United
Statescarriesthe bannerof freedomandpeace.We
thereforeaskourselves:arethe crimescommittedby
Israel in the regionconsistentwith the valuesand
principlesespoused
by the UnitedStates?

20. Will the Council merely condemn Israel this
time, knowing full well that Israel has always ridiculed
all kinds of condemnation and has behaved towards
the United Nations, which gave it its birth certificate,
w&.wpgance and disdain?
21. If we really respect our great international
Organizatlon and care for its credibility, we must
provide it with the necessary means that will enable it
to discharge its responsibilities. In the case under
discussion, it is in the interest of morality and
internationalpeace that the Council adopt a resolution
calling for the imposition of sanctions agalnst the
aggressor. Without such a resolution, Israel will
continue to violate internationalrulesandprinciples
and thus will rest assuredthat it will be neither
deterrednor nenaiized.

26. Our interestin maintaining
positiveco-operation
with all thecountriesof the worldandpreservingnonalignmentandindependence
leadsusto hopethat the
Council’sresolutions
will becredible,in ordernot to
promptthe beliefthat a violator of rightswill fmd a
sympatheticear in matterswhereit cannotappealto
reason or to ethicalprinciples,matterswhichpromote
the law of the jungle amongmembers
of the international community, a jungle in which the strongwill
do astheywishwithoutfearof deterrence
or penalty.

22. The exerciseof the right of veto againsta draft
resolutionimposingsanctionson lsraeiwill have a
negativeimpactuponworldpublicopinion,whichhas
coiidemnedin ai unprecedented
‘way the Israeli
auaression
againstthe lraai nuclearinstallation.The
l&iers of vaAouscountriedof theworldhavestrongly
condemnod
that aggression,
and so hasthe pressin
different parts of the world. International public

27. We appeal to the Council on the basis of our firm
belief that justice must govern relationsamongall
States great and small, distant and near, justice which
believes in the equelity of all States and holds that
thoseStatesexceleachotheronly to the degreethat
they respect international law and custom.

opinion will therefore be dismayed to see the aggressor
free to pursue its aggressive policies agaInat other
etions, in this case the Arab States.

28. The PRESlDENT (interprerarion
from Spanish):
The next weaker ir the rcwewntative of India,whom
I invite to t&e a place at tile Council table and to make
his statement.

23. Should any State cart it8 veto to tmvent the
adoption of such a resolution, the Arab pdopler will
undoubtedly be greatly shockedbecausethey still

believethai the united Nationsrepresentsthe conscienceof the international
communityandisa refuge
to which peace-lovingnationsturn.-Will, then, the
hopesof the Arab peoplebe frustrated,andwill the
aggressor
be giventhegreenlight to proceedwith its
actsof terrorismandpiracy?

29. Mr. KRISHNAN (India): Allow me to express
the gratitudeof my delegation
to you, Mr. President,
and the other members of the Security Council for
giving me an opportunity to address
theCouncilduring
its current deliberations on the Israeli military attack
on an Iraqi atomic reactor. The timely convening of
the Council to consider the grave situation arising out
of Israel’s aggression against Iraq cannot butenhance
our faith in the United Nations and encourage confidence in its determination to meet any threat to
international peace and security. We are particularly
happy that the Council has your leadership and
guidance, Mr. President, at this critical moment. Yom

24, Any objectionto the impositionof sanctions
will
in thisc&e be explainedby ihe Arab peopleandthe
peoples
of thethird worldasanact of biasin favour of
ihe‘aggressorfor reasonswhich can neither be
understoodnor justified, especiallysincethe Arab
right is crystal clear in this case. Should any State
exercise its veto power, which God forbid, the Council

3

32, India ha8 consistentlymaintained
8olidaEity
with
the Arab nations, which are constantly threatened by
Israel’s aggressive and expansionist policies. We have
repeatedly called for the withdrawal of Israel from the
Arab territories occupied eince1967,to facilitatethe
establishment of a Palestinian State andto guarantee
30. The Council ha8 met on innumerable earlier
the right of all States in the region to live in peace and
occasion8 t0 Consider the OXplO8iVe situation in Westharmony. Orr hopes for the estabiishment of durable
ern Asia created on account of the expansionist
peace in the region have once again been shattered by
policies and aggressive action8 of ISraOl. Israel ha8 80
Israel. Though acts of aggression by Israel have
f&r totally dieregarded the calls and urging8 as well as
become too frequent to cause shock or surprise, the
the condemnation8 and iflunctions emanating from the
very nature of the attack on Iraq’8 nuclear reactor ha8
Council and persisted in it8 intransigence towards it8
shaken the entire world. The wanton destruction of a
Arab neighbours, particularly the Palestinian people,
nuclear
facility established with the objective of
who have been denied even their fundamental right to
harnessing nuclear energy for peaceful purposes ha8
their own homeland. The latest Israeli act of aggresmade a mockery of accepted norms of international
sion, this time in the nature of a premeditated attack
conduct and behaviour.
on an Iraqi nuclear reactor in the outskirts of Baghdad,
war~committed at a time when the Arab countries in
33. The argument that Israel has advanced to justify
the region were engaged in a serious attempt to ward
it8 action8 is an allegation that Iraq was on the verge of
off war, even in the face of grave revocations. The
broducinn atomic weawns. That allegation is basecontinued occupation and annexat Pon of Arab terriie88; because Iraq has repeatedly stated that it8
torles and the increasing threat to the very existence of
programme in the nuclear tleld is confined to the
Lebanon had already brought Western Asia to the
utilixation of nuclear energy and technology for
brlnk of war. The naked and wanton aggression
peaceful purposee, On the other hand, the world is
against Iraq now perpetrated by Israel ha8 made the
aware that it is Israel which ha8 been making sys@ation
in Western Asia all the more precarious.
tematic efforts in the pursuit of nuclear-weapons
.capability. There is growing evidence to show that
Ierael may already have acquired such capability and a
31, It was with grave concern and a sense of deep
stockpile- of nuilear weaj)ons. Against that backindignation that my Clovemment learned of the attack
ground, surely the development of nuclear energy for
on the Osirak atomic reactor in Iraq by Israeli war
peaceful pu sea by Iraq cannot, by any stretch of
lane8 on 7 June. The Israeli action, whichis nothing the imaginat ‘p”on, be deemed to be a threat to Israel.
I-.ut stark adventurism and blatant intervention and
The sovereign right of a developing country to acquire
@gression, deserve8 universalcondemnation.
It i8 a
and develop nuclear technology for peacefbl pu1pos.08
flagmnt violation of all canons of international law and
cannot be denied or thwartedihrough
di8CritihiatOry
iinciples governing the conduct of relations between
policies and practice8 and much IO88 by such a
tales.
No
justification,
however
ingenious,
can
alter
13.
dastardly act of naked aggression as the one comthis IrrOfltable fact. To call the very victim of Israeli
mitted by IS&.
@@grOssionan aggnssor is indeed a sirange perversion.
To invoke the rieht to self-defence to justify a long34. The Council once again ha8 ample proof that
premeditated act-of aggression is a cynical attempt io
Israel alone is responsible for threntening place and
oonfnse the issue. To cite Article 51 of the Charter of
security in Western Asia. In fact, lsmel has already
the United Nations in support of this indefensible
committed breaches of the peace on several occasions,
@ion is a travesty of the very provisions of the
without any fear of punitive action by tho Unhod
Gluuter. That Israel should have sought to present
Nations. Entrusted as it is with tho maintenance of
&ah arguments is an &ont to the United Nations and
peace and security in tho world, the Council has the
the internationalcommunityas a whole. It demon- obligationto signalclearly to Israelthat the inter-

personal qMlltiO8 88 well a8 the standing that MOXiCO
eqjo 8 in the international community will, we are
con ir dent, have a deCi8iVe influence on the flecislons
of the Council.

stratesyet againIsrael’scallousdisregardof inter- nationalcommunitywill not tolerateitstransgressions
nltional taw and its arrogant defianceof world any more.We thereforejoin in the demandthat the
opinion.Thepresentactionof Israelis notan isolated Councilshouldnot only condemnthis act of Israeli
act of self-defence
to dealwith a specialsituation,as aggression
as a violation of the Charterand interIsraelhasalleged.Rather,it mustbeseenaspart of
&onal law but alsodeterminethat it constitutesa
what Israelhasbeendoingfor the pastmal?yyearsin grave threat to peaceandsecurity.The time is also
denyingthe rightsof the peopleof Palestmeandin now for the Councilto consider,as urgedby the
continuingto occupyArab lands,whichhasbeenthe Foreign Minister of Iraq, Mr. Hammadi,effective
causeof continuingtensions
andconflictin the region. actionunderChapterVII of the Charterto impose
Israelcannotensureits own securityby threatening mandatorysanctions
againstIsrael.
the securityof its Arabneighbours
or by thwartingthe
legitimaterightsof the Palestinians.
Indeed,its own 35. ThePRESIDENT(interprelnliorr ~ortl Spanish):
of Urazil. I
intransigence
andaggressive
actionsare the causeof The next speakeris the representative
instabilityin the regionandthe consequent
threatto invite him to takea placeat the Counciltableandto
makehisstatement.
peaceandsecurity.
4

tions of friendship and res ct with revolutionary
Cuba; Mexico, tPe homelan r of Jtiarez and Morelos,
through whose race the spirit of our Amdrica speaks.
I am convinced that, with your great qualities and
recognized skill, you will be able so steer the present
meetings of the Council to a successtil conclusion.

36, Mr, CORRfiA DA COSTA (Brazil): Mr, President, I should like at the outset to thank you and the
other members of the Security Council for having
given me the opportunity to address the Council and to
make a statement on behalf of my aovernment
expressing Brazil’s views on the military attack
against the Osirak nuclear reactor last Sunday,

44, The Council is meeting once again to consider an
act of flagrant aggression which endangers international wace and sect&. The barbarous air attack
by the Zlbnist r6gime against civilian Iraqi installations
on 7 June last is nothing but a typical act of State
terrorism, an action of international gangsterism,
which has been firmly condemned by the m&lo&y of
the vembers of the Organization.

37, Once again the Security Council is called upon to
consider a breach of the principles on which the
Organization is based. As a country which believes
that those principles constitute the essential bulwark
against chaos in relations among States, and as a
Member of the United Nations which has consistently
observed its obligations under the Charter, Brazil sees
it as its duty to join other Member States in a clear
ccmndemnation of the aggression suffered by Iraq.

45. To the unspeakable deed is added the unheard-of
brazenness with which the aggressor itself set about
divulgin the news and with which it attempted to
justify tie unjustfiable in this august forum, In the
name of “security”, the Zionist regime is trampling
the Inalienable rights of the Palestinian people and is
illegally occupying Arab territories. In the name of
“security”, it is massacring the population of southern
Lebanon, destroying property and homes. In the name
of “security” it is attacking the Arab nation and
bombarding Ira i nuclear research installations. Adolf
Hitler launched % is criminal hordes against the peoples
of Europe in the name of Iebensraum.
Zionists and
Nazis merge in their shabby arrogance, in their
messianic aggressiveness, in their brutal contempt for
the law of peoples and the international commuolty.

38, Brazil has always expressed its support of a
comprehensive, just and durable peace in the Middle
East, based on the principles of the Charter. By its act
ofaggression, Israel disregards its commitments under
the Charter and gravely increases tension in the
Mlddle East; in fact, its recent action renders the
prospects for peace in the region much dimmer than
t&y were before.
39. Brazil condemns an attack which is a flagrant
breach of International law and which shows a
dangerous preference for the use of force. The
notion-for one cannot call it a doctrine-of “oreventive aggr&sio~”
is unacceptable under thi legal
system which binds all nations. Toleration of that
n&ion would lead to the destruction of the Organization and to the foundering of any hope of coexistence
n$tong states.

46. The United Nations cannot allow one of its
Members to attempt to stand above international law
#nd the obligations imposed by the Charter of the
Qr@nkation on all !te Members. That is intolerable,
even when the offender has among its few allies a
permanent member of the Council.

40. A violation of the principles and purposes of the
Charter is damaaina to all the Members of the
Organization, andioionly to the immediate victims of
such a violation. It certainly is damaging to the author
@the violation, no matter how he may try to)urtg it.

47. Not content with tho defiant statements of his
Prima Minister, the representative of tha Zionist
i$gime yesterday [22LWth mrrffn 1 displayed unaziw
ii‘ cirm, attempting to portray fi imwlf as the chamg _. _oIdenuckuitaUonin theI&l& But, AMI, in the

II, The PRESIDENT (inlrrpretarlon from Spanish):
The next spcrLer is th& reprewntativo of Cuba, the
PWdent of the Co-ordinating Bureau of the Move&nt of Non-Alianed Countries. I invite him to take a
place at the Cou&il table and to make his statement.

sk.lfyythe

weapons-which,
of course, are possessed in the area
only by theZionistr&&e-which hasconvertedAsia

Minor into a true powder-keg,but preciselythe
expansionist
andaggressive
policiesof Israelandits
persistentrefusalto recognizethe legitimaterightsof
the Palesthdan
people.Or canhypocrisyhavescaled
greater heights,and did the representativeof the
Zionistreghnemeanto suggest
that a blitzkrieg,with
sophisticated
aircraft from the United States,is the
correctformulafor the creationof a nuclear-weaponfree zone in the Middle East?That would be denuclearizationtnanu nuXrari,like the illegaloccupation
of Arab andPalestinian
lands.

(Cuba)(interpretation
from
Mr. President,I shouldlike, first of all, to
thankyou andthe other members
of the Councilfor
this opportunityto speakduringthe debateon the
Israeliaggression
againsttheOsiraknuclearreactorin
Iraq.

42. Mr.
Spanish):

KOA

cauwr d the ton&n in that
. It ie not tho exieteneeof nueleu

KOURf

43. It isalsoagreatpleasure
for mcto greetyou, Sir,
asthe worthy representative
of Mexico, the country
in which Jose MartI feit himselfto be a “foreignerin privileges,but a Mexicanin duties”; the
country which has resistedthe pressures
from its
powerfulneighbourandhasalwaysmaintained
rela-

48. Fromthe point of view of the normsgoverning
the behaviourof Statesin the peacefuluseof nuclear
5

energy, the argument of the aggressors does not stand
up to the slightest scrutiny. The programmes for the
development of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes,
.as is well known, rule out, under rigorous supervision,
the use of atomic science for purposes opposed to
international peace and security. The word “safeguard” is permanently embodied in the language of the
United Nations.
49. -It is not by coincidence that the Board of
Governors of IAEA in Vienna unequivocally condemned the Zionist act of aggression against Iraq and
reiterated the right of all States to develop nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes [see S/145321. The
Director General, Sigvard Eklund, himself confirmed
that the Iraqi nuclear installations were covered by
the safeguards and guarantees of that international
Agency,
50. As if that were not enough, we have the presence
ofmore than a hundred scientists and technicians from
the country which provided the reactor, a responsible
permanent member of the Security Council, with all
that their presence implies in terms of additional
guarantees.
51. We believe, as has already been stated by a great
many Governments in expressing their condemnation
of the Zionist act of aggr&sion against Iraq, that this
abominable act highlights the vital need to reach
international agreements to prohibit attacks against
nuclear power stations, whose destruction can result
in massive loss of life and property.
52. My delegation, pending an emphatic reply from
the Council, wonders whether the United Nations is
willidg to allow the Zionist regime of Israel to violate
with impunity the cardinal principle of respect for the
sovereignty of States, to heighten dangers and tension
in the region and to threaten international peace and
security.
53. ln our view, only one reply can be expected from
the organ whose primary responsibility is precisely to
Match over peace and security around th; world:
unequivocal condemnation and the Laposition of
sanctions against this repeat offender. Any other
artifice or sorcery, any other acts of legal juggling or
attempts to justify the barbarous action would be
unworthy and inadmissible, since they would be
objectively endorsing the conduct of the aggressor.
54. In some circles we can already see clumsy
stammerings. shameful disclaimers. courtroom conjuring and political attempts to absolve the offender. It
would be hard for these so-called lawyers to prevent
the imposition of sanctions against an aggressor which
not only declares its guilt but threatens to commit new
and worse offences. Following the zigzag path of
Fascist logic, perhaps they will tell us, together with
Israel: “After all, they are not so bad; if the reactor
had been functioning, there would have been an

escape of radioactivity and the result would have been
even worse,”
55. This case cannot be considered in isolation. We
have heard the complaint by Iraq:12280th 1~1ertingl
-the incontrovertible evidence and arguments presented by Its Minister for Foreign Affairs. But our main
concern must be to make sure that we do not lose sight
of the wood for the trees.
56. The barbarous attack on 7 June cannot be
separated from the series of aggressive acts committed
by Israel against its Arab neighbours; nor can it be
dissociated from the overt support which it receives
from the Government of the United States of America
in pursuing its expansionist policy. Such hostile acts,
already of long date, have escalated to new levels of
intensity over recent weeks.
57. The Zionist regime of Israel, however much it
may displease the false prophets of neo.McCarthyism,
has formed a sinister binomial with the South African
apartheid regime to raise State terrorism to the level of
international policy. To restrict myself to only one of
the factors in this binomial, the aerial attack against
the Iraqi nuclear installations was, as we all k;low,
preceded by threats against Syria and by constant
terrorist activities conducted against Lebanon, as well
as in the occupied Arab territories.
58. How and why is this chain of piratical Zionist
activities possible? How and why is this sustained
adventuristic policy by the Zionist State feasible? Who
IS its guarantor? Who is encouraging and inciting it?
Who is the ventriloquist working the dummy?
59. None of this could have occurred just by itself.
Economic, political and demographic limitations, as
well as limited natural resources, would have erected a
barrier around the offender.
60. Israel’s gangster policy is a fact, and it continues
to scoff at the conscience of the world, solely and
exclusively as a result of the complicity. SU&VI.
encouragement and inspiration which the Zionist
tcglme receives from imperialist circles-in particular,
from the United States Government.
61. Ultra-modern military supplies, sophisticated
equipment-including
the aircraft which sowed destruction upon the Iraqi Osirdk nuclear research centre
-which threaten the sovereignty and territorial integrity of other neighbours in the region and snuff out
lives in Xrab cities and towns, bear the well-known
label “Made in the USA”.
62. Barely a week ago, the non-aligned movement,
meeting in extraordinary plenary session, wisely and
perceptively stressed the singular coincidence of
aggressive actions taking place in the Middle East
and in southern Africa. In the communiquC issued at
that time [S/14508, OWICX], the non-aligned countries

flagrant violation “of the principles of civilized conduct” among nations (S//45/1]. The statement called
this Israeli act of terrorism agahtst Iraq a continuation
of the brazen aggression which Israel has unleashed
against its Arab neighbours.

stressed that the common denominator in both cases
--Israel and South Africa-was
the modern and
sophisticated American armaments which Washington
was providing to its racist allies. A delegation from the
movement, with a mandate from the plenary session,
undertook to exnress that concern to the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations. On that same day, as-if
to heinhten the drama of the situation, Zionist aircraft
carried out their piratical act of aggression against
Iraq.

67. The Government of Pakistan condemned In the
strongest terms the unprovoked Israeli aggression
against Iraq and called upon the international corn
munity to take effective measures to prevent Israel
from threatening the peace and stability of its neighbours with impunity. The Government and people of
Pakistan declared their total solidarity with their Iraqi
brethren in the face of the Israeli aggression.

63. It is the bounden duty of the international
community, and of course of the Security Council in
the first instance, to put an immediate end to the
prevailing situation. The nowaligned movement has
consistently and clearly expressed its unlimited solidarity with the Palestinian resistance and with the
Arab peoples and countries of the region that are
facing Zionist aggression. At this time of challenge, of
uncertain dangers threatening peace and security
around the entire world, we reaffirm that solidarity
today and we call on the members of the Council
speedily to ado t measures compelling the arrogant
aggressor to yie Pd, to halt its vandalous acts and thus
contribute to the attainment of a iust and lastina Peace
in the Middle East, which would presuppose israel’s
complete withdrawal from occupied Palestinian and
Arab territories and full exercise of the inalienable
rights of the Arab people of Palestine, including its
return to its own homeland, self-determination and the
establishment of an Independent Palestinian State in
Palestine.

68. The Council is once again faced with a grave
violation of the Charter of the United Nations by
Israel, which deserves the strongest condemnation
and_ calls for an effective response from the Council.

69. The fallacy of the Israeli plea that the attack was
undertaken in self-defence was fully exposed by the
Iraqi Foreign Minister yesterday. The Israeli contention that the Iraqi nuclear reactor, which was part of
Iraa’s peaceful nuclear programme, posed a threat to
Israel is no more than aclumsy pretext to provide an
ex post Macro justification of its act of aggression. The
peaceful nature of the Iraqi nuclear programme is fully
evident from the report of the Director General of
IAEA and the resolution adopted by th& Board of
Governors of the Agency in the aftermath of the lsraeli
attack. Iraq fully subscribes to the Agency’s safeguards system and has been t\llfilling its obligations
64. The PRESIDENT (Interpreturionfionr
Spunlsh): under that arrangement. It is clear that the Israeli
The next sneaker is the representative of Pakistan,
attack on Iraqi nuclear facihties was part of the Israeli
scheme to keep its Arab nelghbours perpetually weak
whom 1 now invite to take a-place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
and technologically backward. In attempting to do so,
however, Israel is only pitting itself against the
65. Mr. AHMAD (Pakistan): Mr. President, on
irresistible advance of history.
behalf of the Pakistan delegation, 1 wish to express our
deep gratitude to you and to the other members of the
70. Israeli representatives are trying to justify
Security Council for providing us the opportunity of
Israel’s act of aggression against Iraq by invoking the
lcipating in this important meeting. I should also
principle of selfdefence, specially Article 51 of the
Charter of the United N&one. This cynical rppruach
lr c to express our warm felicitations to you, Sir, on
your rssumption of the presidency of the Council for
of Israel in arrogating to itself the fight to act
the month of June. We are happy to say that our two
wbitrariiy on the pretext of eelfdefence constitutes a
highly dangerous precedent that must be condemned
countries enjoy the most cordial relations of close
friendship and co-operation. We are confident that
in the strongest terms. Such an interpretation of
Article 5 I of The Charter is no less than a negation of
under your wise guidance the Council will be able to
take important decisions in carrying out its responthe United Nations itself, to which, ironically, Israel
owes its very existence. No State should be allowed to
sibility under the Charter with respect to international
peace and security, which have been gravely jeopartake the law into its own hands. Even when Member
States are facing a threat, it is imperative that they first
dized by the latest act of Israeli aggressin:r.
resort to the United Nations.
66. The Israeli attack on the Iraqi atomic reactor on
7 June has shocked the international community and
71. The Israeli attack against the Iraqi nuclear
installation has added a grave dimension to the conflict
has further aggravated the already explosive situation
in the Middle East. Commenting on this latest act of
in the Middle East. It seems that Israel wisnes to block
every avenue leading to a durable peace in the Middle
aggression by Israel, the Government of Pakistan
issued a statement on Y June describing the Israeli
East and is not inclined to terminate its continuing
attack on the Iraqi atomic reactor as “an unprecaggression against the Arab and Palestinian
edented act of international gangsterism’+ and a
people. Already. Israeli aggression has assumed
7

intolerable proportions. Israel has usurped and
occtmied the Arab and Palestinian lands. umootina
the fialestinian people from their ancient land ana
debrlvina them of their inalienable national riahts. It
hab repeatedly committed acts of aggression against
the Arab and Palestinian people and has contemp
tuously rejected the decisions and verdicts of the
international community. Israel in its arrogance has
now taken upon itself the launching of pre-emptive
strikes against its Arab neighbours in order to perpetuate its hegemony in the Middle East. The relentless Israeli aggression, unless firmly checked, will
inevitably lead to disastrous consequences for the
pcaceof-the entire region and, indeed, of the world,

of the system of international relations, and has further
exacerbated an already tense situation in the Middle
East. The world community, which has been following
with deep concern the actions of the Israeli militarists
in Lebanon, has received further confirmation of
Israel’s aggressive designs. Israel has once again
shown that in order to achieve its expansionist aims it
is ready to undertake any crimes against international
peace and security. This attack is one further step in a
long series of steps taken by Israel which have
elevated international terrorism to the status of State
policy,
78. As is said in a statement distributed by the
Bulgarian Telegraphic Agency, this is “a natural
consequence of the Camp David conspiracy, which
freed the hands of the extremist circles in Tel Aviv to
undertake further aggressive actions against those
Arab States that have reiected the aolicv of separate
deals and are striving to bring aboui a c6mprehensive
and lasting settlement of the Middle East problem”.
Tothe tactics whose essence is, by means of separate
negotiations, -to split thr united front of the Arab
States and peoples, in the interests of Israeli expansionism and in the service of the forces of reaction and
imperialism, there has now been added the method of
selective strlkes against individual Arab States.

72. The time has come for the Council to take
effective decisions to force Israel to terminate its
continuing aggression against the Arab and Palestinian
people and to respect international law and to desist
from taking the law into its own hands. Condemnation
alone will no! serve the purpose. The Council must act
firmly and should proceed to impose mandatory
sanctions under Chapter VII of the Charter. Only a
decisive and resolute response to the latest act of
premeditated Israeli aggression, can compel Israel to
see reason, abandon its arrogance and submit itself to
the dictates of peace. Firm action on the part of the
Council is also called for in order to reassert its
effectiveness as the primary international body responsible for the maintenance of in!emational pee@
and security.

79. There are no arguments or points that could
possibly justify this m&t arrant vioiation of the rules
of civilized intercourse among States. The so-called
security considerations that have been adduced are
rather dit&ult to square with the doctrine of so-called
spheres of vital interests. The philosophy of those two
doctrines has now been joined by the concept of the
8o+alledpre-emptive
strike.

73. The PRESIDENT (intrrpretution
from
Spanish): The next spea”-r is the representative of Bulgaria. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
at~I to make his statement.
14. -Mr. TSVETKOV (Bulgaria) ~Interprererlonfrom
I should first !ike to thank you, Mr. Pres.
ident, and all the other members of the Security
C(.r.ocil for giving my country the opportunity to take
pitIi In iile discussion of the item on the agenda. It is a
particular pleasure for me to see you, an eminent
representative of a country with which my own enjoys
close, friendly relations, occupying the responsible
@St of President. We are convinced that ufider your
skilful and wise leadership the work of the Council will
be successful.

86, There are no guarantees that this piratical raid
will not be repeated-and very soon at that. Indeed,
the aggressor has declared with unconcealed cynicism
that it is ready to repeat its criminal actions in the
future. Thus, all the States that are in the geographical
proximity of Israel and that lie within range of its
aircraB are now subject to the threat of a similar attack
@&tat their sovereignty and torritorial integrity.

Russiun):

$1. Ismel, its political and State leaders, and also the
Zionist lobbies in the States that are patrons of Israel,
have already
adopted a stance which can be characterized
as the arrogance
of power.
Along with that.
ridiculous
attempts
have been made to divert
the
attention
of world public opinion
from the facts of
this most flagrant,
lawless,
illegal, criminal
act by
adducing
arguments
connected
with considerations
of
preventing
the spread of nuclear weapons.

75. I should like to pay a sincere tribute also to yom
predecessor,
Mr. Masahiro
Nisibori,
who conducted
the Council’s
work last monlh.
76. World
public opinion
reacted with the t!tmost
indignation
Lo the news of Ihe criminal,
terrorist
act of
the ruling circles of Israel.
It is by no means an
exaggeration
to state that there has been practically
unanimous
condemnation
by the world of that act.
This is demonstrated
also by the present discussion
in
the Council.
77. Indeed,
international

thal act was in
law. It has affec;ed

82. In their attempts
to justify
their criminal
attack
by the use of arguments
about an alleged nuclem
threat, the Israeli aggressors-for
obvious
reasonshave passed over in silence the fact that the country
that was the victim of their attack is actually
a State
party to the Non-Proliferalion
Treaty and has allowed

flagrant
violation
of
the very foundations

8

all Its nuclear activities to be inspected by IAEA.
Indeed, It Is none other than the Israeli Ciovernment
which has so stubbornly refbsed to associate itself
wlth the existing system that 1s preventing the spread
of nuclear weapons, and has preserved its freedom
of--action-for the f\lrther development of nuclear
weapons. Moreover, the mass media and official
statements and documents published in certain countries have all made it clear for a long time that Israel
possesses nuclear weapons and the potential for
manufacturing them. It is a secret to no one that Israel
and the racist Pretoria rCgime have established the
closetposeible~co-operation
in the nuclear field.

peace and security and for this act of State terrorism
which is so dangerous for the stability of the Internatlonal situation, On the other hand, Israel’s actions
are one more stdklng confirmation of the truth that
United States policy, its strategy of separate settlement of the problems of tho Middle East without
taking account of the interests of all the interested
parties, amounts in practice to encouraging the expansionist designs of Israel.
87. An understanding is growing &Uwnd the world of
the fact that the Middle East problem can be resolved
only by means of a s cially convened International
conference on the Mi 8”dle East, with the participation
of all interested parties, in&-lhtg the Palestine Liberation Organization,

83. ~‘The hollowness and absurdity of the arguments
adduced by the aggressor and its supporters are a
fbrther example of how Israel and its protectors
attempt to mislead world public opinion. This is one
further piece of evidence of how deeply entrenched In
the-minds of Israel’s ruling circles is the prOfoUndly
fallacious idea that Israel’s security can be ensured
ottly by harming the security of &hers. That is a
m65oi1s thesis: it is harmful and it is doomed, even
from the standpoint of the genuine interests bf the
Isyll people Itself.

88. It is our view that, at this extremely crucial
moment for the cause of peace and security, it is more
@an ever necessary for the Security Council, upon
which the Charter has conferred special powers in
questions affecting the maintenance of international
peace and securtty, to come out tlrmly In favour of
adopting practical, effective measures which could
prevent a repetition of such aggressive actions in the
future.

84. l’he world community categorically repudiates
al-attempts on the part of Tel Aviv to justify its own
aggressive actions by unfounded allegations against
the victim of aggression and by attempts to represent it
as guilty of committing an act of aggression. To agree
with that kind of argumentation and approach would
meat! replaci~ng contemporary international law by the
lriw of the Jungle and would be tantamount to
p_qtnlvance at aggression. The aggressor must bear full
l%%&s!blllty under the Charter of the Uttited Ngtioss
&&aactt?
of -cdminal aggression.
;.m-~-.7- ---~
83, -bn the other hand, however, it WOUld be wrong
hprlno.le
if, In the circumstances, attention wer8 not
#hwn
10 to the respondbilit
borne in the resent
@~~@stanccr by Israel’s ma! n protector. #Ismel
itipiitinues on its course of dlsregardlng the will of the
@$d g-om&umlty, lf it continues its qgressive and
oy and itr acts Qf tmor ogdnrt it8
MH only oBab~~tboal4hotl
tho
United States, too, mwt boartheir
ity. Everyone knows that Irmel
would hardly have dared to undertake such an

89. The PRESIDENT(interpretation from Spanish):
The next swaker is Mr. Chedli Klibi. the SecretarvOcncml ifilie
Iiague
if Arab btates; 1Invite him io
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
90. Mr. KLIBI (interpretation from French): Allow
me first of all to join the heads of delegations who have
already aid a tribute to the authority which you,
Mr. I%esPdent, have and continue to show in conduotlng tho work of the
also to say how much the quali
sor, the representative of Japan, havo
preciated, since the echoes of the esteem in wM:hghq;
was held have reached us.
91. 1 am keenly awore of the honour that you,
Mr. President. have ahown mo by allowing the Secret&e@onoti.Qf
the
QfArabslatorto8poak
heteintheC!ounclIfor L”x” clrsttimo.IshouMukoto
expresr my deep appreciati
for that.

irresponsible
provocativeactionif it hadnotbeensure 92. The questionbefore the Council is one of
that its principalarms supplierwould in practice exceptionalgravity. Peaceis in dangerin a region
continueto supportit. And nothingis changed
by the which today is the mostsensitivein the world. An
fact that in wordsthey have condemned
Israeland Iraqi scientificresearchfacility-indeed, a nuclear
haveeventhreatened it with a postponement
of the reactor-has beendestroyedand humanlives have
deliveryof newoffensiveequipment.
Everyoneknows beenlost. That, we are told, wasdone“cleanly and
that itI thiscaseaircraftof UnitedStatesmanufacture effectively” [228&kmeeting, pura. 591.
werenot usedeitherfor so-calledself-def-ce or fol
so-calledmaintenance
of internalorder-+. course, 93. In spiteof all the pretextswhichhavebeenput
thosetwo categories
includeactionscarriedout more forward,despitetheinitialandthelatestjustifications,
Israelis guilty bevonda shadowof doubt.
than 1,000kilometres
from Israel’sborders.
86. It is quite obviousthat the UnitedStates,too, 94. We haveheardtalk of self-defence;
but whenone
bearsresponsibilityfor the crimecommittedagainst looksinto that argumentone realizesthat it is an
9

have never been made clear; nor have Its frontiers,
which Israel still refuses to define and which it would
prefer to extend from the Nile to the Euphrates, and
B&dad is on the Euphrates,

unfounded imputation of intent, Between building a
nuclear reactor, on the one hand, and, on the other,
+,&g it to produce nuclear weapon8 and u8e them
against Israel, b0injj prepared in 80 doing to ma88aor8,
along with Israelis, those Arab8 who live in Israel, in
the occupied territories and even in the neighbouring
countries of the region, which would inevitably be
contaminated by the radiation, owing to the smallness
of Israeli territory-between
those two action8 there is
a distance which only men hard put to it for argumants
did not hesitate to cro88.

.98. For the Zionist State, defence is attack. So-called
proventive attack8 aro only a eubtolfuge to impose
domination and hegemony. In that area the Israeli
arauments are Presented as being the only valid one8,
thG.only ones ihat are credible,-whoreag those of its
advereary-evon
if justified, evident, tangible and
indeed &ring you in the face-are alwaysnull and
void.

95, Therefore this is a fallacious argument and the
argument of self-defence cannot be supported, Rabbi
Balfour Bricknor know that when, according to The
New York Timesof 12 June 1981, he said: “NO nation
can arbitrarily thumb it8 nose at the world, destroying
what It parcoivos a8 a throat to its socurlty,”

99. Tho head of the Israeli Government, drunk with
joy after the attack on Baghdad and the destruction of
the Iraqi rO8eaICh centre, ha8 attempted to teach
“moral leseons”, to ~80 hi8 own term, to the State8 of
Western Europe, including France, the France of
Prssident Mitterand, whose election he welcomed and
acclaimed. Invective, sarcasm, in8uk-overybody
comes in for hi8 share: the Germen Chancellor. Italian
Doliticians. the United States Secretary of Dofenso,
&td so on..

%, The flight of supersonic aircrrd, which violated
the airspace of two countrios before bombing the
territory of a third: the massacre of a large number of
Worker8 and technicians; the destruction of a tochnologlcal!y sophisticated installation-this
cold.bloodod
crime, which was committed “deliberately”,
a8 has
been rocognizod, was not, lot there be no mistake,
conceived solely in terms of electoral interests. The
explanation is to be found in the French newspaper
Le Monde of 10 June. An article by Charles Saint.Prot
States:
L1* I * one may wonder why the State of Israel took
such a risk, carrying out an action that ha8 earned it
the condemnation of the entire international corn.

100. Israel’s arrogance and irresponsibility are such
today that no country in the area can feel secure or,
in oiher words, safe iroom an Israeli attack, concerned
as Israel is with preventing the Arab nation from
advancing along the road of tOChnOlOgy and progrees.
101. Some, in Europe and elsewhere, in 1977 and
recently, had in good faith thought that the Camp
David -&cords, by markadly redIicing the weight df
IstBCl’8 adversaries, would roa88urc Israel and lead it
to a mon balanced view of the Arabs. They have had
to think again. Contra
to their expectation, I8raOl
has become embPldono 7 . It think8 it can do anything.
In Lebanon it ie sowing division, dostabilizing, machlneg,umin~ and bombing. And when attompts am
made throua ap ropriate dOtOtrent8 to provont it from
continuing to vi0 Pate LOban
airspace, it throatens to
declare wiv on Syria.

pni!ya

“Indood, Israel ha8 dovoloped a nuclear bomb in
.tho Wo8ev and ha8 rofbsod to si8n the NoHrollfora.
tlon Treaty. It wishod to halt the tachnololjical
~a;lcJpmOnt of it8 main adversary in the Middle
Tho artlclo #oO8 on to 8totO:
“Irrael could dominate the re&ion only with the
udot~~~ of Wostom technoIo(v, in particdu that
of the United Stata8, and it has a vert0d intemst in
seeing the Arab8 remain undordovoloped.”
The article

102. Israel claims-we
heard this yesterday-that
oiitc4 * dortructh
of Oshnktho mulon has becomo
l@s dan@mur and the situation is lass thmrtenins.
But less threateblng to whom? Certainly not to tho
Arabs, who are threatened with the bombing of their

continues:

“The
Iraqi research
centre
must comprise
more
than 500 Arab engineers
and technicians.
Therein
lies what Israel wanted
to prevent-as
though
it
were possible to prevent the scientific take-off
of an
entire people!”
-

towns
and the destruction
of their technological
potential.
And these are not empty threats.
Not only
does Israel possess warplanes
that can commit aggrcssion against any Ar+ city, aggression
that has ahXddy
been clearly and publicly announced
by the head of the
Israeli Government;
it also possesses nuclear weapons
-everything
points to this.

97. The Council may be sure that Israel was in no
way concerned
with defence objectives
or the preservation of security.
The notion of security,
Israel’s old
war-horse,
can be expanded
in terms of space, and not
merely
in terms of airspace.
Its geographical
limits

103. Israel’s nuclear reactors,
which it has possessed
since the 19SOs, are not open to international
inspection, because Israel has nbt yet acceded to the tionProliferation
Treaty.
But what cannot fail to disturb us
considerably
is that, while a few American
experts
10

wereable to visit that reactorin the l%Os, thosevisits
have not been permitted for the last 10 years.
104, Is Israel ready to authorise a visit of inspection
from IAEA? If it refuses,it shouldjustify its decision
before the international community. Let it saywhat it
is hiding in that centre and why it is hiding it,

112. Sanctions have been called for in the Council.
Measures have been proposed. The Council cannot
shlrk its duty: world peace is at stake, All the hot
points which scornto threaten that world peace have
cooled down, with one exception: the Middle East.
The objective elements of a confrontation which could
lead to armed conflict are liable, over the short term,
to be found there in combination.

105. And why should we not ask that country, which
justifies its aggressionand denies the right of othersto 113, In the faceof this situation, the Council of the
manufacture nuclear bombs, whether it possesses League of Arab States, meeting in extraordinary
nuclear weaponsand how long it has possessedthem? sessionat Baghdadon 11June, vigorously condemned
Would it bc ready to answerthat double question7
the Israeli aggression. It al80 aRirmcd the absolute
right of the Arab States to establish programmes of
106. In actual fact, there is quite a col;&rastbetween technological and nuclear development. The Council
Israel’s conduct and that of Iraq. Israel has long none the loss decided to work through the United
entertained thoughtsabout the nuclearoption. In 1976, Nations and to trust In It, becauseof its devotion to the
before the Osirak plan, Moshe Dayan, who is no Charter [S/14529,annex],
stranger to this, stated that Israel must have the
nuclear option to counterbalancethe numerical supe- 114, The unanimous determination of 21 Arab
riority of the Arabs.
States,expressedb the Leagueof Arab States,is that
political options sf;ould bc exhausted. It is those
107, That is the situation. It is Israel which 30 years optlons which the Arab States would prefer, anxious
ago beganthe nuclear competition in the area. In 1974, as they are to ensure peacein the region.
the then head of the Israeli Government claimed that
Israel possesseda nuclear potential-that is. the 115. If the Arab States have had recourse to the
capacity to manufacture the bomb. Those arc the Security Council, it is out of necessitya8 well as of
facts.
conviction, It is also bccauscthey want to conduct
thcmsclvesrceponsibly v/s-d& the rcat of the world.
108. We are told that Israel claims the riaht to That Bettaoof responsibility is something they have
survival. But what has Israel done to ens& the proved and they expect that others will follow suit.
oossibilitv of survival for the Palestinian peoale. which
‘hasbeedcondcmned to exile, doomed-to iif; in the 116. The act of aggrcseionby Israel is a flagrant one
refugeecamps, stripped of its country and its identity, and it is indefensible. Self-defencecannot bc U8Cdas
deprived of its most elementary rights?
a lcgltimatc explanation, WhiIe olalmlng to bc pro.
vonti the Arabs from po88cssingnuclear woapona,
109. As is cvidcnt, the Israeli danger is not just a IurpdlT aanot donicd it8clf posssaeion,thinking thus to
mcrc slogan. It is a reality that is rcasacrtcdmore counterbalancethe numorlcal superiority of tho Arabs.
strongly with every pa88ingday. At the present time,
no country in the rcgIon is free from the throat, and 117. For th0 AI&~, the uw Of nuclcu weapons
tomorrow no Arab country, from the Clulf to the
nat @or difflcultier and preaonts
Atlantic, no Muslim country maybe, and no AfHcan E%u::
rla
‘ff’ 8, bccauw wlthin a radiur of IO0 kl.
country will feel exempt from attack8 by Irracl, unlctr hmotforthedBmageandloarofhumanluowouldba
the international community da8 8Omcthing to -.
mmcdy the riturtlon.
118, Ths klcr of Itnel 18thomforc to Werltsn the
110. mat State, which is stlll back in the days of Arabs
becauseit is convinced-and here I am quoting
colonialism in its thinking, its racial segregationand
Meir-that the securityof Israelresidesin the
religious intolerance, but which happens to possess Golda
weakness
of the Arabs.
the most sophisticated weapons, which it is using in
the service of the mentality of an earlier age-that
State is dangerous. and we must be on our guard
against it.

I I I. More than once United Nations bodies,
including the Security Council, have condemned acts
of aggression by Israel and have bidden it to comply
with international law, which it is always obviously
determined to flout. But all those decisions and
resolutions have remained a dead letter.

119. Israelwantsto delaythetechnological
progress
of the Arabs,whichis the guarantee
of their independcnceandof their invuhlerability.
120. Its aggression
is thereforeundeniable.It calls
for the measures
which have beenproposedto the
members
of the SecurityCouncil.
T/w rneetittg rose at 1 pm.
