United Nations

S/PV.6341

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6341st meeting
Wednesday, 16 June 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Cantellano/Mr. Heller/Mr. Puente . . . . . . . . .

(Mexico)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Barbalić
Mr. Moretti
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Araud
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet
Mr. Takasu
Ms. Ziade
Mr. Lolo
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Children and armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/181)
Letter dated 15 June 2010 from the Permanent Representative of Mexico to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2010/314)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-40745 (E)

*1040745*

S/PV.6341

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Children and armed conflict

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting in accordance with the rules
of procedure and the previous practice in this regard.

Report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/181)

There being no objection, it is so decided.

Letter dated 15 June 2010 from the Permanent
Representative of Mexico to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2010/314)

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend invitations under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict; Mr. Atul Khare, Assistant Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations; Ms. Hilde Frafjord
Johnson, Deputy Executive Director of the United
Nations Children’s Fund; and Ms. Manju Gurung.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Afghanistan, Argentina,
Australia, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Finland, Georgia,
Germany, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Israel, Italy,
Kazakhstan, Liechtenstein, Myanmar, Nepal, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Pakistan, Peru, Qatar, the
Republic of Korea, Sierra Leone, Slovenia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Switzerland, Thailand, Viet Nam
and Yemen, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the consideration of the
item, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
11 June 2010 from the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations, has been issued as
document S/2010/316 and which reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in and be inscribed on the list of speakers for he
meeting of the Security Council that will be held

2

on Wednesday, 16 June 2010, in connection with
the item ‘Children and armed conflict’.”

It is so decided.
I should like also to inform the Council that I
have received a letter from His Excellency Mr. Pedro
Serrano, in which he requests to be invited, in his
capacity as acting head of the delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate in
the consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Pedro Serrano.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Serrano to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2010/181, containing the report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict, and
document S/2010/314, containing a letter dated 15 June
2010 from the Permanent Representative of Mexico to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General,
transmitting a concept paper on the item under
consideration.
Let me say that it is a great honour for me, as
Secretary of Foreign Affairs of Mexico, to be here

10-40745

S/PV.6341

today to preside over this special meeting of the
Security Council on this topic of particular importance
to us all. I take this opportunity to thank all members
of the Security Council for the support they have
extended to Mexico throughout its participation in the
work of the Council and particularly in the course of its
presidency this month.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Mr. Atul
Khare, Ms. Hilde Frafjord Johnson and Ms. Manju
Gurung.
I shall now give the floor to Ms. Coomaraswamy.
Ms. Coomaraswamy: I wish once again to thank
the Government of Mexico for presiding over this
important debate on children and armed conflict. Your
presence here today, Madame Minister, elevates the
discussion and your words provide a framework for the
serious deliberations that must follow.
Since the last report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict (S/2009/158), we have had
some measurable progress in important areas. The
Security Council adopted resolution 1882 (2009),
which now makes sexual violence against children and
the killing and maiming of children contrary to
international law grounds for listing in the annexes of
the Secretary-General’s report. This naming and
shaming exercise, along with the possibility of
sanctions against persistent violators, has persuaded
parties to cease their reprehensible behaviour and
should deter others from future offences. The collective
voice of the Council, guided by the common moral
compunction of humanity to protect its children, must
be used to make outcasts of those who commit
unspeakable acts against children in war.
I cannot emphasize enough how important this is.
Just two weeks ago, I was in Gulu, Uganda, where I
met with a girl named Agnes who had just escaped
from the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA). She fled with
a baby born of rape, fearing for her life and that of her
infant child as the LRA splintered and regrouped
across the region. She could hardly express herself.
Years of abuse had broken her spirit. We cannot ignore
Agnes or those like her. The Council’s decision to
make sexual violence and the killing and maiming of
children grounds for listing by the Secretary-General is
the first step in the right direction.

10-40745

The Council’s decision to expand the triggers
requires that we further develop our methodologies and
practices to collect reliable information and to guide
the field with regard to action plans. For the past few
months, my Office has been working with Ms. Patricia
Sellers, whose extensive experience with both the
International Criminal Tribunals for Yugoslavia and
Rwanda has brought new momentum to the discussions
on action plans. In close consultation with our United
Nations partners, she is developing templates for action
plans on the killing and maiming of children and on
sexual violence against children. I am glad to say that
she is finalizing guidance to the field on resolution
1882 (2009), which will enhance the monitoring and
reporting on the two triggers. With regard to sexual
violence in particular, I welcome the appointment of
Ms. Margot Wallström, the new Special Representative
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and I am pleased to
report that we are already working very closely and are
looking into common strategies. I look forward to a
fruitful collaboration.
Parties listed in the Secretary-General’s report
can be de-listed if they enter into an action plan with
the United Nations We have also had marked successes
with regard to the formulation of action plans required
by the Security Council. Within the framework of such
an action plan, the Maoist party in Nepal released
almost 3,000 minors in an extraordinary process in
which the whole United Nations worked together as
one. My office, the United Nations Mission in Nepal,
UNICEF, the United Nations Development Programme
and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, as well as their
national partners, worked very closely together to
secure the agreement and implement the terms of the
release.
It was an important moment for the United
Nations in Nepal. Children were identified, registered
and sent home. At the moment, our child protection
partners are tracking these boys and girls in their home
villages to ensure that they are included in the
reintegration process. Later this morning, the Council
will hear from Manju, a Nepali girl who was taken by
the Maoist forces at the age of 13 and remained with
them for two years. Since her release, she has rebuilt
her life and is a model for other children. Manju has
travelled a long way to share her story with us so that
her experience will not be repeated in any part of the
world.

3

S/PV.6341

The Moro Islamic Liberation Front from the
Philippines has also entered into an action plan with
the United Nations. The terms have been agreed and
activities outlined. Our main challenge now is to assist
in the reintegration of these children. Unless we
provide the United Nations in the Philippines with
assistance to secure schooling or livelihood training,
they will either be re-recruited or tempted by other,
less peaceful avenues. It is crucial that the international
community step up to the plate and give these children
a real future. I appeal to all Member States represented
here to support the reintegration process. I also call
upon the ceasefire mechanism in place in Mindanao to
include the monitoring of child rights violations in its
mandated activities.
In the Sudan, there have also been some
successes. In the past month, we have moved forward
on commitments by the Sudan Liberation Army/Free
Will and the Sudan Liberation Army/Abu Gasim from
Darfur to release children and to give unhindered
access to the United Nations for verification purposes.
The ceasefire agreement between the Liberation and
Justice Movement and the Government of the Sudan
includes specific key provisions for the release of
children and is reflective of the priority and
commitment to children on the side of the parties. I
urge that all subsequent ceasefire or peace agreements
include provisions for child protection. The Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement/Army has also entered
into an action plan for the release of children
associated with their forces this year. Again, child
protection partners have the responsibility to make this
reintegration a success.
Despite these successes, many challenges remain.
In the report before the Council (S/2010/181), the
Secretary-General has highlighted a list of the most
persistent violators who have been on the annexes of
his reports for a minimum of five years. As the
Secretary-General’s independent voice for children
affected by armed conflict, it is my duty to persuade
this body to move forward on taking action against
these violators. In this regard, resolution 1882 (2009)
calls for closer cooperation among sanctions
committees of the Council. The Sanctions Committee
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo had the
foresight to include crimes against children as grounds
for listing, and I urge other sanctions committees to
also consider the same. I had the honour of addressing
the Democratic Republic of the Congo Committee and

4

to thank its members for the fair hearing they gave to
our recommendations. I look forward to deeper
engagement with other relevant sanctions committees.
That being said, we would also need to move
forward to devise appropriate mechanisms to deal with
the large number of parties listed in the SecretaryGeneral’s annexes that are not covered by sanctions
committees. I hope that the Council will sharpen its
focus on this issue so that perpetrators do not sense
reluctance on the part of the Council to hold them fully
accountable. After all these noble efforts by this body,
the Security Council should not be perceived to be part
of the cycle of impunity.
Many parties have been listed in the SecretaryGeneral’s reports for recruiting and using children,
committing sexual violence against children, and
killing and maiming children. The vast majority are
non-State actors, who need to enter into action plans
with the United Nations to be de-listed. We urge
Governments to endorse this process in the best
interest of the children as a humanitarian imperative
towards saving children’s lives. Without access to
dialogue with non-State actors on action plans, the
chances of securing the release of children is very slim.
In recent times, new issues have also emerged
with regard to children and armed conflict. The first is
the ever-increasing pattern of attacks on schools. This
has become a very disturbing phenomenon that
requires urgent attention. The United Nations system
has always argued that children and schools should be
zones of peace. Instead, schools themselves are
increasingly being targeted. The classroom, once a
sacred space, has become a place of fear. It is
important that we respond to this crisis effectively,
working with local communities so that children,
especially girls, are not placed at risk and are not
denied their right to education during or after conflict.
We are also discovering that more and more
children are being used for military intelligence
purposes by different armed forces and groups around
the world. Recently, we have been engaged in bilateral
advocacy against this practice in a number of
situations. Children should be handed over to child
protection institutions and partners within 48 hours of
their capture. This is extremely important. Placing
them at risk or subjecting them to prolonged
interrogation will only make it more difficult for their
proper reintegration into their communities.

10-40745

S/PV.6341

We are increasingly concerned about the
changing nature of warfare in different parts of the
world and the difficult challenges it poses for child
protection partners. In some wars, we find children
being used as suicide bombers; there were seven such
cases in Afghanistan and several in Iraq in 2009.
Attacks on schools and denial of humanitarian access,
where the neutrality of humanitarian actors is not
respected, are also posing major dilemmas. We are just
starting to fully explore how we should deal with such
phenomena. We do not as yet have the answers.
Counterinsurgency also poses its own set of
difficulties. The number of children being killed in
aerial bombardments and drone strikes is a matter of
great concern. I had the opportunity to meet General
McChrystal, the commander of the international forces
in Afghanistan, who reassured me that the protection of
civilians is an important part of military strategy in
Afghanistan and explained the measures taken to
minimize civilian casualties. Nevertheless, children
continue to die, and in 2009 137 Afghan children were
killed by aerial bombardment alone. We do commend
the steps taken recently in this regard, but would like to
impress upon all actors that vigilance is necessary and
that the killing of children must be avoided at all cost.
Finally, it is 10 years since the Optional Protocol
on the involvement of children in armed conflict was
adopted. My office, along with our partners, UNICEF
and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, has begun the “Zero
Under Eighteen” campaign for the universal
ratification of the Protocol. I will be knocking on the
doors of those who have not signed and ratified, and
encouraging those who have ratified to speak to their
neighbours. Universal ratification signifies an
international moral consensus — a consensus that is
necessary to give further strength to laws and norms
protecting children from unlawful recruitment.
In my work with this Council, I have been
encouraged by the political will to reach consensus on
issues relating to children. It is this consensus that
empowers and emboldens us, both in the field and at
Headquarters, to work with heart and spirit for the
protection of children.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Coomaraswamy for her statement and for the
information she has given us, and I appreciate the work

10-40745

she is doing. We encourage her to continue moving
forward with the same dedication and enthusiasm.
I now give the floor to Mr. Atul Khare.
Mr. Khare: I thank you, Madame, for inviting
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to
participate in this important debate. It is a great honour
for me to address the Security Council on the critical
issue of the protection of children affected by armed
conflict.
The adoption of resolution 1261 (1999) placed
the protection of children firmly on the peace and
security agenda. With a total of seven Security Council
resolutions, the issue of children and armed conflict is
undoubtedly one in which the Security Council has
invested deeply in the past decade. Nonetheless,
children continue to be victimized in conflict situations
around the world, and our sustained engagement is
required on this vital issue. In that regard, for the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the inclusion
of specific child protection provisions in the mandates
of peacekeeping operations and the related deployment
of child protection advisers to peacekeeping operations
have helped us to follow up on the implementation of
key aspects of Security Council resolutions on children
and armed conflict.
In collaboration with the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and UNICEF, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations has continued to strengthen
its activities to protect children affected by conflict in
the countries where peacekeeping missions are
deployed. Today, we have child protection advisers in
nine peacekeeping operations. In the past year, we have
established a focal point in the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon, and efforts are under way to
strengthen our child protection presence in Afghanistan
with the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan.
The child protection advisers have continued to
contribute directly to the missions’ priority-setting and
policy formulation and are working to ensure that
concerns related to children affected by conflict are
adequately addressed throughout our activities by
promoting mainstreaming, monitoring and reporting,
training and advocacy. We believe that it is crucial to
strengthen the deployment of child protection advisers
wherever children are significantly affected by conflict.

5

S/PV.6341

At the political level in the field, peacekeeping
missions are engaging in dialogue with parties to
conflicts towards the preparation of action plans to end
and address the grave violations committed against
children affected by armed conflict. We are also
following up on commitments obtained by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict during her high-level visits and
advocacy missions. This priority activity is undertaken
hand in hand with UNICEF and other members of the
United Nations task forces on monitoring and reporting
at the country level.
Alongside other child protection actors, we have
registered significant progress in this regard. In April,
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) reported that the Sudan Liberation
Army/Abu Gasim had issued a command order,
prohibiting the recruitment, mobilization and use of
child soldiers. This followed a meeting between
UNAMID, UNICEF and the armed group to discuss the
development of actions plans, following a commitment
issued by the group to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General during her visit to the Sudan in
November 2009.
Efforts continue to reach out to armed groups for
commitment and implementation of action plans to end
the recruitment and use of child soldiers and other
grave violations committed against children. Yesterday,
15 June, the Sudan Liberation Army/Free Will also
made commitments to end the recruitment and use of
child soldiers, and issued a command order to that
effect. In Chad last week, Governments of the region,
including those of Chad, Cameroon, the Central
African Republic, Niger, Nigeria and the Sudan, signed
the N’Djamena Declaration, stressing the need to end
the recruitment and use of children by armed forces.
At the operational level, monitoring and reporting
on grave violations committed against children are an
ongoing priority. Today, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations co-chairs five monitoring and
reporting mechanisms of country-level task forces. We
attach great importance to the monitoring and reporting
mechanism process, which is pivotal to promoting
accountability for violations committed against
children and strengthening the overall response to the
needs of children in conflict situations.
With the recent adoption of resolution 1882
(2009), we are working to improve the collection of

6

accurate, timely and verified information by leveraging
other monitoring capacities and resources within
peacekeeping operations. Most importantly, we are
exploring ways of improving our reporting on sexual
violence committed against children, in close
collaboration with all key monitoring and reporting
mechanism partners in the light of resolution 1888
(2009) on sexual violence in armed conflict.
We are also investing heavily in providing
training on child protection and child rights for all of
our peacekeepers, as required by the Security Council.
Training is one of the most important tools for creating
awareness of the impact of armed conflict on children,
the standards that govern child protection, and the role
that each peacekeeper can play in protecting children.
Last year alone, over 8,500 peacekeeping personnel
received training on child protection in four
peacekeeping missions. Over 66 per cent of those
trained were military personnel, and another 26 per
cent were police personnel.
In the Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire and Haiti, our advisers are
reporting that the training has resulted in a heightened
awareness of key child protection issues among the
military and the police, and yielded specific
interventions for the benefit of children. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, our military
observers trained in child protection are working in
close collaboration with our child protection teams and
human rights components to provide critical
information on the situation of children in remote and
inaccessible areas. In Haiti, the military personnel of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti are
currently developing their own guidelines on child
protection with the support of our child protection
team. In Southern Sudan, the United Nations Mission
in the Sudan has provided support to the local police in
establishing specific women’s and children’s desks and
offering training to them, jointly with our child
protection teams.
Recognizing the importance of providing training
for all peacekeeping personnel on child protection, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations is partnering
with UNICEF, with the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
Affected by Armed Conflict and with Save the
Children Sweden in an initiative aimed at reviewing
and standardizing our training materials and

10-40745

S/PV.6341

strengthening pre-deployment and in-mission training
to extend our overall reach and cover.
At the strategic and policy level, in June last year
the Department adopted a system-wide policy on
mainstreaming the protection of children affected by
armed conflict into the work of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. That policy underscores the
important role that the special representatives of the
Secretary-General must play in promoting the rights
and concerns of children affected by armed conflict
and in ensuring effective and systematic follow-up to
Security Council resolutions on children and armed
conflict. That policy is our highest-level commitment
to the protection of children in armed conflict, and we
are working towards the development of an
implementation plan that will provide the necessary
operational guidance for our teams on the ground.
The Department recognizes the importance of
coordinating closely with other operational actors,
especially UNICEF and the Office of the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict, and
we have prioritized the strengthening and structuring
our partnerships with those key actors as part of our
delivery on child protection. At both Headquarters and
the field level, the Department will continue to develop
protection strategies with UNICEF and relevant child
protection agencies and with our partners in the United
Nations country team, building on the comparative
advantages of each actor.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our
unwavering commitment to the protection of children
in conflict situations, being fully aware that it is only
by our collective and concerted engagement at all
levels that we can secure real protection for children
affected by war. As always, we continue to look to the
Security Council for specific mandates, leadership,
guidance and support.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Khare for the very important information he has
given us today.
I now give the floor to Ms. Hilde Frafjord
Johnson, Deputy Executive Director of the United
Nations Children’s Fund.
Ms. Johnson: Children affected by armed
conflict deserve protection. Not only that, they have
the right to be protected from all violations of their
rights. The Security Council has shown courage in

10-40745

leading international efforts to end grave violations
against children in armed conflict. We truly appreciate
that.
On behalf of UNICEF, I would also like to thank
Mexico for its exceptional leadership in driving this
agenda forward in the Security Council. Without
Mexico’s support and dedication and that of the
Secretary-General’s
Special
Representative
for
Children
and
Armed
Conflict,
Radhika
Coomaraswamy, progress we have seen in recent years
would not have been possible. And with your continued
commitment and determination, Madam President, and
that of all Council members, we may have the
opportunity to end grave violations against children in
armed conflict.
We must never forget what is at stake. Last year, I
visited a major demobilization centre operated by the
armed forces in Chad. The boys were still in combat
uniform when I met them. Their stories were
horrific — they had witnessed brutal attacks on their
homes and families; they had seen their houses burnt,
their livelihoods destroyed. The boys had been forced
to join rebel groups. When I asked them about their
hopes for the future, all ten had one singular, uniform
ambition: education. They wanted to go to school. That
was the key to their future.
We cannot ignore their stories or deny them the
fulfilment of their dreams. That is within our collective
reach, but it will require sustained engagement at the
highest possible level, stronger partnerships and robust
delivery in the field. Together we can report on
violations and identify violators. We can take action to
ensure compliance with Security Council provisions,
and we can protect and assist those that are the most
vulnerable: children.
The past year has been marked by notable
progress. Action plans to end child recruitment have
been signed by parties to conflict in the Philippines,
Nepal and the Sudan. Thousands of children have been
released from armed groups and armed forces. In 2009,
a little over 9,500 children were removed from armed
groups and armed forces in countries implementing the
monitoring and reporting mechanism. However, that
number does not include the almost 3,000 children who
were released in Nepal — which the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General has just
referred to — in January and February this year. It does
include 5,900 children in the Democratic Republic of

7

S/PV.6341

the Congo and 1,400 children in the Sudan who have
now embarked on the long and challenging process of
reintegration with their families and communities.
These numbers tell a compelling story: Security
Council resolutions 1539 (2004) and 1612 (2005)
work. They are making a real difference in children’s
lives. Now we need to take our collective efforts one
step further — not a small step, but a major one. We
need to make change happen in the lives of many more
children, as the Special Representative just highlighted
in her statement.
Security Council resolution 1882 (2009) was a
formidable breakthrough. The vision and courage
demonstrated by the Council in passing that resolution
cannot be overstated. It expands the triggers for listing
parties so that more of the grave violations are
associated with the Council’s naming and shaming
efforts. Such grave violations also merit strong
reactions and punitive measures against the
perpetrators. We are pleased that the Security Council
is willing to take such action.
With resolution 1888 (2009), on sexual violence
and rape as a weapon of war, the Council provides a
further opportunity to consolidate the framework at our
disposal to hold violators accountable. On our side, we
stand ready to support the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Margot Wallström, in her important mission.
UNICEF welcomes the two triggers for listing of
parties who commit rape and other forms of grave
sexual violence and who kill and maim children.
Sexual violence is still regularly used as a weapon of
war with the strategic intent to humiliate and
demoralize individuals, tear apart families and destroy
communities. As many of us have experienced during
visits to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
stories women and girls tell us are just horrific. They
bear the brunt of that violence. The humiliation,
stigma, exclusion and deep physical and psychological
scars remain with them, in many cases destroying their
lives.
Children still account for a considerable number
of war-related casualties. When they are not directly
targeted or used in war, they often fall victim to the
indiscriminate use of force. They are most affected by
landmines, cluster munitions and other indiscriminate
weapons and explosive remnants of war. It is
commendable that the Security Council has decided to

8

address this most basic grave violation against the
rights of children.
In total, therefore, three of the six grave
violations in conflict are now subject to the Security
Council framework. To be able to list, we need
adequate monitoring and reporting mechanisms.
UNICEF is fully committed to strengthen the
monitoring and reporting mechanisms in relation to all
three violations in all countries concerned. We also
need monitoring and reporting to hold violators
accountable. Indeed, our ambition should be to utilize
the full potential of this framework, holding
perpetrators accountable and bringing them to justice,
and to enforce measures against violators through
existing sanctions regimes.
We also need to focus on other grave violations
against children. The Special Representative has
already expressed concern about the trend of attacks on
schools. That trend must be reversed. In addition, the
continued denial of humanitarian access in situations of
armed conflict, such as in Somalia, Iraq and
Afghanistan, has grave implications for children. Our
colleagues in the field in those situations take
considerable risk when they engage with parties to
conflict, often non-State actors, to reach children in
need of assistance, to provide protection where there is
no rule of law and to safeguard schools as zones of
peace. That is easier said than done. We constantly
look for new approaches to deliver on our promise to
children in the field. Humanitarian access is
imperative, and denying it is unacceptable.
The child protection framework for children and
armed conflict supported by the Security Council spells
out the accountability of perpetrators. At the same
time, it lays out the responsibilities of key
stakeholders, including the Security Council and its
Working Group, concerned national Governments, the
United Nations, Member States, donors and civil
society. Thanks to the monitoring and reporting in
countries listed by the Council and other situations of
concern, we cannot claim ignorance when it comes to
the situation of children. The extent of grave violations
perpetrated against children is known. Never have we
been so well informed. Silence is not an option, nor is
inaction. We have a collective duty to act. We all are
accountable to the children whose stories we hear.
UNICEF stands ready to assist the Security
Council and its Working Group as it utilizes all the

10-40745

S/PV.6341

tools at its disposal for clear and determined action. We
look forward to supporting possible missions to the
field to consider the information compiled by our
colleagues, assisting in-country advocacy efforts and
helping mobilize the required resources to improve the
situation of children affected by armed conflict. As
indicated in resolution 1882 (2009), donors must also
ensure that operational agencies have the necessary
capacity to address grave violations and deliver results
for children.
Together with our partners, UNICEF and the
Office of the Special Representative have taken several
key initiatives to strengthen the monitoring of grave
violations in follow-up to resolution 1882 (2009),
including a global roll-out of a new monitoring and
reporting mechanism field manual and training toolkit,
as well as the development of practical action plan
templates. This will lead to a more systematic and
effective implementation of the mechanism, where
UNICEF normally is co-chair in the field.
In UNICEF, we have ensured that the protection of
children and women in armed conflict and other crises
are prioritized in our Core Commitments for Children in
Humanitarian Action. We are scaling up initiatives to
raise awareness and develop capacity across the
board — among our country offices in all countries
listed and situations of concern, in regional offices and
headquarters and among key partners — to improve the
monitoring and reporting mechanism and our protection
programmes. None of that would be possible without
strong partnerships. Cooperation with United Nations
entities — in particular peacekeeping and the child
protection advisers, as my colleague just explained, and
special political missions — and with concerned
Governments, non-governmental organizations and civil
society is essential to all our efforts.
But to be able to take action, the legal framework
must be in place. A couple of weeks ago we
commemorated the tenth anniversary of the two
Optional Protocols of the Convention on the Rights of
the Child. UNICEF strongly urges all Member States
that have not yet signed, ratified and implemented the
Optional Protocols to do so as a matter of priority and
urgency. We encourage all Member States to
effectively implement the Paris Commitments and
Paris Principles on Children Associated with Armed
Forces or Armed Groups.

10-40745

This is also the year of the twentieth anniversary
of the Convention on the Rights of the Child. Somalia
is the only country in the world where an entire
generation — the two past decades — has known only
violence and conflict and where grave violations are
committed against children every day, by all parties.
As children in Somalia deserve a better future, so
does the boy whom I met in the Central African
Republic a few months back. He was only nine years
old and had been demobilized from the rebel group
Armée pour la Restauration de la République et la
Démocratie. As tears streamed down his cheeks, he
told me about the horrible pictures that came before his
eyes over and over again. They would never leave his
head. His name was Futur. His only wish was to go
home. Indeed, for Futur and for those 10 boys in Chad,
and for millions of other children, the principles and
values of the Convention stand as a beacon of hope for
a better future. It is our collective obligation to turn
them into reality in their lives.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Johnson, Deputy Executive Director of UNICEF,
for her important briefing. I should also like to
highlight the value of the work on peacekeeping
being
done
jointly
by
UNICEF
and
the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
non-governmental organizations and civil society. I
also wish to emphasize the need for all of us to
continue to encourage that teamwork in order to
strengthen our ability to act.
I now give the floor to Ms. Manju Gurung, who,
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Coomaraswamy has already pointed out, was a child
soldier in Nepal.
Ms. Gurung (spoke in Nepalese; English text
provided by the speaker): Let me thank you for inviting
me. It is a great honour for me.
I am a girl from Nepal. I was born in the central
region of Nepal. I’m here not only to talk about my
own story but on behalf of all children in armed
conflict who face and survive the atrocities of war. I
will start by telling you some of the stories of my past.
In my family, I am the second of five children. I
have a mother and father, one elder sister, two younger
sisters and one younger brother. My family is very
poor. My father drives a rickshaw from morning to
evening and my mom works at home and also does

9

S/PV.6341

agricultural work. It is difficult for us to have good
clothing and good food. Despite our difficulties, my
parents had managed to send me and my siblings to
school.
I was 13 years old when I completed fifth grade
and moved to a new school to start the sixth grade. The
new school was a one-hour hike up a steep hill from
my home. At that time, I had just started thinking about
my future. My dream was to complete my education
and become a teacher in my own village. But things
did not happen the way that I had imagined.
That September of 2005, during a school holiday,
I walked to my house to bring some food. As I reached
my home, I realized that the Maoists had organized a
programme at my old school. The Maoists had
demanded that each family should send one family
member to their programme under the one-family/one
member campaign. I had to go there because my
parents were not at home. They had gone to the market.
After the programme, the Maoists told me that I needed
to go with them for seven days.
During that time, they gave me an orientation to
the Maoist party. Seven days passed but they did not
talk about sending me home. When I said that I wanted
to go home, they said “You’ll have to come with us
forever”. I said, “What is the use of small people like
me in this party?” But they said, “Small people will
one day become big people.” I told them, “I’m of the
age for studying, and not of the age to go with you.”
But they did not agree to that. At that time, I did not
know that children had rights and that recruiting a
13-year-old was a crime. I did not have a choice, so I
followed them.
There were many other children my age who
were brought forcefully or who had been coerced or
enticed with promises. They would not give us food on
time, and there were many children like me who
wanted to go home. They would not give us clothes,
and we would only receive NPR50 — or $0.75 a
month — for our toiletries. We had to buy
undergarments, toothpaste and toothbrushes with that
money.
Although we were small, we had to work very
hard. The Maoists were organizing a campaign to win
the villagers’ trust and would construct roads and
trenches and till land. I had to help with this work. To
construct roads, I would carry heavy loads of boulders
and stones and help dig the roads. We would walk from

10

one district to another, often at night, in groups of 50 to
60 people, through the jungle, for more than 12 to
14 hours at a stretch. I would get so tired I felt I was
dead. I couldn’t sleep, and sometimes I would cry a lot.
But there was no one for me to talk to or to help or
protect me.
For a few days, we would stay in one of the hilly
districts or a district in the southern plains and work
for villagers, as instructed by the party. We would stay
and eat in some of the villagers’ homes. In one of the
districts, the Party did not have a good reputation and
so we had to move through that place quickly. In other
districts, we would stay longer — up to a month. I was
always afraid because we had to hide from the army
and make sure they did not find us.
While I travelled from one place to another, I saw
many other children going to school. That made me
very sad. I would think that if I were at home I would
be going to school, too. I made friends who were my
age. We shared our emotions and our sadness, but there
was no hope for us. My life had become sad and
painful. I missed my parents a lot and I wanted to run
away from there.
After travelling for almost 12 months, we
returned to my home district. By this time, it was
October 2006 and I was 14 years old. I had not talked
to my family in a year. They knew I was with the
Maoists but did not know where I was. They could not
come for me because they were afraid of the
repercussions that all of us might face. When we came
back to my district, I really wanted to go home. But
what could I do? I was scared that if the Nepalese
Army saw me, they would kill me or my parents. Our
neighbour was a commander with the Maoists, and I
was scared that if I went home the Maoists would again
find me and take me back. There was no way to escape.
When I asked some of my friends if they wanted to go
home, they would say, “Who does not want to go
home? But there is nothing for us at home. Now we
have to live and die here.”
But I took a risk and secretly sent a letter to my
mother. I told her where I was and asked her to come
and bring me back home. Despite the risks, my mother
and sister found me and took me back to my village.
The Maoists did not prevent me from leaving but they
terrified us with their threats. They said, “We will find
you again and we can do whatever we want to if we
find you again.” I went back to my village, but I never

10-40745

S/PV.6341

stopped worrying for me and my family. I went back to
school and, after a month, the Maoists held another
recruitment campaign and took students from different
schools to participate. My school was requested to send
seven children to the programme. I was one of them
and so I was taken again.
They made us walk to another district on an
empty stomach. When we arrived, they made us go in
small groups of three to four people to people’s homes
and ask for food and lodging. One woman did not have
food for herself and her family, but she feared us and
gave the corn that she had set aside for seed. I had only
one set of clothes and I would wear them for 10 to
11 days. Sometimes I would exchange clothes with
others in the Party.
By the time I had been with the Maoists for
around 15 months, they enrolled me in their training
programme. We would dig tunnels and crawl through
them, and sometimes we had to jump to the ground
from a height of 10 feet. Holding our weapons and
gear, we had to climb ropes. They trained me to use
.303 British rifles, INSAS rifles, single-loading rifles
and AK-47s. They also taught us how to make and
detonate bombs. We had to wear shorts and shortsleeved shirts and do leopard crawls during training,
and my skin had cuts, scabs and bruises. I was still a
little girl of only 14, and my body was hardly fit for
such intense training. I started developing symptoms
and problems in my heart and throat.
Out of 160 people in my training, I finished in
second place. After the training, many of my friends
ran away, but some of us just could not. Since I
graduated second, they made me the commander over
seven people. It was my turn to train other children.
Many people were forced to marry others within the
Party. This was a way to ensure that they would stay
with the Party. I did not want to marry, and I was
beaten up several times for that. In the meantime, I had
become
section
vice-commander
and
my
responsibilities had increased. Days passed and I
started to accept my fate and to understand that this life
had become my life. I felt sad, damaged and hopeless.
One day I fainted. One of my senior commanders
said that I was faking to avoid working and carrying
arms. I was very angry and went to another
commander. In a very angry voice, I told him what had
happened to me and that I needed medical attention. I
said that if they could not give it to me, then I needed

10-40745

to go home. The commander told me that I had violated
the rules by approaching him and asking to be relieved
of my duties and go home. To punish me, they demoted
me and made me work as a cook for six months. After
six months, I asked for a leave and they granted it. I
stayed home for 10 to 11 days, but I could not stay in
the village longer. Villagers treated me badly, bullied
me and talked behind my back. So I returned to the
Maoists.
Within the Party, I had many friends who had not
returned home in more than one or two years. Many of
my friends had died fighting and many had become
disabled while fighting. Most of us were weak. At
times during the war, we would not be able to eat for
an entire week. Sometimes we survived on water and
corn flour. Some of my close friends who had been in
combat told me that it was always the youngest who
were sent to the front line and that the commanders
gave orders from behind. I had not been sent to the
front line yet, since I had not completed the combat
training. Luckily, after I was trained and they were
planning to send me to the next round of active
fighting, the peace agreement was signed and I did not
have to fight.
After the peace agreement was signed, people
from the Maoist Party were gathered into cantonments
and there was talk of a registration and verification
process. The United Nations had been called in, and
many of us went into the first registration that it
conducted. I was one of them. The Maoists constructed
seven cantonments across Nepal.
At that time, the senior commanders used to tell
me, “You are a commander. You need to have more
patience and you need to look after your members.”
They also used to give me medicine, saying that it
would cure my heart and throat problems. They would
also tell me that my heart and throat problems would
go away if I got married. But I still did not want to, so
they continued to harass and threaten me. Because of
my hard work, they made me a section commander. I
think they also thought that if I was promoted, I would
be more inclined to get married. Time passed and my
health worsened. I managed to tell my sister and uncle.
So one day they came, and without asking any of the
commanders, I just left the camp.
In May 2007, I returned home. I was 15 years
old. I was very happy, but I was also scared. I was
afraid that the Party would take me again or that the

11

S/PV.6341

army would kill me if they found out who I was. In the
village, everyone continued to show suspicion towards
me and to talk behind my back. My parents could no
longer send me to school, and I had to leave. I went to
the nearest city, where I worked as a housemaid.
One day, I received a call from my sister saying
that someone who worked with children affected by
armed conflict had come to our home. She said they
would help children like me. So I came home and met
with them. They convinced me to go back to school,
although I was shy about returning to the sixth grade. I
started my education again. Meanwhile, the Maoists
continued to threaten me. I had to stay at my uncle’s
house to hide from them, but they would not leave me
alone. They came to his home and asked me to come
along with them. I was always scared.
Finally, one person who worked for human rights
intervened and helped me formally seek release from
the Maoist Party. Then it became easier for me to stay
in my village. Some of these organizations helped me
readjust to life and build relationships with members of
the community. Now I am well respected in my
community and my school, and I regularly participate
in and lead child rights-related programmes in my
school and village. Now I also have friends, and
children like to play with me and talk to me.
Since my family was poor, some organizations
helped us to generate income. Today, I raise a little
livestock. They also paid for my throat surgery. They
helped me form a children’s club which advocates for
children’s rights and on HIV issues. I am the president
of the club, which counts 40 children among its
members. Now, I have a new life.
Not long ago, I heard through the radio that there
was a formal discharge process for children who
remained in the cantonments. I am happy that they will
now have a chance to choose what they want to do with
their lives. But I also feel sad for them because I have
been through the challenges they will now have to
face.
I truly thank the Security Council for listening to
my story, for it is the story of hundreds of Nepalese
children. Thanks to the help and trust of the United
Nations, including UNICEF and local organizations,
some of us have been able to recover. I am one of
them. I am very happy now. I am in the ninth grade at
the school in my village, and I still dream of becoming
a teacher.

12

The President (spoke in Spanish): I would like to
thank Ms. Gurung for having been kind enough to
share her experience with us. I would also like to note
the courage of this young girl, who has described very
clearly today the tragedy of the situation of children in
armed conflict. I believe that this should be a source
for inspiration to all us to continue to strengthen the
work of the United Nations in this area.
With the Council’s permission, I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as Secretary of Foreign
Affairs of Mexico.
I am grateful for this opportunity to reaffirm the
commitment of my country to the full respect of human
rights and international humanitarian law. Mexico
today reaffirms its commitment to ensuring the full
protection of civilians in armed conflicts, in particular
women and children.
Mexico is convinced that we have made
substantive progress in the Security Council’s
treatment of the promotion and protection of children
affected by armed conflict. The adoption of resolution
1882 (2009), which strengthens and broadens the
United Nations mechanisms for protecting minors in
cases of armed conflict, is an example of this progress.
In thanking Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy for
presenting the annual report of the Secretary-General
on children and armed conflict (S/2010/181), I note
that this year the annexes to the report include the
names not only of those who recruit or use children in
armed conflict, but also of those who commit criminal
acts against them. While these are important steps,
there is still much to do if we truly want to spare
children from being the principal victims of the spiral
of violence generated by armed conflicts around the
world.
In the past two decades alone, more than
2 million children in areas of armed conflict have died,
another six million have been disabled, more than a
quarter of a million young people have been exploited
as child soldiers in different regions of the world, and
thousands more have been victims of sexual
exploitation, rape and prostitution.
These figures are heartbreaking, but they say very
little about the personal and direct suffering of the
children involved. That is why, very personally but also
on behalf of Mexico and the Security Council, I should
like to commend the courage and testimony of Manju

10-40745

S/PV.6341

Gurung, this former child soldier who has urged us to
act decisively for children in situations of armed
conflict.
Mexico also appeals to the Security Council to
continue, within the framework of its competences, to
address the repercussions of armed conflicts on
children, and to promote concrete action to comply
with the recommendations of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict.
My country vigorously defends the principle of
the higher interests of children, and believes that we
must step up our efforts as a community to provide
broad and effective protection to children. Crimes
committed against children cannot be stopped if their
perpetrators remain unpunished. Serious violations of
fundamental principles and norms of international
humanitarian law are war crimes, and Members States
have the primary obligation to investigate and
prosecute those responsible for such violations. We
support the recommendation contained in the report of
the Secretary-General that the Council consider
stronger measures against those who persist in
violating the rights of children in armed conflict.
Transparency and accountability in the protection
of children in armed conflict have become crucial
priorities. In cases where States have neither the
capacity nor the willingness to prosecute those
presumed responsible for these crimes, the
International Criminal Court has the power to
recognize those crimes that are stipulated in the Rome
Statute.
As a State party to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child and its Optional Protocols, Mexico has
resolutely joined the campaign for ratification of the
Protocols. We call upon States that have not already
done so to ratify those and other instruments designed
to ensure the greatest protection for those who today
are affected by the scourge of war, exploitation and
violence. Mexico will continue to guide the work of
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict
inclusively and with determination and transparency
until the end of its mandate as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council.
We would like to focus on five aspects: first,
strengthening the monitoring and reporting mechanism
to guarantee the provision of objective and verifiable
information that will permit timely action by the
United Nations system and follow-up to the

10-40745

recommendations of the Working Group; secondly,
promoting the implementation of action plans aimed at
ending the recruitment and use of children and crimes
perpetrated against them; thirdly, improving the impact
of our decisions on the comprehensive protection of
children, including open meetings for the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to present her
reports; fourthly, ensuring that our recommendations
promote full respect for international humanitarian law
and human rights by all parties to a conflict; and
finally, supporting the establishment of comprehensive
programmes to rehabilitate and reintegrate children in
the ranks of armed groups into their families and
communities, as well as preventing new violations and
abuses against them.
Close international cooperation on all these issues
is crucial to providing comprehensive and sustainable
solutions that meet the needs of children in situations
of violence and armed conflict. This task requires the
commitment of us all, as well as our coordinated
efforts with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, UNICEF, United Nations agencies
and programmes, and civil society organizations.
Protecting the most vulnerable is not only an ethical
imperative; today, protecting our children, who should
never take any part in any armed conflict, is also
protecting our nations, whose strengths, deepest values
and hopes are embodied in those children. I thank the
Council for its support in favour of a better world for
the children of our planet.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than five minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I support
the statement to be made on behalf of the European
Union. I would like to thank the Secretary of Foreign
Affairs of Mexico for taking the initiative to convene
the Security Council to address the issue of children
and armed conflict. We welcome the Council’s sending
of an unmistakable message to parties who continue to
violate the rights of children in armed conflict. If

13

S/PV.6341

parties to a conflict refuse to take the path of dialogue
and do not implement action plans in spite of the
repeated appeals of the Security Council to do so, we
should not hesitate when considering targeted and
strong sanctions against them.
The mechanism set up in the draft presidential
statement to be adopted today aims at greater
integration of the protection of children in armed
conflict into the work of the sanctions committees. In
this respect, we invite Ms. Coomaraswamy to begin
direct dialogue with the committee experts without
delay.
In the absence of a sanctions committee or when
it would take too long to establish one, the Security
Council can act directly, when necessary, through a
resolution adopted under Chapter VII. In that respect,
the responsiveness of our Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict should be improved. Beyond
implementing sanctions, we agree with the analysis and
recommendations developed by the Secretary-General
in his report (S/2010/181) to put an end to the heinous
acts referred to therein and to ensure that their
perpetrators are brought to justice. In this respect, we
welcome the actions of the International Criminal
Court, among which the current war crimes trial of
Thomas Lubanga Dyilo is a prime example.
Since its creation five years ago, the Working
Group has focused on the recruitment and use of child
soldiers and has achieved results contributing to the
release of tens of thousands of children. However, we
remain in the implementation phase of resolution 1882
(2009), which added rape and other sexual violence, as
well as killing and maiming contrary to international
law, to the criteria for listing parties to conflict on the
Secretary-General’s naming-and-shaming list. In our
view, this will require making more resources available
to the Council’s monitoring and reporting mechanism
and to the implementation of action plans. It will also
require taking better into account the cross-border
dimension of some conflicts, including but not
exclusively in Africa.
Finally, we believe that it would be desirable to
give increased attention to attacks against educational
facilities, which are increasing throughout the world,
with a view to expanding the criteria for adding parties
to conflict to the Secretary-General’s naming-andshaming list. We would like to see specific

14

recommendations on this issue in the next report of the
Secretary-General.
The work of our Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict will be marked by some important
developments in the coming months. First, we will
need to resolve the recurring question of its
administrative support. Today, that job is wholly
dependent on the goodwill of the Mexican Mission. We
hope to see proposals from the Secretary-General on
this issue in the coming weeks in order to relieve our
Mexican friends of that duty. Next, the Working Group
will have to undertake a country visit. We would be
pleased for such a mission to take place by the end of
the year.
Finally, the action plans will have to be
implemented in the field. To that end, France will
co-organize with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
UNICEF and its partners in the Steering Committee the
third Ministerial Follow-up Forum to the Paris
Commitments and Paris Principles on 27 September. It
will focus on the financial commitment of the
international community to ensure, inter alia, that
children who are victims of violations benefit from
care and adequate reintegration programmes.
I wish to conclude by affirming that France
supports without reservation the campaign launched by
the Secretary-General aimed at the universal
ratification within two years of the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict. We call on
all States, as you have done, Madam Minister, that
have not yet ratified this instrument to do so as soon as
possible.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): My thanks
go
in
particular
to
Special
Representative
Coomaraswamy for her thorough briefing and her
passionate commitment to this cause. I would also like
to thank UNICEF Deputy Executive Director Hilde
Johnson
and Assistant
Secretary-General
for
Peacekeeping Operations Atul Khare for their very
passionate and informative briefings. But I should like
especially to thank Manju Gurung for her presence
here and her statement to the Council. Her courage and
her example are extraordinary, and all of us can only
begin to imagine how difficult and daunting it must be
to speak before a Council like this in a room like this.
We wish her to know how much we admire her and

10-40745

S/PV.6341

how much we are here cheering for her and for a
brighter, safer and more peaceful future. We wish her
all the best.

coordination mechanisms for better information
exchange and cooperation on cross-border child
protection issues.

The nineteenth century American abolitionist
Frederick Douglass once said, “It is easier to build
strong children than to repair broken men.” Two
centuries later, we see the truth of that insight in
country after country, in conflict after conflict. As the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/181) makes
painfully clear, children are abused and children’s
rights are violated in armed conflicts in many areas of
the world. Even after such conflicts end, the scars
remain. Children exposed to violence or trauma,
especially prolonged trauma, are more likely to have
their social, emotional and cognitive development
impaired. And such ordeals inflict psychological
damage that can endure for years to come.

We
support
the
Secretary-General’s
recommendation to include the unlawful recruitment or
use of children as a listing criterion in appropriate
Security Council sanctions regimes, and we strongly
encourage closer cooperation and coordination among
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict,
these sanctions committees and their expert groups. As
the Secretary-General suggests, such coordination
would let us weigh the application of “more vigorous
measures against persistent violators” (S/2010/181,
para. 186) when that is appropriate.

The litany of abuses is grim: outright killing,
maiming, forced participation in armed conflict, rape,
sexual exploitation and other forms of sexual violence.
Those outrages not only rob children of their innocence
and limit their full and meaningful participation in
their societies, but they also risk further stoking the
very conflicts in which these children so gravely suffer.
Parties that commit violations against children plunder
the future of their countries and threaten international
peace and security.
The United States fully and firmly embraces our
responsibility to protect children, and we will not rest
until the last abuse is halted and the last child soldier is
released. We welcome the Secretary-General’s report
as an important tool to help us uphold that common
responsibility. We are glad to note that for the first time
the report’s annexes include parties that have engaged
in patterns of killing, maiming, raping and sexually
abusing children in contravention of applicable
international law.
We urge that all information on violations
identified by the monitoring and reporting mechanism
be thoroughly verified to ensure a high degree of
accuracy. We agree with the report’s recommendation
to ensure that specific language on protecting children
is placed in the mandates of both the relevant United
Nations peacekeeping operations and those of political,
humanitarian and peacebuilding missions. We also
agree that, given the regional dimensions of some
conflicts highlighted in the report, these missions
should speed their development of strategies and

10-40745

We take heart from several instances in which
parties and former parties to armed conflict have taken
meaningful steps to protect children, from Afghanistan
to Burundi and Nepal, often after strong
encouragement from the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict.
Nevertheless, violations and abuses against
children are endemic in far too many places. The
United States is particularly concerned about the
situation in Somalia. Active recruitment of child
soldiers has placed several thousand children in the
line of fire. We strongly condemn the use of child
soldiers by any group, and we call on parties to the
conflict in Somalia to immediately cease child
recruitment and release those who remain within their
ranks.
Equally, we continue to be gravely concerned
over developments in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Virtually every party engaged in the conflict
there actively and unlawfully recruits children.
Hundreds of children were shoved into the ranks of
combatants there last year. We particularly abhor the
actions of the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA), which
makes a practice of forced recruitment through
abduction.
The United States is also deeply disturbed by the
situation in the Central African Republic, where the
active and unlawful recruitment of children is so bad
that, as the Secretary-General notes, children now
comprise a full third of the total self-defence militias
and where the LRA continues its reprehensible acts.

15

S/PV.6341

We do see some hard-won progress, thanks in no
small part to the efforts of Special Representative
Coomaraswamy, as well as moves towards
mainstreaming this issue across the whole of the
United Nations system. But the grievous examples of
violations and abuses against children — whether in
the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Somalia or a number of other places —
remind us that the pace of progress is too slow for too
many children. Much more work must be done, and we
have no time to spare.
The United States will remain fully and deeply
dedicated to preventing the violations and abuses
committed against children in armed conflict. We will
continue to strongly support the efforts of the United
Nations and our many non-governmental organization
partners. We look forward to continuing to work
closely with our fellow Security Council members on
this vital issue. We are grateful to those who organized
today’s important debate, but we hope that the day will
soon come when such meetings will no longer be
needed.
One child harmed as the result of armed conflict
is one child too many, and the only morally tolerable
number of child soldiers is zero.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): At the outset, I
should like to welcome you, Madam President, and to
thank you and your delegation for the commitment
shown in this very important matter. I should also like
to thank Ambassador Heller and the Mission here for
their excellent work in preparing for this important
debate.
Austria aligns itself with the statement to be
made later on behalf of the European Union. As a
member of the Human Security Network, as well as of
the Group of Friends on Children and Armed Conflict,
Austria also supports the joint statement of the
Network to be delivered by Costa Rica and the firstever joint statement of the Group of Friends, to be
delivered by Canada.
I should like to thank Special Representative of
the
Secretary-General
Coomaraswamy,
Deputy
Executive Director Johnson and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Khare for their presentations. We greatly
appreciate the work of the Special Representative and
of all of those who contribute to implementing the
children and armed conflict agenda within the
Secretariat and UNICEF.

16

My delegation and I personally also wish to
extend a warm welcome and a word of thanks to
Ms. Manju Gurung from Nepal. We thank her for
having shared her thoughts and her very moving
experiences, which serve as a stark reminder of why
we are here today. In this context and in view of what
she said, we welcome the signing of an action plan by
the parties in Nepal and the swift completion of the
discharge process. The successful mission of Special
Representative Coomaraswamy to Nepal last December
underlines the importance of her field visits for
effective follow-up on the recommendations of the
Security Council and its Working Group.
Progress has also been made in the past year in
other parts of the world also, as set out in the
Secretary-General’s most recent annual report
(S/2010/181). We welcome the signing of action plans
to halt and prevent the recruitment and use of children
with parties in the Philippines and the Sudan, as well
as the positive developments in Burundi, which
allowed for the de-listing of the armed groups formerly
listed under that country situation.
At the same time, the fact that parties to armed
conflicts have continued to commit grave violations
and abuses against children in conflict situations
around the world is deeply worrying. We take note of
new listings of parties that recruit and use children and
engage in patterns of killing and maiming or sexual
violence. We call on all parties listed in the annexes
immediately to halt those violations and to prepare and
implement concrete, time-bound action plans to ensure
the effective protection of children. We agree with the
Secretary-General that direct contact between the
United Nations country teams and non-State actors is
important in this context. We therefore support his call
on Member States to allow for such contacts in the
framework of resolutions 1539 (2004), 1612 (2005)
and 1882 (2009).
The reported increase in attacks against
schools — to which others have already referred — as
well as against teachers and students, and the specific
targeting of girl students in certain country situations
constitute a deeply worrying development. We strongly
condemn such heinous acts, which violate international
humanitarian law and deprive the children concerned
of any meaningful prospects for a better future.
We wish to acknowledge the detailed information
provided in the Secretary-General’s report on the

10-40745

S/PV.6341

criteria and procedures used for listing and de-listing
parties to armed conflict, as well as on the ongoing
development of templates for action plans to address
and prevent patterns of killing and maiming and/or
rape and other sexual violence against children. We
agree with the Secretary-General’s understanding of
the notion of a “pattern”, which involves a “multiple
commission of acts being perpetrated in the same
context” (see S/2010/181, para. 175), but we also wish
to stress that, from our point of view, this should not
necessarily imply a high quantitative threshold.
With the introduction of new listing criteria in
resolution 1882 (2009) the provision of timely,
accurate, reliable and verifiable information to the
Council, and thus an increased monitoring and
reporting capacity of the United Nations system, has
become even more important. We call, therefore, on all
relevant United Nations entities to cooperate and
coordinate in order to create synergies and to allow for
the systematic exchange of information. We also
believe that in certain situations — such as the case of
the Lord’s Resistance Army — regional cooperation
among United Nations actors in the field needs to be
strengthened.
The report of the Secretary-General rightly draws
our attention to those parties to conflict that continue to
commit crimes against children despite repeated calls
of the Council. The Council must be determined to
ensure respect for its resolutions, and it needs to be
prepared to take vigorous measures against persistent
perpetrators.
In order to increase the coherence of the
Council’s work, provisions pertaining to violations of
international law committed against children should be
included in the mandates of the relevant sanctions
committees. Interaction of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict with sanctions
committees and their expert groups should be
enhanced.
The
recent
briefing
by
Special
Representative Coomaraswamy to the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which included provision of specific
information on individuals recruiting and using
children, was an important first step that will enable
the Committee to take action. In this context, we also
support the Secretary-General’s recommendation to
incorporate child protection expertise in sanctions

10-40745

committees’ expert groups. At the same time, the
Council must also consider specific recommendations
from its Working Group on parties committing
violations and abuses against children, in order to take
direct action in particularly serious situations where no
sanctions committee is in place.
We welcome the fact that the presidential
statement to be adopted at the end of this debate
addresses these issues in a forward-looking manner.
In closing, let me express my country’s sincere
appreciation for the excellent work that has been
carried out by the Mexican Chair of the Working
Group over the past one and a half years. The Group
has been doing important work in developing concrete
recommendations on various situations on the basis of
country-specific reports of the Secretary-General and
exchanges with the Member States concerned. In view
of the considerable workload, as well as the urgent
need to build up a historical memory — and here I am
also repeating something that has already been said
today — Austria strongly supports the repeated request
to the Secretary-General to provide administrative
support to the Group. This could also enable the Group
further to improve its working methods and the followup of its conclusions and recommendations, as well as
to proceed to a more effective use of its toolkit, in
particular through the timely realization of a field visit.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I thank you, Madam
Secretary of Foreign Affairs of Mexico, for organizing
and presiding over this important debate on children
and armed conflict. I also thank Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Hilde Frafjord Johnson, Deputy Executive
Director of UNICEF, and Assistant Secretary-General
Atul Khare for their statements. I welcome Ms. Manju
Gurung and salute her for her courage and for sharing
her experiences in a compelling account of the story of
her life in conflict.
The issue of children in armed conflict has been
an important subject on the agenda of the Security
Council for 11 years now. Member States have
consistently articulated the plight of children in armed
conflict; they have reiterated their commitments to the
well-being of children and pledged support for their
protection, especially in situations of armed conflict.
It is essential that children in conflict situations
be protected by the international community. We note

17

S/PV.6341

with concern that in the annexes to the ninth annual
report of the Secretary-General on children and armed
conflict (S/2010/181), several armed groups associated
with children are named. A number of these are in
Africa. Not only do these groups recruit or abduct
children, but in some cases, such as that of the Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA), they also maim them, commit
sexual violence against them or even kill them. They
rob them of their freedom as well as their innocence.
Uganda calls upon all parties in situations of
armed conflict to adhere to international normative
instruments protecting educational facilities from
attack. We strongly condemn wilful attacks against
schools and other educational facilities, as well as the
deliberate targeting of girls by armed groups. Uganda
has had first-hand experience of attacks against
schools, as well as of the abduction of students. In June
1998, 12 years ago, an armed group calling itself the
Allied Democratic Front raided a technical college in
western Uganda and burned 80 students alive in three
dormitories. That armed group also abducted more than
100 students.

Uganda notes the recommendation of the
Secretary-General that stronger measures be taken
against persistent violators who have been listed for
grave violations against children in his annual reports
for at least five years. It is also clear that the United
Nations is at different stages of engagement with the
various parties on the lists, including the negotiation of
action plans. Notwithstanding the five-year timeline,
Uganda encourages a broader set of conditions that
would necessitate action by the Council against
persistent perpetrators.
Uganda emphasizes the importance of urging
relevant actors in peace processes to ensure that the
concerns and needs of children in armed conflict are
consistently taken into account. Given the regional
dimensions of some conflicts, it is essential that
relevant Member States, United Nations peacekeeping
missions and country teams accelerate the development
of appropriate strategies and coordination mechanisms.
That is necessary for information exchange and
cooperation on cross-border child protection concerns.

This year marks the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of the Optional Protocols to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child. Uganda is a party to both
Optional Protocols, and we encourage Member States
that have not yet done so to consider acceding to,
ratifying and domesticating them. It is important that
the reports on implementation be prepared and
submitted in a timely manner.

Uganda is convinced that this debate should
further galvanize our collective efforts to protect
children in situations of armed conflict. Children
everywhere have the right to live in conditions that
provide an opportunity for a bright and successful
future.
We
therefore
highly
commend
the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Coomaraswamy, and her staff on the work that
they are doing in that direction.

We note the call by the Secretary-General to
parties listed in the annexes of the report to prepare and
implement concrete and time-bound action plans to halt
those violations. It is necessary for the Security Council
to consider taking measures against any parties that fail
to comply. We commend the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Ms. Coomaraswamy, on the
achievements she has made in finalizing action plans
with parties to conflicts in four countries and encourage
her to maintain the momentum.

Mr. Apakan (Turkey): I warmly welcome you,
Madam President, as Secretary of Foreign Affairs of
Mexico presiding over the Council today. I also thank
you for the comprehensive observations that you have
made. Allow me to extend to the delegation of Mexico
our most sincere congratulations on its work under the
leadership of Ambassador Heller as the Chair of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict and
on its efforts to prepare the draft presidential statement
that we are going to adopt today.

We
also
note
the
Secretary-General’s
recommendation to allow contact between the United
Nations and non-State actors to ensure the broad and
effective protection of children. We regard that as a
positive recommendation. The spirit of that
recommendation is positive, but it is important to take
into account the specific conditions that may prevail on
the ground.

Let me thank Ms. Coomaraswamy, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, for her briefing, and the other
briefers — Ms. Johnson, Deputy Executive Director of
UNICEF; Mr. Atul Khare, Assistant Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations; and Ms. Manju Gurung.

18

Children are faced with appalling forms of abuse
and violence every day in different parts of the world.

10-40745

S/PV.6341

They are reported to be forcibly abducted and recruited
as militants. Children are also victims of sexual
trafficking, and girls in particular face sexual violence.
Many children do not have access to education or basic
health care during armed conflicts. We must reverse
that trend and protect children at all costs, and the
Council plays an imperative role in that regard.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2010/181)
provides us with very useful information for ending all
violations and abuses committed against children. We
take note of his observations and support his
recommendations. We welcome the attention focused
on persistent violators.
Important progress has been made over the past
year, and we welcome the adoption of resolution 1882
(2009) and the expansion of the triggers for listing to
include the killing and maiming of children, as well
rape and other sexual violence. Human rights
violations committed against children cannot and will
not be tolerated. Therefore, we believe that the
protection of children is part of the collective cultural
values of humanity.
Our aim in the Council for the better protection
of children is stronger child protection frameworks. We
must continue our collective efforts to that end. Turkey
also believes in the importance of investigating,
prosecuting and punishing all those who commit grave
violations against children. We would also like to
emphasize our grave concern about the increased
number of attacks on education facilities, schools and
pupils. Since education is the future of new
generations, the Security Council should address the
problem in its future deliberations.
While working to achieve our goals, we believe
that three points should always be kept in mind. First,
States must be encouraged at every stage to cooperate
with the Working Group. Secondly, the work of the
Group should be expedited and facilitated in order to
cover more situations. Thirdly, we should give priority
to the implementation of United Nations documents
first.
On that last point, Turkey strongly supports each
United Nations instrument and initiative related to the
rights of children. We show our dedication and
sensitivity to the issue of violations against children by
being party to every relevant United Nations
instrument. Needless to say, these United Nations
instruments have become a fundamental part of

10-40745

Turkey’s legislation. We are party to various
instruments promoting the rights of children outside
the framework of the United Nations. Our first priority
should be to recruit every country to support and
ensure the implementation of all United Nations
conventions and protocols.
Children comprise almost one-third of our
population. They are our future. We have to unite for
their future. We should act against persistent violators
of their rights to free them from the devastating effects
of armed conflicts. The Security Council should not
refrain from taking the essential steps to stop violations
against children and to fulfil our responsibility to
protect our children.
Turkey is committed to contributing to all efforts
in order to halt persistent perpetrators of crimes against
children, and we call all Member States to be active on
the issue.
Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I wish to thank you, Madam President, for your
presence here to preside over this important debate. I
also thank Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, and the other speakers, Mr. Khare
and Ms. Johnson, for their briefings. We underscore the
courage of Ms. Manju Gurung and thank her for her
testimony, which puts a human face on the violations
and crimes we are discussing today.
Children’s right to life, security, health care and
education continues to be violated by armed conflict.
The lost childhood of such children is a threat to the
peace and security of the societies to which they
belong and prevents them from building prosperous
nations that respect international law.
In our region, a just and lasting peace cannot be
established while ongoing and constant threats to the
physical security of our children persist. These threats
include the cluster bombs that Israel has placed in
Lebanon and Gaza, which continue to maim our
children. The Gaza embargo also continues to have
devastating consequences for our children, who
comprise 45 per cent of the population there.
Resolution 1882 (2009) represents critical
progress in the protection of children because it
introduces two new criteria — sexual violence and
killing and maiming — for listing parties to armed
conflict in the annexes of the Secretary-General’s

19

S/PV.6341

annual reports. Even so, Lebanon believes that the six
serious violations enumerated in resolution 1612
(2005) are all of equal gravity and should be accorded
the same attention by the Working Group. We hope that
one day the criteria for listing in the annexes of the
Secretary-General’s reports will be extended to those
six violations; failure to do so would be tantamount to
silence concerning the heinous crimes perpetrated
against thousands of children. No measure to address
grave violations should be limited to post-conflict
symptoms; any such measure must be part of a strategy
to prevent conflict and address the underlying causes
of emergent conflicts.
The protection of children should also be
reflected in the Security Council’s resolutions
concerning specific countries. In this case, we welcome
the adoption by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations of the guidelines on the protection of
children. Like the Secretary-General, we reaffirm the
importance of deploying child protection advisers in
missions. We encourage the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to design a
predictable and stable financing structure that would
ensure the resources necessary to implementing the
action plans. We also urge donors to provide the
necessary funding to national Governments, the United
Nations and its partners in order to ensure the
rehabilitation and reintegration of children who have
been associated with armed forces or groups.
Twelve years ago, the Security Council
considered the topic of children and armed conflict for
the first time. We have come a long way since then and
achieved some progress. However, much remains to be
done. First, we believe it imperative that the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict respond swiftly
to urgent or sudden situations in which children are
affected on a large scale. Secondly, we underscore the
importance of appeals for a more effective follow-up to
the implementation of the recommendations of the
Working Group. In his report (S/2010/181), the
Secretary-General notes that impunity remains
prevalent and that the prosecution of parties to
conflicts listed in the annexes of his reports is still rare.
That is why the various United Nations bodies must
facilitate coordinated support to help national
authorities to establish and maintain the rule of law at
the national level. That would allow perpetrators to be
held accountable for their actions — a decisive factor
in protecting children.

20

The harmful psychosocial consequences of
conflicts on the mental health of children and on
stability and lasting peace in post-conflict societies
cannot be ignored. Despite the efforts of the United
Nations and relevant actors, gaps remain in the
reintegration phase, especially in the psychosocial area.
We therefore encourage the United Nations agencies
and non-governmental organizations, alongside
national authorities, to jointly improve psychosocial
support services to demobilized children and all
children affected by armed conflict.
We have the ethical and moral responsibility to
protect future generations from the scourge of armed
conflict. We must focus our efforts on attenuating the
emotional, physical and psychological impact on
children who, with their well-being and often with their
lives, daily pay the price of wars they have not chosen.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I congratulate
the representative of Lebanon on her excellent Spanish
and thank her for making the effort to deliver her
statement in my language.
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French):
My delegation should like to a pay a special tribute,
Madame, to your country, Mexico, for your interest in
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. Your
country’s outstanding chairmanship of the Security
Council’s Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict and your presence at today’s debate clearly
attest to that interest.
My delegation also thanks Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy for her exceptional introduction of the
Secretary-General’s ninth annual report on children and
armed conflict (S/2010/181), and reaffirms our support
for her efforts to promote the cause of children affected
by the scourge of war. We also note the deeply moving
testimony of Ms. Manju, a former child soldier, on the
war in Nepal. It not only reminded us of the gravity
and urgency of the phenomenon, but also encouraged
us to listen to and involve children in the settlement of
problems that concern them.
My delegation wishes to speak on the following
three points: the impact on children of new forms of
warfare, progress made, and challenges and prospects
ahead.
New forms of armed conflict, marked by the
growing involvement of non-State actors and
non-traditional forms of combat, complicate the

10-40745

S/PV.6341

objective assessment of the impact of war on children.
In addition to this there is the illicit proliferation of
small arms and light weapons, the increase in armed
groups, the emergence of resource wars and the
internationalization of terrorism, which constantly fuel
a culture of violence, especially against children.
In his periodic report on children and armed
conflict in 2005 (S/2005/72), the Secretary-General
identified six violations of the rights of children in
conflict zones, namely, killing or maiming, the
recruitment of child soldiers, attacks against schools or
hospitals, rape or other forms of sexual violence, the
abduction of children and the denial of humanitarian
access for children. Gabon vigorously condemns these
heinous and shameful practices, which offend morality
and undermine human dignity.
One of the most significant achievements of the
last ten years has been the recognition by the
international community that political and diplomatic
commitment is crucial in responding to the suffering of
children affected by armed conflict. The Security
Council played a decisive role in acknowledging, in
resolution 1261 (1999), that the protection of children
in armed conflict affects international peace and
security. The many resolutions adopted since then by
the Council and by the General Assembly on this
matter bear witness to this. Thus, the problems linked
to children are taken into account today in negotiations
of peace agreements and in the mandates of United
Nations peacekeeping operations.
In adopting, in accordance with resolution 1612
(2005), a monitoring and reporting mechanism for
countries at war and a working group on children in
armed conflict, the Council wanted to have reliable and
timely information on the recruitment and use of
children by parties to armed conflicts, as well as on
other violations of children’s rights. Despite this
progress, the international community has many
challenges to overcome in this area. The reality on the
ground remains very worrisome.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/181)
reveals that many national armies and armed groups
continue to recruit and use children. Therefore we
welcome the publication in the annexes of the report of
the Secretary-General of the lists of those who violate
the rights of children, which certainly constitutes
progress towards possible legal proceedings against
them.

10-40745

My country is pleased by the fact that at a
regional conference held in N’Djamena from 8 to
9 June 2010, the States of Central Africa adopted the
N’Djamena Declaration reaffirming their commitment
to put an end to the enrolment of children in armed
conflict, with a view to strengthening peace and
security and promoting development of the subregion,
where there are more than 30,000 child soldiers.
The protection of children in armed conflict is a
shared responsibility. Gabon considers relevant the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to ensure
that the question of the recruitment and use of children
in armed conflict could be examined at all levels of the
Security Council’s activities, including in the counterterrorism committees.
That recommendation includes another proposal
which urges the participation of experts on questions
linked to the protection of children in all United
Nations peace missions, including peacekeeping
operations and political missions. It would also be wise
for the Council to establish a sanctions committee on
the violations of the rights of children affected by
armed conflicts. Generally speaking, our action in
fighting impunity with respect to violations of the
rights of children will not be truly effective unless we
increase our awareness campaigns with the goal of
leading the largest number of leaders and individuals to
accept and understand the validity of this struggle.
The presidential statement that we shall adopt at
the end of this debate should lay the bases for a
common ethic, the commitment of all of us —
Governments, the United Nations system and
non-governmental organizations — to act together in
the interest of the children of the entire world and of
future generations.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to you, Sir, for your initiative
in holding today’s meeting and to the SecretaryGeneral for preparing the overview report
(S/2010/181). We also thank Ms. Coomaraswamy,
Mr. Khare, Ms. Johnson and Ms. Gurung for their
information.
Russia supports the call by the Secretary-General
to give due attention to all serious violations of the
rights of children in conflict. Crimes against children
should not go unpunished. In this connection, we
welcome the first practical steps for including in the
annexes to the Secretary-General’s report information

21

S/PV.6341

on parties to conflict that are responsible for killing
and injuring children and rape and other sexual abuse.
However, we wish to stress the need to consider
correctly the issue of including in the report
information on specific country situations. In
particular, we do not believe it is right to include in the
current report several situations — specifically, India,
Pakistan and Yemen — that cannot be called armed
conflicts.
We firmly condemn premeditated attacks on
civilians, including children, and the deadly,
indiscriminate and disproportionate use of force, as
described by the Secretary-General. Of particular
concern for us is what the report mentions with regard
to the increasing trend in the number of attacks by
parties to conflicts on education facilities.
Russia condemns the grave violations of
international humanitarian law during operation Cast
Lead in Gaza, which took the lives of hundreds of
children and destroyed schools. The statistics in the
report cannot leave anyone indifferent. We once again
call on parties to conflicts to comply with their
obligations under international humanitarian law and to
refrain from violence against civilian populations.
Children continue to be victims of conflicts in
Afghanistan and Iraq, where armed groups attack the
civilian population and carry out terrorist acts. It is
important that Al-Qaida and the Taliban are once again
included in the list of violators. Unfortunately, children
in those countries are dying because of the actions of
foreign forces that are supposed to defend them. We
consider unjustified the attempts to describe deaths of
children as collateral damage. That is also in line with
the Geneva Conventions. We favour looking closely at
such incidents and punishing those responsible.
We welcome the work of the United Nations
missions and country teams aimed at getting parties to
conflict to accept action plans to prevent and halt
violations of the rights of children. However, contact
with United Nations structures and non-State armed
groups can take place only with the agreement of the
Governments involved. Moreover, action plans are
important instruments in protecting children and
should not be seen as a goal in and of themselves. True
improvements in the situation for children in the field
is much more important for assessing progress than
promises that exist on paper but are often not fulfilled.

22

The Working Group on Children in Armed
Conflict, led by France and later by Mexico, did a
significant
amount
of
work
in
developing
recommendations on concrete situations. In order to
effectively implement them, it is necessary to develop
constructive
cooperation
with
the
concerned
Governments.
We studied with interest the recommendations set
out in the Secretary-General’s report. We believe that
most of them deserve close study and analysis,
including from the point of view of practical
application. In particular, we consider that an exchange
of views on the criteria for qualifying parties to
conflicts as persistent violators would be useful. We
believe that a brief mention in the annexes to a report
of the Secretary-General is insufficient in this context.
We are grateful to the delegation of Mexico for
preparing the draft presidential statement that we will
adopt today.
Mr. Moretti (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): It has
been an honour for my delegation to have had the
presence of the Secretary of Foreign Affairs of Mexico,
Her Excellency Patricia Espinosa, in the Council this
morning. I thank you, Sir, and your delegation for the
initiative in convening this important meeting.
(spoke in English)
I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, for her outstanding work
and her remarks today. We also thank the Deputy
Executive Director of UNICEF and the Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations for
their statements.
I would like to give particular thanks to Manju
for her vivid testimony about her experience as a child
soldier in Nepal. I commend her for her courage and
determination. It is disturbing that such experiences are
repeated day after day for thousands of children around
the world.
The case for the protection of children in armed
conflict is morally compelling. In cases where it
involves a threat to international peace and security,
the Security Council must take action to prevent and
halt violence against children.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2010/181)
demonstrates the success of the work that

10-40745

S/PV.6341

Ms. Coomaraswamy’s office has been carrying out in
conjunction with other actors, such as UNICEF. The
release of children associated with armed groups in
several countries, as described in the report, is cause
for genuine celebration. The signing of action plans
with groups in the Philippines, the Sudan and Nepal is
also worthy of recognition. At the same time, the
numerous instances in which violations continue
unabated are a sobering reminder that much remains to
be done.
Monitoring violations and gathering accurate
information remains a challenge. Close coordination
with local authorities and other relevant actors is key.
It is also important to identify and compile best
practices in this field and to consolidate the
methodology for collecting data, particularly with
regard to sexual violence, where the greatest
challenges lie.
Another source of concern is the issue of
accountability relating to crimes against children.
Improvements in this area require strong support by
means of technical assistance and capacity-building. It
may be worth considering ways by which multilateral
organizations and governments can cooperate with
interested States in that regard. That would be
particularly relevant in those cases where shortcomings
are due mostly to lack of funding, expertise or judicial
structures.
The Council and the Working Group should bear
in mind social and economic conditions affecting
children in armed conflict. In many situations poverty
and social injustice, although never a justification for
violations and abuses against children, make them
more likely. The Working Group could make
recommendations regarding specific socio-economic
conditions affecting child protection in the context of
armed conflict.
Where there is a peacekeeping operation on the
ground, child protection should be integrated into the
mission-wide protection strategies called for in
resolution 1894 (2009), as happens in many cases.
Those strategies can include plans to effectively protect
educational facilities and to build capacity so that
community leaders can help identify, as early as
possible, attempts by armed groups to recruit or harass
children.
I would like to make two brief points on the
functioning of the Working Group. First and foremost,

10-40745

it is imperative that it be provided with sufficient
administrative support by the Secretariat, as has been
repeatedly requested. We are especially concerned with
the preservation of the Group’s institutional memory,
which is particularly necessary for the elected members
to adequately participate in its work. Secondly, we
would support efforts to ensure that the Working Group
is able to deal in a timely fashion with the numerous
situations on its agenda.
In closing, I wish to reiterate my Government’s
commitment to the protection of children in all
situations, not only through the action of the Security
Council, where violations may affect peace and
security, but also through the United Nations agencies,
funds and programs and through bilateral cooperation.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, we would like to thank you, Mr. President, and
Her Excellency Ms. Patricia Espinosa Cantellano for
convening this debate, thus showing that Mexico
attaches special interest to the issue of children in
armed conflict. As a country with critical experience,
Bosnia and Herzegovina feels particularly strongly
about this topic, and we consider that giving high
priority to protection of children in armed conflict is of
vital importance. I would like to reiterate Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s appreciation for Mexico’s tireless
efforts and for chairing the Security Council Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
Allow me also to express our appreciation to
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Atul Khare,
and the Deputy Director of UNICEF, Ms. Hilde
Frafjord Johnson, for their briefings. We are grateful to
Manju Gurung for sharing her story with us today. We
really feel and respect her courage, and I believe we all
heard very important messages that we have to
consider in future.
Bosnia and Herzegovina highly appreciates and
supports the work of Ms. Coomaraswamy, whose
outreach activities and field visits contributed
significantly to improving the situation of children in
armed conflict. The pragmatic and cooperative
approach, with a humanitarian emphasis aimed at
ensuring broad and effective protection for children
exposed to and affected by conflict in situations of
concern, is of key importance.

23

S/PV.6341

We also align ourselves with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of the European Union
later today.
Bosnia and Herzegovina takes positive note of
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2010/181) and the
recommendations contained therein. Significant
progress has been made with regard to the signing of
action plans to end the recruitment and use of child
soldiers and to secure their release from armed forces
and groups.
We are encouraged by the fact that some parties
to armed conflict have made progress in releasing child
soldiers. Nevertheless, we are deeply concerned that
the practice of recruiting and using children has
continued in the past year. While stressing the primary
role of national Governments in providing protection
and relief to all children affected by armed conflicts,
we urge all parties to conflicts to fully comply with
international humanitarian law and human rights law
with regard to protecting the civilian population. All
countries and groups must place the protection of
children in situations of armed conflict above politics.
Furthermore, we urge the parties to conflict listed
in the annexes in the Secretary-General’s report to
engage in constructive dialogue in order to prepare and
implement the time-bound action plans to stop
recruitment and use of children, sexual violence
against children and killing and maiming of children.
This process should be conducted through efficient
coordination among different actors in the field,
including the host Government, United Nations
entities, donors and non-governmental organizations.
We would encourage donors to ensure sufficient,
timely and adequate funding for the implementation of
action plans. In this context, education packages and
access with regard to basic needs such as nutrition,
health and water, as well as psychological support for
reintegration of child soldiers into their families and
communities, should be ensured and all barriers to
access removed.
Recognizing the important role of education, we
are deeply concerned about the growing number of
attacks against schools, educational facilities, teachers
and pupils. In times of conflict all steps should be
taken to safeguard the right to education. All parties to
conflict should keep schools as protected areas and
zones of peace for boys and girls.

24

Bosnia and Herzegovina considers that targeted,
gradual and more vigorous measures against those
groups and individuals who persistently commit grave
violations against children should be undertaken. In
order to end impunity for violations against children,
Member States must uphold existing international
standards and operationalize their obligations through
accelerated national legislative reform and systematic
implementation and monitoring. Perpetrators should be
brought to justice in compliance with international
justice mechanisms, criminal courts and tribunals.
The Paris Principles and Guidelines on Children
Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups
advocate a comprehensive approach to reintegrating
children into their communities. Including children in
peacebuilding activities is one of the key elements of
each peacebuilding strategy. Special attention should
be given to refugee and displaced children, children
with disabilities and those who have been subjected to
sexual violence. We believe that their participation in
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
processes is critical. It is of utmost importance to
continue including specific provisions for the
protection of children in the mandates of all relevant
United Nations peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
political missions; Child Protection Advisers should be
deployed in those missions.
Many positive developments with regard to
monitoring and reporting have been seen since the
adoption of resolutions 1539 (2004) and 1612 (2005).
However, much more remains to be done. We are of the
view that the monitoring and reporting system should
be strengthened and its capacities developed for
effective and timely response to all violations and
abuses committed against children, in particular with
regard to collecting reliable and verifiable information
on acts of rape and acts of sexual violence. It is crucial
that country task forces on monitoring and reporting
follow up developments and the implementation of
recommendations of the Security Council Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
Cooperation and exchange of information
between the Security Council Working Group on
Children in Armed Conflict, the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children in
Armed Conflict and relevant sanctions committees
should be improved. Sanctions committees should
consider inviting the Office of the Special
Representative, as was the case in May with regard to

10-40745

S/PV.6341

the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
to brief them more regularly on specific
recommendations in the Secretary-General’s reports.
We believe that such cooperation can add value to the
efforts of the Working Group and, at the same time,
contribute significantly towards more efficient use of
the Working Group’s recommendations.
Finally, Bosnia and Herzegovina fully supports
the adoption by the Security Council of an actionoriented presidential statement, convinced that more
positive examples will follow.
Mr. Lolo (Nigeria): Madam President, let me join
others in welcoming you to this debate and in thanking
you for your leadership. Also, let me commend your
country for the choice of topic for our discussion today.
I should like in addition to thank Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
for her tireless efforts and her contribution to the task
of protecting the rights and welfare of children. The
growing culture of cooperation on this issue between
State actors, the United Nations and other relevant
agencies is a credit to Ms. Coomaraswamy’s
leadership. Working together to devise and implement
time-bound action plans for the rehabilitation and
reintegration of children affected by armed conflict,
these actors make an important contribution to the task
of protecting the rights and welfare of that vulnerable
group.
Children are not only victims of armed conflicts;
they also suffer the worst effects of their debilitating
consequences. Defenceless and powerless, children are
killed and maimed and are used and abused in these
situations, as we heard this morning in the compelling
account of Ms. Manju Gurung. We commend her for
her courage in telling her story before the Security
Council.
Where they survive, their future is often marked
by neglect, rejection and even ostracism. We are
convinced that, so long as there is armed conflict, the
international community must take appropriate
measures to protect the most vulnerable groups, of
which children constitute a significant component. Our
interventions must aim at preventing their involvement
or use in armed conflicts in violation of international
law.

10-40745

One cannot overstate the need for the Council to
continue to pay attention to the issue of children and
armed conflict. Indeed, over the past decade the
Council has demonstrated its commitment to
improving the plight of such children, beginning with
its landmark resolution 1261 (1999) and most recently
through resolution 1882 (2009). Resolution 1621
(2005), which created the Security Council Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict, provides
another key mechanism that has allowed the Council to
give practical expression to the protection of children
in armed conflict.
We are pleased that resolution 1882 (2009) has
extended the reach of the Secretary-General’s reporting
framework to cover additional violations and to
address conflict situations not on the Council’s agenda.
That resolution also broadened the conceptual scope of
the issue to include killing, maiming and rape and
other sexual violence inflicted on children in these
circumstances. Fittingly, the issue of children and
armed conflict has become more deeply embedded in
the business of the Council.
We applaud the progress that has been achieved
in the adoption of appropriate instruments and the
establishment of relevant institutional frameworks
related to children and armed conflict. Those countries
that have willingly submitted themselves to United
Nations support and strategies are to be commended. In
addition, the N’Djamena Declaration on child soldiers,
signed last week by Nigeria and five other countries,
demonstrates the commitment to tackling this issue.
While these successes should be recognized, it is
clear that much work remains to be done. Nigeria is
concerned that persistent violators cited in the annexes
of the Secretary-General’s reports for at least five years
have not received the Council’s attention with a view
to ensuring their accountability.
In our view, the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict should be encouraged to continue to
monitor, assess, consult and report objectively on the
range of issues affecting children in armed conflict.
The Council should take steps to ensure that
substantive administrative support is provided to the
Working Group to enhance its capacity to discharge its
mandate. There is also need for coordination among the
Working Group, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
and the relevant sanctions committees to ensure that

25

S/PV.6341

the recommendations of the sanctions committees
adequately respond to the protection imperatives of
armed conflicts.

efforts. It is her commitment and leadership that have
led to much of the progress we have made on the
protection of children over the past year.

For its part, the Council should be seen to
facilitate progress. It should be more responsive to the
conclusions and recommendations of the Working
Group, and it should use its considerable authority to
ensure that violators of children in armed conflict are
held to account.

And there has been progress. Without the work of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and the Security Council Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict, more than 350 children in Burundi
would not now be with their families. Such success
underlines the difference that we collectively can
make. But where systematic and persistent violations
continue, we must make every effort to bring those
violations to a swift end. I would like to focus on three
points.

As a troop-contributing country, Nigeria supports
the inclusion of specific provisions for the protection
of children in the mandates of all United Nations
peacekeeping and peacebuilding missions. We also
support the efforts of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations to develop and implement appropriate
training programmes and material for all United
Nations peacekeepers. Support should also be given for
the integration of this successful strategy into the work
of the Department of Political Affairs in its political
missions. We believe that this will not only prepare
the missions to better handle child-specific issues that
are inevitable in conflict and post-conflict situations,
but will also help to establish best practices for
emulation by the international community.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s suggestion to
make the provision of peacekeeping support to national
forces that may be committing serious human rights
violations conditional on compliance with international
law. We hope that this will propel the integration of
child protection measures into all medium- and longterm peacekeeping and peacebuilding strategies.

First, the United Kingdom firmly believes that
the greatest impact on the lives of children in armed
conflict can be made through the implementation of
country action plans. We welcome the new action plans
in the Sudan, the Philippines and Sri Lanka, as well as
the new country task forces for monitoring and
reporting, notably in Afghanistan. In the Sudan, the
United Kingdom will work alongside others to
implement security sector reform in Southern Sudan to
help the Sudan People’s Liberation Army develop as an
accountable and disciplined body operating with
respect for human rights. In Sri Lanka, we were
heartened to see the recent release of all registered
child soldiers. The United Kingdom supports
UNICEF’s vital work in ending the recruitment of
children in Sri Lanka and in facilitating the release and
reintegration of former child soldiers.

Finally, we endorse the draft presidential
statement to be issued at the end of this debate.

Non-governmental organizations and civil society
organizations have also contributed greatly to
information-gathering on children and armed conflict.
We urge all those parties that have signed national
action plans to honour their commitments and redouble
their efforts. Those yet to sign must engage with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
commit to ending violations against children.

Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom):
Madam President, I would like to join other speakers in
thanking you for organizing today’s important debate.
Mexico has given outstanding leadership on this issue
in the Security Council, as demonstrated by your
presence today. We greatly appreciate that. I would
also like to thank Hilde Frafjord Johnson and Atul
Khare for their interventions and to thank in particular
Manju Gurung for her powerful and moving testimony.
I commend Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy for her

Secondly, as the Security Council acknowledged
in resolution 1882 (2009), children are subject not just
to recruitment, but also to killing and maiming and
rape and other sexual violence. The SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2010/181) contains valuable
analysis of these abhorrent violations. Reporting and
follow-up action should be further strengthened. We
are particularly concerned about attacks on education,
which are mentioned in the report. The country task
forces should enhance monitoring and reporting in that

The Council should continue to send a strong a
clear warning that abuses and violations against
children in armed conflict situations will not go
unpunished.

26

10-40745

S/PV.6341

particular area. Children must be able to learn, and
teachers must be able to teach, free from the threat of
rape or sexual violence.
Thirdly, we must make better use of the reporting
we receive here at the Council. The Security Council
Working Group should produce conclusions that are
robust and timely and that hold violators to account.
It is clear that, although there has been progress,
many challenges remain. As we know, many children’s
lives remain at risk from conflict on a daily basis. In
Burma, the conflict continues to place children in grave
danger. We urge all parties to allow full access to the
United Nations task force and the International Labour
Organization. While we welcome the Government of
Burma’s establishment of a committee to prevent
military recruitment of under-age children, still greater
efforts are needed to ensure that officers and
communities are aware of the law on the recruitment of
children and that complaints and cases are investigated.
The United Kingdom remains committed to
tackling the issue of children and armed conflict. We
will continue to work with our partners in the
international community to create a safer environment
for children around the world. Today’s draft
presidential statement gives us a good basis from
which to do so, and we strongly support it.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank you, Madam President, for convening today’s
meeting. I should also like to thank Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Hilde Frafjord Johnson, Deputy Executive
Director of UNICEF, Mr. Atul Khare, Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, and
Ms. Manju Gurung, a child from Nepal, for their
briefings.
China attaches importance to the issue of children
and armed conflict. We condemn and oppose the
recruitment and use of child soldiers and other
violations of children’s rights in armed conflict. We
support the efforts of the United Nations, including the
Security Council, to promote the protection of children
in armed conflict. In that regard, I would like to
emphasize the following points.
First, in order to ensure the protection of children
in armed conflict, it is necessary to begin at the source
and pursue a comprehensive approach. The Security

10-40745

Council bears the grave responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. It
should attach greater importance to the prevention,
suppression and elimination of armed conflicts, so as to
prevent the occurrence of tragedies. The international
community should redouble its efforts to eliminate
poverty,
universalize
education
and
promote
sustainable development, so as to create a security and
social environment conducive to the healthy growth of
children. That would be the best way to protect
children.
Secondly, in considering the issue of children and
armed conflict, it is necessary to take into account
local conditions and to proceed accordingly. The nature
of conflict situations varies, as do situations both on
and off the agenda of the Security Council. In that
regard, it is always necessary to attach importance to
the protection of children. However, there should be
differences in the actual approach. It is necessary that
we not disregard existing differences or apply a single
approach to every situation. China is not in favour of
the frequent use or threat of use of sanctions by the
Security Council. It is in particular necessary to use
caution when it comes to the issue of children and
armed conflict.
Thirdly, in addressing the issue of children and
armed conflict, it is necessary to fully utilize the role
of the Governments of the countries concerned. The
relevant resolutions of the Security Council stipulate
that Governments bear the primary responsibility for
the protection of the children of their countries. The
Security Council and its Working Group should have
more communication with the countries concerned and
endorse and support the positive measures adopted,
continually increase mutual trust and avoid politicizing
children’s issues. In gathering information and carrying
out field work, it is necessary to cooperate with the
Governments of the countries concerned, so as to
improve efficiency and generate synergies.
The efforts of the Security Council alone are not
enough to truly to change the situation of children and
armed conflict and give them a good future. We
encourage
United
Nations
bodies,
regional
organizations, the World Bank, other international
agencies and non-governmental organizations to
strengthen their coordination and cooperation, adopt an
integrated strategy, exploit their own strengths and
work together to help countries in conflict to increase
their capacity to protect children. China will continue

27

S/PV.6341

to work together with the rest of the international
community and to make its due contribution to the
protection of children.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I too would like to extend a
warm welcome to you, Madam President, and to thank
you for personally presiding over this important
debate. It is a great pleasure to discuss the issue of
children and armed conflict under your presidency. I
would like to pay special tribute to the Government of
Mexico and its Mission here for very ably chairing the
Security Council’s Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict, as well as to Canada for chairing the
Group of Friends of children and armed conflict at the
United Nations. I would also like to express my
gratitude to Ms. Coomaraswamy, Ms. Johnson and
Mr. Khare for their briefings. Most of all, Ms. Manju
Gurung has inspired us all with her courage and her
strong faith in a better future.
The United Nations architecture on children and
armed conflict — including the monitoring and
reporting mechanism, action plans and the Working
Group — have been in place for almost five years now.
During those years, there has been steady progress in
reducing the number of child soldiers in the world.
Some parties to conflict have been de-listed from the
annexes to the Secretary-General’s reports, such as
Burundi in the most recent report (S/2010/181). Parties
in the Sudan, Nepal and the Philippines recently signed
action plans. In another welcome move, six Central
African countries adopted the N’Djamena Declaration
last week and committed themselves to taking
measures to protect children according to global
standards.
Meanwhile, however, some new conflict parties
have been listed. The latest report of the SecretaryGeneral contains a list of 55 conflict parties in 13
countries. Clearly, there still remains a major challenge
in eliminating the scourge of inhuman treatment of
children trapped in armed conflict.
Today I would like to address three issues. The
first is accountability for persistent perpetrators. Japan
is particularly concerned about 16 parties which have
been listed for the past five years. In order to ensure
accountability for those persistent perpetrators, the
Security Council agreed in resolution 1539 (2004) to
consider the possibility of imposing targeted measures
against those groups. But the practice is not necessarily
consistent or even.

28

To hold persistent perpetrators accountable, the
Security Council should include in its resolutions on
the sanctions committees provisions in respect of
conflict parties who commit serious violations against
children. The Working Group should exchange
information and coordinate closely with the work of
the sanctions committees. The informal briefing given
the other day by Ms. Coomaraswamy to the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo was useful, as would be others she could
make in the future. We very much encourage other
sanctions committees to invite her and to consider
similar briefings.
The second issue is rape and other sexual
violence. We welcome the fact that, in accordance with
resolution 1882 (2009), the report of the SecretaryGeneral this year has listed for the first time the parties
responsible for rape and other sexual violence. The
report’s indication of a relatively low incidence of
sexual violence against children does not reflect the
reality on the ground or the practice of parties. We
believe that it reflects the difficulty of collecting and
verifying information on sexual violence in conflict
situations. Timely and reliable data are indispensable
for appropriate action. Japan is particularly grateful to
the efforts of UNICEF and peacekeeping operations
personnel on the ground in collecting information and
data
on
sexual
violence.
We
encourage
Ms. Coomaraswamy to coordinate closely with the
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict
in the monitoring and reporting of sexual violence
against children.
Third is the issue of attacks against education.
Japan believes that education is the most essential
means of promoting human potential. Achieving
universal primary education is one of the fundamental
pillars of the Millennium Development Goals.
Therefore, we have to express strong condemnation of
the widespread attacks against schools committed by
several armed groups and forces, as reported in the
Secretary-General’s report. A new UNESCO report,
“Education under Attack 2010”, indicates that the
number of attacks on schools, students and teachers is
growing in conflict situations, and that these attacks on
education appear to be far more severe and systematic
than previously thought. The targeting of girl students
in specific settings is a particular concern.

10-40745

S/PV.6341

We call upon all conflict parties to stop and
prevent attacks against schools and other educational
facilities, and against teachers and pupils, including, in
particular, girls, and to fully respect international
humanitarian law. It is our hope that the next report of
the Secretary-General will include full information and
analysis on these attacks, which have a severe longterm impact on children and sound national
development.

to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo as a positive step in this
direction, and in line with Security Council resolutions
1698 (2006) and 1882 (2009). The Group of Friends
also commends the sanctions Committee on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for its groundbreaking engagement and fully supports the
designation of individuals for targeted measures, as
provided for in resolution 1807 (2008).

In conflict situations, children are the most
vulnerable. Japan is a strong advocate of the concept of
human security. I am pleased that Japan and Mexico, as
co-chairs of the Friends of Human Security — which is
growing — are jointly promoting the mainstreaming of
this concept in the work of the United Nations. This
human-centred, multisectoral approach, which focuses
not only on protection but on empowerment at the
individual and community levels, is particularly
relevant when we consider children and armed conflict.

The Group of Friends looks forward to the
continuation of such fruitful collaboration between the
sanctions committees, the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict and the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, and stands ready to work for
greater protection of children in situations of conflict.

Japan has been providing support, through the
United Nations Trust Fund for Human Security, for
projects that address the issue of children and armed
conflict in a comprehensive and multisectoral manner,
in many countries including Timor-Leste, Nepal, the
Philippines, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Uganda. Japan remains committed to strengthening the
protection and empowerment of children affected on
the ground.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Normandin (Canada): Madam President, I
would first of all like to thank you and the delegation
of Mexico for convening this important meeting. I
would also like to thank all the speakers of this
morning. In particular, I thank Ms. Manju Gurung for
her moving and compelling statement, which reminds
us of the relevance and the importance of our work.
First, let me say a few words on behalf of the
Group of Friends of children and armed conflict, an
informal network of over 35 interested Member States,
chaired by Canada. The Group of Friends is pleased
with the Security Council’s commitment to
strengthening accountability for persistent perpetrators
of grave violations against children and encourages
decisive action against such perpetrators. We welcome
the briefing by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict to
the Security Council Committee established pursuant

10-40745

The Group of Friends is also pleased with the
work undertaken by the Security Council in
progressively strengthening the protection framework
for children affected by armed conflict. However, the
Security Council Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict is currently the only subsidiary body
of the Security Council that does not receive
administrative support. In order to continue the recent
momentum and ensure day-to-day attention to the
children and armed conflict agenda, the Working
Group will need ongoing support. Therefore the Group
of Friends calls for the immediate provision of
administrative support, as requested in resolution 1882
(2009).
Lastly, the Group of Friends congratulates the
Special Representative, UNICEF, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
as well as the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Violence against Children, on the launch of
the campaign for universal ratification of the Optional
Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
(spoke in French)
Speaking now in my national capacity, on behalf
of Canada, I would like to formally welcome the
Secretary-General’s annual report on children and
armed conflict (S/2010/181). This debate is an
opportunity to once again bring to the Security
Council’s attention the severity of continued acts of
violence against children, and at the same time to make
recommendations for the full implementation of
resolution 1882 (2009).

29

S/PV.6341

The adoption of that resolution last August has
brought forward new improvements to the children and
armed conflict agenda, most notably a higher profile on
rape and other forms of sexual violence against
children and on the killing and maiming of children. In
particular, Canada is pleased that perpetrators of sexual
violence against children have been exposed in the
Secretary-General’s annual report. Given the on-theground reduction in the number of children used in
hostilities, which is a result of diligent monitoring and
reporting in recent years, Canada firmly believes that
strong monitoring and the exposure of the perpetrators
of rape and other forms of sexual violence will result in
a significant reduction in the number of these
incidents. With the expansion of the monitoring and
reporting mechanism’s mandate to include these two
new triggers, strong support from the international
community is required on several fronts.
First, the mechanism requires additional financial
support from donors in order to be adequately
resourced to deliver on its mandate. Secondly,
non-governmental organizations and local civil society
are key partners and should therefore be supported.
Thirdly, as noted in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, the mechanism requires the political support
and cooperation of the national Governments of the
countries in question, which should in particular allow
access to non-State actors. Canada strongly supports
the link between the United Nations and non-State
actors in order to ensure that the crucial dialogue with
the latter can take place and that an action plan to
eliminate grave violations against children can be
adopted.

Canada also welcomes the call in resolution 1889
(2009) for the element of accountability to be
integrated into the agenda of the Working Group.
Sanctions should be imposed more systematically in
order for persistent perpetrators of grave violations
against children to be held accountable. As
recommended by the Secretary-General, Canada urges
the Security Council to take more vigorous measures
against persistent violators who have been listed in the
annual report for at least five years for committing
grave violations against children.
Finally, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Coomaraswamy, deserves special recognition for
the wealth of information put forward by her Office
and for its numerous efforts on behalf of children. She
has been a tireless proponent for the protection needs
of children and undertaken countless field missions.
The collective experience and lessons learned by
Ms. Coomaraswamy’s Office, the Security Council
Working Group, and the monitoring and reporting
mechanisms are invaluable. They must be shared,
particularly since similar processes on the protection of
civilians issues have been activated.
In conclusion, Canada will continue to play a key
role and help contribute to concrete results both at the
United Nations and on the ground in countries of
concern.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are still
a number of speakers remaining on my list. I therefore
intend, with the concurrence of the members of the
Council, to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.05 p.m.

30

10-40745
