United Nations

S/PV.4828

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-eighth year

4828

th meeting
Tuesday, 16 September 2003, 4.20 p.m.
New York

President:

Sir Emyr Jones Parry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Tafrov
Mr. Banoum
Mr. Muñoz
Mr. Wang Guangya
Mr. De La Sablière
Mr. Pleuger
Mr. Sow
Mr. Pujalte
Mr. Akram
Mr. Gatilov
Mr. Arias
Mr. Mekdad
Mr. Negroponte

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question
Letter dated 12 September 2003 from the Permanent Representative of the
Sudan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2003/880)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

03-52158 (E)

*0352158*

S/PV.4828

The meeting was called to order at 4.25 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
Letter dated 12 September 2003 from the
Permanent Representative of the Sudan to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2003/880)
The President: The Security Council will now
continue its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2003/891, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Pakistan, South Africa,
the Sudan and the Syrian Arab Republic.
It is my understanding that the Security Council
is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
before it. If I hear no objection, I shall now put the
draft resolution to the vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, Cameroon, Chile, China, France, Guinea,
Mexico, Pakistan, Russian Federation, Spain,
Syrian Arab Republic.
Against:
United States of America.
Abstaining:
Bulgaria, Germany, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland.
The President: The result of the voting is as
follows: 11 votes in favour, 1 against and 3 abstentions.
The draft resolution has not been adopted, owing to the
negative vote of a permanent member of the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.
we

2

Mr. Negroponte (United States of America): As
stated yesterday, while all parties have

responsibilities in bringing peace to the Middle East,
ending terrorism must be the highest priority. The draft
resolution put forward today was flawed in that it
failed to include the following three elements: a robust
condemnation of acts of terrorism; an explicit
condemnation of Hamas, the Palestinian Islamic Jihad
and the Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade as organizations
responsible for acts of terrorism; and a call for the
dismantlement of infrastructure that supports these
terror operations wherever located, consistent with
resolution 1373 (2001). This draft resolution did not
take a clear stand against the actions of these terrorist
groups or call for decisive action against them.
The Palestinian Authority must take action to
remove the capability of extremist groups to conduct
terrorist outrages. In addition, Israel must move
forward and fulfil its obligations and commitments
under the road map and the Aqaba summit, including
improving the daily lives of Palestinians.
As we said yesterday, we will not support any
draft resolution that evades the explicit threat to the
Middle East peace process posed by Hamas and other
such terrorist groups. The United States opposed the
draft resolution, as it failed to do just that.
We note once again that the Government of Israel
is already aware of the views of the Council members
on the issue of Mr. Arafat. Moreover, Secretary of State
Powell stated that the United States does not support
either the elimination of Mr. Arafat or his forced exile.
While Mr. Arafat is part of the problem, we believe
that this problem is best solved through diplomatic
isolation, and we have made that view clear.
For its part, the United States, along with Quartet
partners, will continue to work towards the
implementation of President Bush’s vision of a twoState solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, as set
forth in the road map.
Our diplomatic personnel, including Secretary of
State Powell, Ambassador Wolfe and our missions in
the region, are intensively engaged with both parties at
the highest levels. We remain committed to the road
map as the way forward towards the goal of the Israeli
and Palestinian peoples living side by side in peace,
security and freedom.
Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French):
Bulgaria abstained in the voting on the draft resolution,
as it does whenever there is no unanimity on the

S/PV.4828

Council or, worse yet — like today, regrettably — there
is an impasse.
Given the extremely grave situation in the Middle
East, the Council should have made an extra effort to
find consensus. Bulgaria appeals yet again to the
Palestinian Authority to do all it is called upon to do in
the Quartet’s road map in order to stop the suicide
attacks and all acts of terrorism against Israeli
civilians. We also call on the Government of Israel to
halt the extrajudicial killings and to renounce its
intention to expel President Yasser Arafat, as called for
by the Quartet’s road map.
Mr. Pleuger (Germany): My delegation is
disappointed by the outcome of the voting. This voting
sends the wrong signal to the parties and gives rise to
the perception of the Security Council as not living up
to its responsibilities.
On behalf of my Government, I should like to
state that, in abstaining in the voting on the draft
resolution, my Government’s view with regard to the
decision by the Israeli Government in principle to
expel the President of the Palestinian Authority,
Mr. Arafat, has not changed. My Government
continues to hold that the said decision in itself is
detrimental to the peace process and that putting the
decision into effect would entail the risk of further
destabilization.
We therefore once again call on the Israeli
Government to revoke its decision and reiterate the
importance of both parties exercising utmost restraint
at this crucial time for the Middle East peace process.
In our view, all efforts now should, more than ever
before, be directed at returning to the road map,
implementing it in good faith and strengthening the
Quartet.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Pakistan sponsored and
voted in favour of the draft resolution in document
S/2003/891. We did so because we believed that it was
important to send a message to all concerned that any
contemplated act of deportation of Mr. Arafat would be
illegal and inconsistent with the objectives of the
Middle East peace process. This message, clearly, was
transmitted yesterday in the open debate held by the
Council, with the participation of the wider
membership of the United Nations.
This draft resolution enjoyed the broad support of
the non-aligned members and was sponsored by the

Arab Group. The vote we have taken reflects the fact
that it also enjoyed the support of the majority of the
members of the Security Council. My delegation
regrets that it was not possible for the Security Council
to move forward in a united way. This will have
implications for our actions in other areas. Several
Council members tried up to the last minute to evolve a
text that would be acceptable to all sides. We thank all
those delegations that took part in these good faith
efforts.
Let me take this opportunity to reaffirm
Pakistan’s opposition to terrorism in all forms and
manifestations anywhere in the world. This includes
State terrorism. At the same time, as stated by the
Secretary-General during the ministerial meeting of the
Council on 20 January this year, the issue of terrorism
should not be used “to demonize political opponents”
(S/PV.4688, p. 3) and to “delegitimize legitimate
political grievances” (ibid.). The Secretary-General
also noted that
“States fighting various forms of unrest or
insurgency are finding it tempting to abandon the
slow, difficult but sometimes necessary processes
of political negotiation for the deceptively easy
option of military action” (ibid.).
The Secretary-General advised us all to
“act with determination to address — indeed,
solve — the political disputes and longstanding
conflicts that underlie, fuel and generate support
for terrorism” (ibid.).
It is unfortunate that, rather than heeding the
Secretary-General’s call, the States which were being
addressed are suppressing the right of peoples to selfdetermination in the Middle East and South Asia and
are now joining together in what is advertised as an
alliance against terrorism, but what is more likely to
emerge as an axis of oppression.
We would strongly urge the Government of
Israel, rather than resort to extreme actions, such as
deportation or worse for Mr. Yasser Arafat, the
President of Palestine, to join in concerted action to
assist the Palestinian people in regaining their rights
and to facilitate the end of their dispossession. They
deserve to exercise the right of self-determination
promised to them by the Security Council. The
international community has a clear responsibility to
realize this as well.

3

S/PV.4828

Another unambiguous message that emerged
from yesterday’s debate is the need for the parties to
rededicate themselves to the Quartet’s road map and to
commence its implementation in good faith. We hope
that the parties will take cognizance of the desire and
determination of the international community.
For its part, Pakistan will continue to support
every effort that takes us closer to the fulfilment of the
vision of two States, Israel and Palestine, living in the
holy land in peace with each other and with an end,
finally, to the epic tragedy of Palestine.
Mr. De La Sablière (France) (spoke in French):
France voted in favour of the text submitted to a vote,
which seems to us to reflect the general message
expressed yesterday in the open debate. Violence and
terrorism must end. The decision to expel President
Arafat is against the law, politically counterproductive
and should not be implemented. The road map is the
best path possible and should be fully implemented by
both parties. The Quartet must pursue and intensify its
efforts.
We should have liked the Council to achieve
consensus on such a message. We regret the outcome
of the voting. It is a seriously counterproductive result.
Mr. Muñoz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation voted in favour of the draft resolution
because it reflected our views. The Government of
Chile unequivocally condemned the Government of
Israel’s announcement with regard to the removal from
the occupied territories of the President of the
Palestinian National Authority. Such an action would
not contribute to the achievement of peace in the
Middle East and would go against the dignity of a
people and its Authority — an Authority that was
legitimately established on the basis of a democratic
process.
We would have preferred a consensus resolution.
The non-approval of the draft resolution did not,
however, prevent our voting in favour of it. But we fear
that this situation will not be helpful to the political
process in the Middle East or to the implementation of
the road map. Nonetheless, we believe that all
necessary efforts must be made to return to peace
negotiations within the framework of international law,
in strict compliance with United Nations resolutions
and with the commitments solemnly undertaken at the
Aqaba Summit for the effective implementation of the
road map of the Madrid Quartet.

4

This afternoon’s developments, however, are not
a cause for optimism. We must now think about the
need for perseverance and patience so that we can
again, perhaps, take up our efforts for peace that the
people of Palestine and Israel deserve.
Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): It is regrettable that, despite all of the efforts
of the Arab Group in general and of the Syrian
delegation in particular, and notwithstanding the
flexibility and patience that we have shown in the past
few days, we have not been able to achieve the desired
result. We were not able to do so in spite of the fact
that the draft resolution, which was supported by the
Non-Aligned Movement, was extremely balanced. We
wish to emphasize in this respect that the wording used
in most of the paragraphs of the draft resolution was
inspired by the language of earlier resolutions that were
adopted by the Security Council, given the evolution of
the situation in the occupied Palestinian territories.
The fact that the delegation of the United States
used its veto is greatly to be regretted. International
law is being threatened, and the fact that that veto did
not allow the Security Council to carry out its functions
with respect to an issue of international peace and
security is regrettable. That will only further
complicate an already complex situation in the Middle
East and have a negative impact on the general
situation there.
We made every effort to reflect the discussions
that took place, as well as the dynamic that we have
observed in the international community with a view to
halting Israeli actions, stopping the destruction that has
been taking place in the past few years and putting an
end to the deaths, which now number thousands. Israel
has also tried to expel the Palestinian people from their
land and to build settlements on Palestinian territory.
Recently, Israel threatened to kill or to expel the
Palestinian President. That is contrary to the principles
of international law, the United Nations Charter and, in
particular, the Fourth Geneva Convention.
Despite the fact that the draft resolution was not
adopted, during deliberations yesterday the Security
Council stated that it rejected the actions and policies
of Israel. Syria therefore believes that Israel bears the
responsibility for its illogical policy and that Israel is
also responsible for having scuttled the peace process
in the Middle East, as well as for all of the
consequences that flow from that policy.

S/PV.4828

I would like to express our gratitude and
appreciation to those States members of the Council
that supported the draft resolution and voted in favour
of it. We would also like to note that Syria’s
commitment, within the United Nations, to resolve all
of the problems that we are confronting today,
particularly in the Middle East, remains steadfast. Our
people look forward to the day when a just and
comprehensive peace will reign in the Middle East, and
when the occupied Palestinian lands, as well as those in
Syria and Lebanon, will be returned to their rightful
owners in accordance with resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973), and in conformity with the Madrid terms of
reference, the principle of land for peace and the
resolutions adopted at the Beirut Arab Summit of 2001.
Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): The result
of the vote was very disappointing. The Council had to
send a clear message with regard to the announcement
regarding the possible expulsion of the leader of the
Palestinian National Authority — an action that not
only would have no legal basis but, as all members of
the Council know, would also be an enormous political
error that could have very serious consequences.
My delegation has always spoken out against all
acts of terrorism; nothing can justify such acts. Clearly
there was room for improvement in the draft resolution
in that respect, although the operative part did include
a demand for an end to all acts of terrorism.
Furthermore, it expressed fully its support for the
efforts of the Quartet. It was necessary to give a clear,
unambiguous and unanimous message about the
mistake that expelling the leader of the Palestinian
Authority would represent. I therefore regret that the
Council was unable to find unanimity on that issue.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United
Kingdom.
The United Kingdom has repeatedly made clear
to the Israeli Government that expelling or harming
President
Arafat
would
be
wrong
and
counterproductive. Israel should not allow its justified
anger at the continuing violence to lead to actions that
would undermine both the peace process and Israel’s
own interests.
The United Kingdom believes that the road map
remains valid and that today it is even more important
that it be pursued. We urge the parties, in conjunction
with the members of the Quartet, to work for its full

and rapid implementation. The United Kingdom
remains ready to assist with the implementation of the
road map.
The road map is comprehensive, but some
elements seem particularly relevant, given recent
events. In phase one, the road map calls on the
Palestinians to undertake visible efforts on the ground
to arrest, disrupt and restrain individuals and groups
conducting and planning violent attacks on Israelis
anywhere. That is still valid and ever more pressing.
In the same vein, the road map calls on Israel to
take no actions undermining trust, including
deportations, attacks on civilians, confiscation and/or
demolition of Palestinian homes and property as a
punitive measure or to facilitate Israeli construction,
destruction of Palestinian institutions and infrastructure
and other measures specified in the work plan. Again,
it seems very relevant to where we find ourselves
today. I therefore agree with Mr. Roed-Larsen, who
yesterday said that bold parallel steps were needed.
The United Kingdom considers that the text
before us was insufficiently balanced and therefore
unhelpful in the context of implementing the road map.
As the sponsors of the resolution felt unable to
accommodate United Kingdom amendments intended
to achieve a better balance, the United Kingdom
abstained in the vote on the text. We regret, however,
that a balanced resolution failed to pass, and we urge
Israel not to misunderstand the international
community’s unanimous rejection of their decision in
principle to remove President Arafat from the
Palestinian areas. Both parties should understand that
the international community wants the full, urgent
implementation of the road map.
I now resume my function as President of the
Council.
I remind the Council that, in accordance with the
decision taken at the 4824th meeting of the Council, on
15 September 2003, I invite the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to take a seat at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Kidwa
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.
The President: In accordance with the decision
taken at that same meeting, on 15 September 2003, I
invite the representative of Israel to take a seat at the
Council table.

5

S/PV.4828

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gillerman
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table.

chose to abstain in the vote for reasons that remain
incomprehensible to us.

The President: I now call on the Permanent
Observer of Palestine.

I wish to reassure the Council once again that we
will not refrain from working with it. We will return to
it, perhaps in the near future. We will not be
intimidated by what has happened. We are encouraged
by the positions of many Council members who have
done their best to preserve the role of the Security
Council, in keeping with the Charter, and who have
attempted to maintain a reasonable, balanced and
moderate political position that will be in the interest
of the peace process in the region.

Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): For
the record, during the years that I have worked here I
have never seen the Security Council invite us to sit at
the Council table while an specific issue is being
deliberated. Then the Council decided to conduct the
vote in our absence. I do not know the reason for that,
but I understand that that has not been the usual
practice at any previous meetings.
We, with the Arab Group, co-sponsored a draft
resolution that was very moderate. We thought that it
would be adopted and would have broad support,
amounting to 14 votes. However, in light of what we
have been told or has been stated publicly by Member
States, I would like to assure the Council that the
United States delegation did not declare that it would
use its veto power. It did not inform us, a Permanent
Observer Mission, of that, not even as a courtesy.
Therefore, that delegation did not make any direct
proposals for amendments and did not conduct any
discussions with us. That, I believe, raises a question
about what has transpired so far.
Generally speaking, it is regrettable that not only
has the position of the United States of America been
biased in favour of Israel for so many years, but also
that it has been transformed into a position that accepts
Israeli logic and positions almost completely, to such
an extent that it has basically become a heavy, dark
shadow over the entire process that does not permit the
United States to play an unbiased role in the ArabIsraeli conflict or to act as an honest sponsor of the
peace process.

Finally, I wish to thank all the Member States that
co-sponsored the draft resolution and those who that
voted in favour of it.
The President: I would just like to assure the
Council as a whole and those watching that the
procedure followed by the presidency accords with the
advice of the Secretariat and conforms to the
established practice of the Council, lest there be any
doubt about that.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Israel.
Mr. Gillerman (Israel): I would first like to
congratulate you, Sir, on the able, efficient and
considerate manner in which you handled yesterday’s
debate and its continuation today.
The draft resolution presented before the Council
today for voting was, in our view, tragically lopsided. I
would therefore like to commend those countries that
did not support it.

As for President Arafat and the Palestinian
leadership, I wish to reiterate that the Palestinian
people will not accept outside interference, particularly
if the interfering parties are considered unfriendly by
our people. The Palestinian people will not accept any
interference regarding who is going to be politically
isolated or who is going to retain his position.

I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate a
number of points from Israel’s perspective. The draft
resolution did not focus on terrorism killing innocent
men, women and children, killing in the process the
hopes for peace. It did not focus on the clear legal
responsibility of the Palestinian leadership to dismantle
the terrorist infrastructure including confronting groups
such as Hamas, the Palestinian Islamic Jihad, the
Fatah, Tanzim and others, whose acts of murder lie at
the very heart of the problem.

Serious consequences may follow the use of veto,
such as the possibility of wrong interpretation by
Mr. Sharon’s Government in Israel, and the United
States alone will bear the responsibility for that. It is
also regrettable that the United Kingdom and Germany

Instead, it focused its criticism on the victims of
terrorism and on the response to terrorists rather than
on terrorism itself. In a perverse manner, the draft
resolution sought to equate the deliberate murder of
innocent civilians with targeted counter-terrorism

6

S/PV.4828

operations directed against those illegal combatants
responsible for murder and for continuing to plan
further acts of terror.
The adoption of the draft resolution would have
harmed efforts to bolster the peace process. The draft
resolution would have come to the defence of a man
who has devoted all his energies to scuttling the road
map and who continues to cause untold suffering to
both Israelis and Palestinians through his support and
toleration of terrorism.
To advance the cause of peace, we do not need
more one-sided United Nations resolutions. Lord
knows we do not need to increase the already
unprecedented burden on United Nations time and
resources that is expended every single year by
pandering to the Palestinian representative’s endless
partisan initiatives.
What we need is for both sides to commit
themselves to the cause of peace and to resolving this

dispute through dialogue in an atmosphere free from
terrorism,
violence
and
incitement,
which,
unfortunately and tragically, have been the tool of
Mr. Arafat’s corrupt leadership for far too long a time.
The President: The Permanent Observer of
Palestine would like to respond to what was just said? I
think the answer is that you have the right. The floor is
yours.
Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine): I will speak with my
broken English and my bad voice today. I just wanted
to remind you that today is the twenty-first anniversary
of the massacre of Sabra and Shatila. You remember,
that? You remember, Mr. Sharon? Just for the record.
The President: The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.10 p.m.

7
