UNITED NA TIONS

CURITY COUNCIL
..,7;//,
::T
RECORDS (-,‘,
I..,‘,
/,;r:g
.,fi,?->yy
” (’

OFFICIAL

@(!\/

THIRTY-FIFTH

YEAR
/

‘.
.- ‘”

1

1”; p:“!,t~

_I .,.-..-..

‘_,‘1
I. ,

th

MEETING:

9 APRIL

1980

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

..**..I.......,.......,,*......*.*...

1

Adoption of the agenda . , . . . . . . *,.......*,.......*..,......**.......I..

1

The question of the exercise by the Palestinian people of its inalienable rights:
Letter dated 6 March 1980 from the Acting Chairman of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/13832);
Letter dated 24 March 1980 from the Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/13855) . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2208)

SlPV.2208

-

WOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures, Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Suppl~r~ter~ts of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions
of the Security Cmncil. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2208th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 9 April 1980, at 11 a.m.
president:Mr. Porfirio MUROZ LED0 (Mexico).

Rightsof the PalestinianPeopleand the representative
of the PalestineLiberation Organization(PLO) to take
Placesat the Council table,

Present:The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh,China, France, German Democratic
Republic,Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, PhilipAt the invitation of the President, Mr. Bedjaoui
pines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist Mgeria),
Mr. Al-Saffar
(Bahrain), Mr. Roa-Kouri
Republics,United Kingdom of Great Britain and (Cuba), Mr. Abdel Meguid (Egypt), Mr. B. C. Mishra
NorthernIreland, United States of America, Zambia. (India), Mr. Bali (Iraq), Mr. Blum (Israel), Mr. Nuseibeh CJordan),Mr. T&i (Lebanon), Mr. Rabetafka
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2208)

1, Adoption of the agenda
2, The question of the exercise by the Palestinian
peopleof its inalienable rights:
Letter dated 6 March 1980 from the Acting
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/ 13832);
Letter dated 24 March 1980from the Chairman
of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/13855)
Themeeting was called to order at II.30 a.m.

Adoption
Theagenda

of the agenda

was adopted.

Thequestion of the exercise by the Palestinian people
of its inalienable rights:
Letterdated 6 March 1980 from the Acting Chairman
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/13832);
Letter dated 24 March 1980 from the Chairman of
the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People addressed to the
I’resident of the Security Council (S/13855)

(Madagascar), Mr. Ayachi (Morocco), Mr. Mansouri
Oyrian Arab Republic), Mr. Ha Van Lau (Viet Nam)
and Mr. Komatina (Yugoslavia) took the places
reservedfor them at the side of the Council chamber
and Mr. Kane (Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People) and Mr. Terzi (Palestine Liberation Organization) took places at the Council table.

2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
I wish to inform the membersof the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of Hungary
and Yemen in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussionof the item on the agenda.
In accordancewith the usual practice, I propose, with
the consentof the Council, to invite those representa-,
tives to participate in the discussionwithout the right
to vote, in conformity with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Hollai (Hungary) and Mr. Alaini (Yemen) took the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.

3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
The first speaker is the representative of Hungary.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to makehis statement.

4, Mr, HOLLAI (Hungary): I should like to express
my sincereappreciation to you, Mr. President, and to
the other members of the Council for giving me the
opportunity to express my Government’s views on
the highly important issue on the agenda. It .is a
1, The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): special pleasure for us to see you, a most promment
[n accordancewith the decisions taken at previous diplomat of a friendly country, in the highly important
neeths [220&h, 2205th and 2207th meetings], office of Presidentof the Council, and I am sure that;
!invite the representatives of Algeria, Bahrain, Cuba, under your guidance, this body will be able to fulfil
EgYPt,
India, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Mada- its task in a most efficient manner,
pear, Morocco, the Syrian Arab Republic, Viet
‘Jamand Yugoslavia to participate in the discussion 5. We have expressedour desire to take part in this
vithoutthe right to vote and I invite the Chairman of debate as a memberof the Committee on the Exercise
he Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.

way of the rights and vital interests of all Arab countries in general and the Arab people of Palestine in
particular. Using the treaty as a cover-up, the parties
pursue a policy of expansion and aggression against
the Arab people of Palestine, while one of them is
striving to expand its military and political presence in
the region. This course of action by the parties involved
is blocking the road to a just and lasting peace and
seriously damaging the struggle waged by the Arab
people.

6. In the opinion of my Government, the present
debate is an extremely important one, because it deals
with the real heart of the Middle East problem. One
may try to conceal, but cannot deny, the fact that no
lasting and stable solution can be reached in the Middle
East which does not fully take into account the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people. There is an
international consensus to the effect that the Arab
people of Palestine has the inalienable rights to
national identity, self-determination and a homeland.
Nobody can deny that the Palestinian Arab people has
its genuine national liberation movement, recognized
by the majority of the members of the League of
Arab States, the Organization of the Islamic Conference, the non-aligned countries, the whole socialist
world, and a number of Western European countries
as well.

10. We continue to believe that the relevant resolutions of the United Nations contain the genuine guidelines for a Middle East settlement and cover all aspects
of the question in their entirety. That is why my
Government does not give its support to any separate
agreement or arrangement contrary to those decisions,
11. The PRESIDENT (interprctntiorz
from Spanish): The next speaker is the representative of Cuba,
I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

7. At its twenty-ninth session, the General Assembly
recognized the Palestine Liberation Organization as
the sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian
people, The Assembly established the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People. That Committee made its recommendations
four years ago for the first time and called for the
establishment of a timetable for Israeli withdrawal
from the occupied Arab territories and the creation
of an independent Palestinian State. It is the responsibility of this body to work out and take a decision on
a draft containing the elements of those recommendations, which were endorsed by the General Assembly.
We should like to hope that the members of the Council under your guidance, Mr. President, will give their
support to such a draft. The peoples of the Middle
East have already paid a heavy toll in untold sufferings
during the last three decades. It is high time to turn
that hotbed of unending wars into a home of lasting
peace and justice for all the peoples of the region
without exception.

12. Mr. ROA-KOURf (Cuba) (interpretation
jkm
Mr. President, it is a great pleasure for me
to extend to you the warmest congratulations of the
Cuban delegation on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for this month. To your great
devotion to Latin America and your progressive spirit,
derived from the best traditions of your country, is
added the fact that you represent Mexico, a friendly
brother country, where the true Cuban revolutionaries
from Jose Marti to Fidel Castro have always found
more than a brotherly helping hand-a common homeland. I think it only fair to say that the land of Cuauhtemoc, Morelos and Juirez, which never bowed nor
compromised when the powerful imperialist neighbour
wished to stifle the Cuban Revolution, has always
earned the esteem and the respect of all the patriots
of the continent. In you then, Sir, I salute the worthy
representative of what the founder of our independence
nearly 100 years ago called “our America”, brought
together in exploitation and hope in the age-old struggle
against those who have tried “to pit one part of lhc
world against another” and in their unbounded greed
to treat our lands merely as their own backyard. I am
confident that, under your unswerving guidance, the
Council will take up in a principled manner the question of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people,
which can no longer be delayed.

Spanish):

8. My Government is firmly convinced that ajust and
lasting settlement of the Middle East conflict can be
conceived only on the basis of three well-known
inseparable principles: first, complete liquidation of
the consequencesof Israeli aggression and immediate
and unconditional return of all the occupied Arab
lands to the countries of whose territories they formed
a legitimate part; second, full recognition of the Palestinian Arab people’s national right to self-determination; and, third, ensuring for all States and peoples
of the region an independent life of their own, free

13. For the past three decades the Council has been
meeting to consider “the question before us”, as it
has been called in such a drearily routine manner. The
aloof attitude of many of the dozens of speakerswho
have taxed our patience during that period seems
inconceivable, as if this were just a verbal exercise,
as if we were not really talking about the destiny of
a people. There are those who think they can bridle
passions as one might bridle a horse,

from fears.

9. I should like to mention that a relatively short
time ago there were fruitful exchanges of opinion
between the members of the Council in an atmosphere
of co-operation and mutual understanding on the
subject under consideration in the Council now. At
that time they shared a common approach to the
crucial problem of a Middle East settlement. Much
has since been changed. The Camp David accords and
the separate treaty are raising serious obstacles in the

14. We have heard the deafening silence of thosewho
wished to keep the freedom of the Palestinian people
2

within a rigid time-frame, predetermined by the holding
of august meetings which will then bring us to the truth
on schedule. In the meantime, the architects of the
new pax anwricana meet comfortably at Camp David
or in Washington, satisfied that certain members of
the international community are prepared not to do
anything until a better opportunity arises.

in the world where the interests of the major
Yankee monopolies are “threatened”; he is supplying
weapons, economic assistanceand military advice to
the Fascist junta in El Salvador, which is daily killing
its patriots, and he is propping up puppets in neighbouring countries and intervening directly against the
forces of the people; and in the coming days he will
#assert his anti-Palestine and pro-Zionist policies to
the drum-beat of a new cold war.
where

15. Now that the fireworks and confetti and all the
fanfare that attended the Camp David production are
over, the objective pursued is becoming clear. Not so
long ago the press revealed that the President of Egypt
was prepared to work for “self-government” for the
occupied territory of Gaza, because it was not yet
opportune to talk about the West Bank of the Jordan.
Not only is the inalienable right of a people to decide
its destiny being usurped and its genuine representatives being disregarded in international negotiations
affecting it directly, but an attempt is also being made
to subdivide the question of Palestine and, step by step,
with the infamous acquiescence of some quislings, if
they find any, to dismember the age-old homeland of
the Palestinian people,

20. The settlement of the problem of the Middle East
cannot be left in those hands. No one can sincerely
believe in their “solutions”, least of all the Palestinian
people whose cause has won the support of the overwhelming majority of mankind and whose plight is at
the very centre of the conflict in that part of the world.
21. Nor is it possible to establish a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East-as stated by the resolutions of the General Assembly-if we do not, inter
alia, bring about a just settlement of the problem of
Palestine on the basis of the realization of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including the right
of return and the right to independence and national
sovereignty in Palestine, in accordance with the
Charter.

16. Not so very long ago we met in the Council to
condemn the colonialist policy of Israel, which was
reasserted with the new settlements in Al-Khalil and
Jerusalem. Zionist expansionism, which has ostensibly
been censured by the Camp David conspirators, has
now found in the doctrine of piecemeal self-government
a beaten path to its ultimate goal: the zionization of
Palestine.

22. The history of the past 30 years would undoubtedly bejustification for an unending description of the
great selfless and heroic struggle of the Palestinian
people to achieve full independence and freedom in
their own State, and of the shame and ignominy of
those who have stood in the way of their inalienable
rights using the most inhuman and despicable methods.
But now is not the time to be recounting history.

17. For those who still have any doubts about the
reactionary and hegemonistic nature of Zionism, and
who, like Paul of Tarsus, need more proof to be convinced, we would say that Begin is not the only one
responsible for what has happened in Al-Khalil, Jerusalem and other occupied territories. More recently,
the weil-known opponent of the Israeli Government,
Abba Eban, in a newspaper of the Holy City, openly
questioned the right of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination.

23. The Council has a clear mandate from the
General Assembly. The Sixth Conference of Heads
of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries
which met in Havana invited the Council to act in
keeping with its responsibilities and to impose on
Israel the sanctions provided for in Chapter VII of
the Charter. At the same time, it declared its unreserved solidarity with the cause of the Palestinian
people. General Assembly resolutions 31/20, 32/40 A,
33128 A, and 34/65 A are equally unequivocal as
regards the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people.

18. The Zionists generally call anybody who is
opposed to the imperialist goals of the State of Israel
an anti-Semite, but they deny the right of the Palestinian nation to dwell in its own homeland just as
their friends and racist allies of South Africa deny the
same right to the black population. Or have the Palestinians not also been living on that land for the last
2,000 years? It is a strange theory that affirms the right
of a people to trample the right of another underfoot.

24. We hope that on this occasion we shall not fail
to approve the recommendations of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People. In that way this supreme tribunal will live up
to the expectations of the international community.
To postpone a decision would be to condone the continued existence of the greatest injustice of our era.
Now it is the Council that must speak out.

19. The host of the meeting on the banks of the
Potomac has made his intentions clear: he will use
force to guarantee supplies of the oil that belongs to
others; for this purpose he has escalated his country’s
military presence in the Persian Gulf, the Indian Ocean
and the Middle East and tried to set up new bases
and facilities in the countries of those areas; he is
setting up rapid-deployment units to intervene any-

25. The PRESIDENT (interpre&Amfrom
Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of Algeria.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
3

responsibility, the Camp David agreements ‘and the
Washington treaty have provided ample fuel for the
already severely exacerbated environment of crisis in
the Middle East. In so doing, they have in fact given
clear proof of the twofold need for a return to the
universal framework of the United Nations and for the
adoption of a new approach which would involve the
entire spectrum of aspects of this crisis.

26. Mr. BEDJAOUI (Algeria) (interpretation from
Mr. President, “respect for the rights of
others is peace”, as Benito Juirez, one of the greatest
men of your national revolution, once said. Who then
better than yourself, the heir of a long and distressing
tradition of lighting for the ideals of liberty, justice and
peace, could appreciate the full extent of the plundering, the suffering and the sacrifices which the Palestinian tragedy has brought in its wake, without
peace, the inseparable partner of justice, having
returned to that long-suffering land. The Algerian
delegation remains convinced that your personal
qualities, your great competence and your perfect
understanding of this tragedy will ensure that this
debate will be as significant as it should be.
French):

31. The lack of validity of the Camp David agreements and the Washington treaty emerges quite clearly
from five different standpoints, if one examines these
texts with reference, first, to the entitlement of the
contracting parties, then to the procedure followed for
the conclusion of those agreements, then to the
contents of the texts, then to the Charter of the United
Nations and the relevant resolutions of the Organization and, finally, to Egypt’s prior commitments.

27. The congratulations and gratitude of the Algerian
delegation are also extended to your predecessor,
Ambassador Mills, the highly respected representative
of, Jamaica, who conducted the proceedings of the
‘Council last month with the diligence, zeal and constructive skill which we know him to possess.

‘,
:
I
/
.

32. The Algerian delegation would have liked to say a
great deal about the lack of validity of the agreements
from the five points of view that I have mentioned,
but, in order not to waste the Council’s time, it will
limit itself solely to certain general points.

28. The fact that the Council has met twice in a
month to take cognizance, at its last meetings, of the
situation in the occupied Arab territories and, today,
of the whole Palestinian question, reveals a three-fold
situation: first, there is a universal awakening to the
national dimension of the Palestinian phenomenon,
which has three facets in the right to self-determination, the right to independence and the right of
return; then there is the profound credibility crisis
to which the prospects of a separate and partial settlement opened up by the Camp David agreements and
the Washington treaty are increasingly subject; and
finally, there is the return of the Palestinian question
to its breeding ground, in this case, the United Nations,
which is a challenge to the community of nations in
this very place where the seeds of the tragedy of the
plunder which ensued were actually fertilized.

33. The first point is the lack of validity with regard
to the entitlement of the contracting parties, It has
been said that any State has the sovereign right to
conclude a treaty. This argument, true as far as it
goes, is here made in a specious manner. The sovereign
right of any State to conclude a treaty is, of course,
an elementary principle of international law. But no
one can fail to understand the natural and clear limits
of such a principle. No State has, in fact, the right
to conclude a treaty which is incompatible with the
imperative norms of law which can brook no derogation or breach. And one of those is the right of peoples
to self-determination. Now, as will be seen, the Camp
David agreements and the Washington treaty eliminate
the national rights of the Palestinian people.

29. The frequency with which the Council has been
seized of this question is not an accident. It is to be
seen primarily as an effect, in reaction to the sterility
of an approach based fundamentally on the perversion
of the traditional institutional framework for the discussion of the problem of the Middle East, to the
extent that a fragmentary structure is being substituted
for the universal forum of the United Nations. It is,
furthermore, a reaction to the attempts to distort the
Palestinian national phenomenon, which is being
reduced by political and legal artifices to a mere claim
for municipal and administrative autonomy.

!

34. Moreover, in actual fact the defenders of the
Camp David and Washington agreements deliberately
distort the problem. It is not really a question of
whether the Egyptian regime has the right to conclude
a treaty for itself, but rather a question of whether it
has the right to conclude a treaty for other States,
in their stead and place, This argument can thus be
turned against its proponents because it contravenes
the right of other States to conclude or not to cow
elude, in exercise of their sovereign right, a treaty in
keeping with their interests. In other words, by signing
the Camp David and Washington agreements, the
Egyptian regime did not confine itself, as is claimed,
to the exercise of its sovereign right; it actually usurped
that right and that of other States and another people,
namely the Palestinian people.

30. Ten negotiating sessions on the status of autonomy to be conferred upon the West Bank of Jordan
and the Gaza Strip have betrayed, by their political
procedure and by their material content, the fallacious
nature of this allegedly comprehensive, just and
lasting solution which some thought they offered. By
taking charge of the Palestinian situation and dealing
solely with the technical allocation of management

35. The Egyptian regime has received no mandate,
either from Jordan, which rejected the agreements,
or from the Palestine Liberation Organization, or from
Syria, which condemned them. The only too well4

i

?ARY

known Balfour Declaration of 1917 was formerly
described as “a promise made by a State to a private
person to found a nation on territory belonging to
another nation”. This is clearly a new Balfour-type
promise that the inglorious Washington treaty has the
Egyptian r6gime make to Israel about Palestinian
territory. It is thus another instance of the cession of
territory belonging to somebody else, when the Washington treaty offers what remains of Palestinian territory, the West Bank, Gaza and Jerusalem, for final
occupation and settlement and in denial of independence.

41. In the first place, the liquidation of the Palestinian
national rights is an element of a coherent approach
which, in turn, forms part of a drastic plan for the
destruction of all Palestinian resistance by the elimination of the PLO-that is to say, the Palestinian political
leadership-by the elimination of the Palestinian
people itself, and finally by the recognition of Israel.
Thus the objective sought is the elimination of the PLO
and of all political leadership in order to bring about
the elimination of the Palestinian people both as the
entity to which those national rights belong and as an
entity struggling for the exercise of those national
rights.

36, The legality of the Camp David agreements and
the Washington treaty is therefore more than doubtful.
Moreover, not only have Jordan and the Palestinian
people been involved, without prior consultation, in the
“solutions” decided upon in those agreements, but
even the United Nations is implicated under certain
of their provisions. That poses the much broader
problem of the procedure followed for this so-called
peace settlement in the Middle East. That is the point
which the Algerian delegation would now like to
examine.

42. By depriving this people of its political rights,
the idea was to reduce it to a mere aggregation of
persons or individuals without national rights, which
would open the way to solutions quite different from
those of self-determination and independence, Thus,
it was necessary to embark upon the elimination of
the PLO in terms of its international status and its
three-fold traditional function as leader of the Palestinian resistance, as the sole legitimate representative of its people and as a possible negotiating partner
for peace.
43. The Camp David agreements and the Washington
treaty consummated the attack on the international
status of the PLO, which is neither more nor less
than the reflection of the international status of the
Palestinian people itself. The Camp David agreements
and the Washington treaty have not only ignored
the PLO, as we shall see, but have sought to destroy
its international status, a status which it has acquired
as a member of the Arab League, a member of the
non-aligned movement and a member of the Coordinating Bureau of that movement, enjoying observer
status in the United Nations since 1974 and full
diplomatic status in a very large number of countries.
Some 110 States now recognize the PLO as the sole
legitimate representative of the Palestinian people.
Now the instruments signed at Camp David and Washington establish the offtcial commitment-I stress
commitment-of the Egyptian regime, along with the
Zionist entity, to eliminate this body of leadership of
the Palestinian people. It suffices to read article III
of the Washington treaty to realize that the two
contracting parties undertook to drive out and eliminate Palestinian resistance not only on their respective
territories, but also in any corner of the world and in
any form. The terms are so general that such an
interpretation is perfectly possible. The Washington
treaty describes the liberation struggle of the Palestinian people as a subversive endeavour and goes
so far as to organize the method of its repression,
even outside the respective territories of the parties
to the agreement.
44. In the same spirit, the PLO and all Palestinian
organizations are excluded in advance from all negotiations, even those on the West Bank and Gaza. Thus,
the exchange of letters dated 26 March 1979 annexed
to the Washington treaty states explicitly:

37. The procedure followed at Camp David and in
Washington in no way corresponds to what was
decided upon and has been expected by the international community since the June 1967 war. Comprehensive negotiations and a similarly comprehensive
Peace were called for by the international community,
which rejected any separate negotiation and any partial
solution, so as not to circumvent the United Nations
or the Arab States concerned or, of course, the Palestinian people itself.
38, Those comprehensive negotiations should,
essentially, have had a twofold imperative result:
first, withdrawal from all the Arab territories occupied
since 1967, out of profound respect for the principle
of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory
by force; and secondly, the right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination, to independence, to the
creation of a State and to a return to their homeland.
39. Consequently, the valid procedure conceived by
the international community called, on the one hand,
for peace negotiations under the auspices of the United
Nations and, particularly, through the convening of a
Geneva Conference as proposed by the General ASsembly at its thirty-third session, and, on the other
hand, for the necessary participation of the indispensable party to the negotiations, the PLO.
40. Beyond all the aspects just mentioned, and
turning now to the substantive problem involved, we
shall see that here the lack of validity of the Camp
David agreements and the Washington treaty is just
as flagrant. Those instruments are in effect a plan for
the liquidation of Palestinian national rights and the
disruption of the territorial integrity of neighbouring
Arab States.
5

tive autonomy for the West Bank, or rather for the
“inhabitants” of the West Bank and not for the territory of the West Bank. This is mere municipal control,
In effect, there is no question of the independence of
the West Bank or of the creation of a Palestinian
mini-State. The Washington treaty does less than this
by promising the Palestinians of the West Bank
five years of Israeli trusteeship, at the end of which
they will be consulted on the elimination of this
administrative autonomy and on pure and simple
integration with Israel.

“The delegations of Egypt and Jordan”-the latter
once more involved against its will-“may include
Palestinians of the West Bank or Gaza, or other
Palestinians, as mutually agreed”.
So it is not the PLO or the Palestinian people, as such,
that is consulted, but “inhabitants”-individuals,
carefully selected to boot, by the two parties to the
agreement. It is to be noted, furthermore, as we shall
see, that the Palestinians in exile, who number nearly
2 million, will in any event be excluded from any
consultation and any representation. It is thus the
Egyptian regime and the Israeli entity which “mutually
agree” to talk with partners whom they describe as
Palestinians and whom they themselves select. This is
“solution” which violates the basic rights of the
Palestinian people and the general consensus which
exists on the Palestinian problem.

48. The West Bank is officially called “Judaea and
Samaria” in the Washington treaty, which constitutes
a recognition of Israel’s sovereignty over the West
Bank, and, thus, over Jerusalem, And the fact that the
fate of the West Bank and Gaza is settled by a simple
exchange of letters in an annex, and not by the treaty
itself, demonstrates the determination to relegate this
question to the status of a mere detail, when it is, in
fact, the central problem. So it is not surprising
nowadays to hear the leaders of the Egyptian rigime
abandoning the discussion even of the mere autonomy
of the West Bank and contenting themselves with discussing the fate of the small Gaza enclave.

45. The attempt to liquidate the PLO as a political
leader in the Washington and Camp David agreements
was a condition for and a prelude to the second point,
that is, the elimination of the Palestinian people as a
people possessing rights to self-determination, to the
liberation of its territory, to the return to its homeland
and to the building of its own independent State.
Once having carefully read these agreements, one can
affirm that the combined effect of the provisions of
the Camp David accords and the Washington treaty
-a few of which I have just mentioned so as not to
take up too much of the Council’s time-scientifically
plan the fragmentation and dissolution of the Palestinian people. The unity of that people is once again
called in question; it is broken up into several parts:
first of all, there are the Palestinians who are in exile,
having left their country in 1948-that is, 2 million
people who will not be consulted; then there are the
Palestinians removed from the West Bank and Gaza
since the 1967 war, from whom the Israelis themselves
will choose a few, at their own discretion, then, if they
consider it necessary, either to consult them or to
bring them back; thirdly, there are the “inhabitants”
of the West Bank and Gaza, who will be very carefully
guided in designating an autonomous authority which
will be merely an administrative council-this is the
expression used-in o&e for five years; and finally,
there are the Palestinians remaining in Israel of whom
nothing is said in the agreements because they will
have to remain Israeli, cut off from their brothers.

49. According to the agreements signed, there will
be no referendum on the self-determination of the
Palestinian people, a people which, as I have just
noted, has been entirely broken up. The Israeli army,
however, according to these agreements, will still
remain in the West Bank.
50. In the final analysis, Israel wants to establish in
the West Bank and Gaza an administrative council
made up of a few tame Palestinians, if there are any
to be found. That council would, what is more, he
permanently-and I stress permanently-under the
heel of the Israeli military Government, and Israel
would have control of all the land in the area and of
all its water resources. In this way Israel seeks to
reduce the solution of the Palestinian problem to a
mere municipal concern ridiculously confined within
a narrow perspective which makes of it a true policy
of bantustanization.

46. It was certainly not to be expected that the Washington treaty would have formally agreed to Palestine’s
right to independence. It is in the logic of things that
it should have imposed obligatory recognition of Israel
and no less obligatory diplomatic relations with it on
the other party to the agreement. But the Washington
treaty goes even further by formally excluding even
the independence of the West Bank and by recognizing,
as we shall see later, a State of Israel with dangerously
extendible frontiers.

51. As to the question of Jerusalem, there is much
to be said, I will content myself with recalling that the
provisions of agreements which have been signed
flagrantly contravene all the ‘resolutions of all intern@
tional or regional organizations, including the Security
Council. It is enough to re-read the letter, dated
17 September 1978 and annexed to the Camp David
agreements, by which Begin imposed, in a veritable
&tar, the “final’‘-to
use his word-annexation of
the thrice-Holy City, citing a Knesset bill of 1967,
according to which “the Government is empowered . . . to apply the law, the jurisdiction and administration of the State to any part of Eretz Israel
(land of Israel-Palestine)“.

47. After the Camp David agreements, the Washington treaty sets itself the target of simple administra-

52. The political procedure and strategic aims of the
Camp David and Washington agreements emergewith
6

3 y v

u-

clarity from, this analysis. They have thus
me,hodically
programmed: first, the elimination of the
PLOasthe leader of the struggle and.the sole political
representative
apd approp.nate negotiating partner for
peace
by violating and dlsregardmg Its mternational
status
and committing the contracting parties to its
elimination,which carries the most severe consequences
for history; secondly, the elimination of the
p&stinianpeople as. an entity possessing national
fights,and as an entity fighting for the exercise of
thoserights-elimination being achieved in the text
thatwassigned, not only by the categorical exclusion
of anykind of self-determination for Palestine, but
alsoby a no less categorical exclusion of withdrawal
fromthe West Bank occupied in 1967 and the denial
of its independence-the texts even hold out the
promise
of extending Israeli sovereignty over that part
ofPalestineafter a five-year period of administrative
autonomy
and municipalism; thirdly, as part and parcel
of this coldly calculated plan, and as its consequence
andcrowningglory, there is, first of all, the recognition
of Israel by the Egyptian rkgime without any quid
proquo, since even the territories returned to Egypt
arenot wholly under its sovereignty and have been
almost
entirely demilitarized, and, what is even worse,
therecognition of an Israel with extendible frontiers
whichmight even include the final incorporation of the
West Bank and Gaza. In a word, this is perpetuation
of Israel’s right of conquest over Palestinian territories,as well as over Arab territories with a certain
foreignpresence in Egyptian Sinai, in the Jordanian
portof Eilat, which is still being occupied, and of the
SyrianGolan, which is still under the Israeli heel.
dazzling

’

realismwhich meansnothing but outright capitulation.
The Arabs and the Palestinians are called upon
incessantlYto endorsewhat has happened previously
so that they will only have to discuss the current
event, which Israel is always in a position to embark
upon, as in the presentcaseof the settlementsand the
new land expropriationsin the West Bank.
55. The recognition in the Camp David agreements
and Washingtontreaty of an Israel with extendible
frontiers that might even have total sovereignty over
the entire WestBank after afive-year period somehow
consecratesthe “final solution” to the problem of
Palestineandthe Palestinianpeople. It is a calling into
questionby Israel of the principle of the inadmissibility
of the acquisition of territory by force as contained
in all relevant United Nations resolutions, particularly Council resolution 242(1967).

56. It is a curious procedure to appear to seek a
comprehensivepeacewhile artificially splitting up the
problems. The technique-if not the tactic-of the
framework agreement is officially to claim to be a
common basisfor a settlement;it claims to deal with
a commonproblem in a comprehensivefashion and on
a common basis, when in fact it borrows from the
techniques of a bilateral agreement which would
gradually break the Arab front, as if the problem
consistedin the juxtaposition of specific problems not
having any common cause.An attempt is being made
to neutralize or to win over one Arab country after
another. The common cause-namely, the national
rights of the Palestinianpeople-is thus being completely disregarded. The agreements and the treaty
53, The territorial situation which would result from have organized its planned elimination, and it is in
theCampDavid agreements and the Washingtontreaty order to eliminate this common causethat the signawouldbepractically equivalent to the Zionist proposals tories have broken up the comprehensivenegotiations
fora Jewish State made at the 1919 Versailles Peace and have given pride of place to the tactics of the
Conference-that is to say, a State comprising the partial and separatesettlement.
wholeof Palestine, the River Jordan, its left and right
57. So we really should ask ourselves the question:
banks, southern Lebanon and the present Jewish
settlements,
particularly in Gaza. And yet, how many what kind of strange peace treaty is it that we have
Peoplesin the world can claim, as the Palestinians here which involves the over-armament of the signacan,1,600years of existence on’ their national soil? tories? What is the meaningof the preparation for war
Eventhose who could make that claim would be by two Stateswhich are trying to make peace? What
liable,if the Zionist thesis were to be applied to them, is the meaning of that peace,if not war, that the new
tolosethe land where the bones of their ancestorslie. allies want to impose on the Palestinian people and
the Arab countries?Indeed, everyone realizesthat the
54. Today, we have a new act of provocation Washington treaty has been accompanied by imme-another in a long chain-in the creation of new diate measuresto over-arm the signatoriesto that SOIsraelisettlements in the West Bank. We must put an called peace treaty. It is certainly a Very strange
endto the sort of absurd logic by which, in responseto peace, in any event, that hasjust been established by
Israel’ssuccessiveexpansions and to its renewed acts a treaty which has provisions for turning the region
of defiance,the Arabs and the Palestiniansare called into a permanent powder keg and for making Israel
UPoaover and over again to reduce the problem of the fourth largestexporter of arms in the world-and
Israelto the dimensions of its most recent conquests. this includesSouth Africa and Rhodesia.
Indeed,the Arabs and the Palestinians are being 58, The nature of the new responsibilities which a
advisedto abandon a comprehensive approach to the
to the Security Council entails should be underproblemof the Middle East and Palestine, so that they return
stood
in
light of the recommendationsof the ComCanhe pushed closer and closer to the trap of a dis- mittee onthe
the
Exerciseof the Inalienable Rights of the
cussionlimited each time to the most recent problem Palestinian People.
Those recommendations have,
createdby Israel-and that in the name of a so-called
7

63. Alive to the strictly bilateral nature of these
agreements aimed at a mere facade settlement of the
territorial issue between Israel and Egypt, the international community soon became aware of the fact that,
even if fully implemented and taken to their ultimate
conclusion, the agreements would not give rise to the
much-hoped-for solution of the Palestinian problem,

moreover, received the moral backing and political
support of the General Assembly, the non-aligned
movement, the Organization of African Unity and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference.
59. In this connection, we wish to convey our warm
congratulations and sincere appreciation to the Chairman and other members of that Committee, whose
perseverance, devotion and imaginative enthusiasm
in the service of the causeofjustice, peace and freedom
have contributed greatly to placing the Palestinian
question within its proper perspective.

64. Such an awareness corroborates the evaluations
and prophecies solemnly made at a certain point by
the whole Arab world. In this context, the attitude
adopted by the Arab resistance front, which some
have been pleased to consider isolated or a mere
emotional reaction, had a certain warning value and,
as such, was the forerunner and precursor of the sentiments of doubt and scepticism that now grip the
international community. The expected failure, which
is taking place today, of the Israeli-Egyptian agreements should not give rise to any astonishment or
surprise. The true objectives and avowed ambitions
of those agreements obviously lay elsewhere.

60. By refusing to heed the many appeals which
have been so regularly made by that Committee, the
Council would seem, up to now, curiously to have
ostracized conclusions actually based upon relevant
resolutions of the United Nations. Thus the Council
has found itself for at least three reasons out of step
with the prevailing international will-first
of all,
because it has deliberately disregarded the spirit and
the letter of the General Assembly resolutions, all
questions of differences of competence as between
these two major bodies set aside; then because it has
adopted an attitude of indifference to the desires of
other international organizations that are among the
most representative in the world; and finally, because
it has given effect to a denial of right and justice
with regard to the approach to the Palestinian question.
61, However, the Committee, in certain of its judgements and analyses, is doing nothing more than
concurring in the conclusions of the Commission
established by the Council to .inquire into the situation
of the settlements in the occupied Arab territories.
The Committee has indeed traced the outline of action
that would be likely to lead to a just and lasting solution of the Middle East crisis on the basis of the
following guidelines: first, the perception of the Palestinian question as the Gordian knot of the Middle
East problem, whereby any searchfor ajust and lasting
solution would be dependent on full account being
taken of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people; secondly, the genuine exercise of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including its right
to self-determination, to national independence and
sovereignty; thirdly, the participation of the PLO as
a fully-fledged partner in all efforts and negotiations
on the Middle East undertaken under the auspices of
the United Nations; fourthly, an increase in and
strengthening of the role of the United Nations and
of its organs in the search for an equitable solution
of the question of Palestine and in the implementation
of such a solution; fifthly, the inadmissibility of the
acquisition of territory by force and the consequent
obligation on Israel totally and rapidly to evacuate
all Arab territory thus occupied.

65. The deterioration of international political relations, the geopolitical bases of whose equilibrium
have suddenly revealed their instability and precariousness, throws further light on the strategic importance of the Middle East-an importance that has
never been denied. Endowed as it is with so many
natural strategic advantages, being both a window
open wide to three continents, a repository of oil and
a highly desirable outlet for the surplus production
of the industrialized nations in this time of recession,
the Middle East stimulates appetites and provokes
covetousness.
66. As the key instruments of a global power strategy,
the Camp David agreements and the Washington
treaty have amply revealed their nature as an
endeavour totally aimed at a resolute transformation
of the region into the imperialist sphere of influence.
67. Such a strategy naturally presupposes the establishment of relay-States, made all the more necessary
because the Iranian defection has given rise to the
disruption of alliances that cannot be qualitatively
assessed. The setting up of the Tel Aviv-Cairo geopolitical axis, the intensification of the arming of Egypt
and Israel and the proliferation of United States air
and naval bases in the region were therefore aimed
at preparing the ground for new alliances and reIationships of rationalized suzerainty.
68. By stressing local conflicts, by fanning differences of outlook and approach and by using military
threats against the independence movements and the
aspirations of Arab States to unity, that strategy is
another modern version of the 2,000-year-old Roman
principle of divide et impem. As part of the implementation of that strategy, the collusion and the
organic links between Zionism and imperialism COP
stitute the means for carrying out this work of division.
In the same way, Israel’s insatiable expansionismis

62. Formulated in this way, these major axes of an
over-all settlement are the outcome of the condemnation in principle and the challenging of the validity of
the Camp David agreements and the Washington
treaty.
8

not centred upon itself and is not simply a response
its own needs for security or vital living space.
Essentially it serves the interests of world imperialism.

threatens world peace and stability. It was only a few
weeks ago that the Council unanimously adopted a
positive resolution [resolurion 465 (1980)] on the issue
of Israeli settlements in the occupied Arab lands,
a resolution that was not only rejected by the Israeli
Government but also followed by intransigence.
Instead of complying with the Council’s resolution,
the Israeli Cabinet decided on an act of defiance, the
confiscation of more Arab lands, thus disregarding
both the deep interest of the Council and world public
opinion.

to

69. In the light of this analysis, the differences of
understanding and approach on the part of the Israelis
and the Egyptians rather proceed from merely formal
differences of opinion than testify to any profound
conflict over the nature and status of the autonomy
to be established, because fundamentally the Egyptian
and the Israeli policies in this matter are united by
their ultimate objectives, inasmuch as they are jointly
aimed at the establishment of a vassal entity and a
feudalized institutional structure that would operate a
strategic junction between the parties.

76. However, my delegation is confident that the
Council’s deliberations on this crucial issue will be
commensurate with its high responsibilities and the
gravity of the situation. We are equally confident
that the Council’s decision this time will be no less
positive than its resolution on the question of the
settlements. After all, the issue under consideration,
namely, the destiny of the valiant and long-neglected
Palestinians, is the heart of the Middle East question, an issue that threatens the peace and prosperity
not only of the region but also of the entire world.

70. My delegation remains convinced that the question of Palestine is at the very heart of the Middle
East crisis and that no solution of the problem is possible if the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people
are not taken into account.
71. The universal appeal addressed to our Organization today should find the necessary and salutary
response. It is time-if we want to avoid bitterness
and blockage-for the principal organs of the United
Nations, looking beyond their respective spheres of
competence, to co-ordinate their positions on the Palestinian problem so as to make progress towards a
courageous settlement of a problem so vital to the
peace of the world. We would venture, once again, to
hope for this from the Council.

77. Has the Council ever been seized of a more just
cause and a clearer issue than the Palestinian issue?

Has a more modest and flexible decision ever been
required of the Council than is required today? During
the last three decades and more, more than two thirds
of the nations of the world have won their freedom and
independence with the help of this Organization, Is
the Palestinian people unjustifiably considered a rare
exception?

72. By permitting the Palestinian nation, through the
authentic exercise of its threefold right to selfdetermination, independence and return, to gather
its people together, now temporarily divided, the international community will be redressing an historic
injustice and will thus contribute to bringing the
Middle East back to what it was originally-a
meeting place and a land of understanding and concord
among men.

78. We firmly believe that neither intransigence nor
blind fanaticism will prevent the Palestinian people
from achieving the ultimate victory. History has
witnessed the collapse of the imperialist empires, the
Fascist dreams and the Nazi ambitions. The destiny
of racist Zionism, we are sure, will not be different.
79. We all remember when freedom fighters were not
recognized and were labelled differently in various
places: they were called Mau Mau in Kenya, Viet Cong
in Viet Nam, and terrorists in Algeria and Zimbabwe.
Today, Kenya, Viet Nam, Algeria and Zimbabwe are
free and independent nations like any others in our
world,

73. The PRESIDENT (interpreration from Spanish): The next speaker is the representative of Yemen.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
74. Mr. ALAINI (Yemen): Allow me at the outset
to express my delegation’s warmest congratulations
to you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for this month. You represent a great
country, Mexico, with which my country has growing
friendly relations. I should like also to thank you and
the other members of the Council for giving me this
opportunity to express the views of the Yemen Arab
Republic on the question of the exercise of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people.

80. We in the Yemen Arab Republic have no doubt
whatsoever of the fact that Palestine belongs only to
its faithful sons and rightful owners; and we feel that
the day is not far away when the struggling Palestinian
people, represented by the Palestine Liberation Organization, will have its own independent and free State,
thus occupying its rightful place in the community of
free, sovereign and independent nations.

75. Once more the Security Council has met within
less than two months to consider the most important
issue in the Middle East today, an issue that directly

81. The ineffectiveness of the United Nations and
its reluctance to shoulder its responsibility has opened
the door to activities outside the framework of the
Organization. The situation in the Middle East has,
9

89. The Palestinians are obviously not asking for the
impossible, In this connection I should like to quote
from Chairman Yasser A&at’s
interview with a
correspondent of Time magazine published in this
week’s issue:

as a consequence of those practices, become worse,
owing to the plans and dreams of the Camp David
designers.
82. The Yemen Arab Republic, like other Arab
States, is scrupulously and faithfully complying with
the resolutions of the Arab Summit Conferences of
Baghdad and Tunis.

“There are birds that fly around the world but
come back to their original nest. There are fish that
swim from the rivers to the sea, but somehow
their sons go back to their original source. Home is
something in the heart of every human being. I want
my people to be able to return as human beings. In
appearance, perhaps I look happy, but in my heart
something has cracked. I live the tragedy of my
people. But I am optimistic because sooner or later
our people will achieve their goal.”

83. We regard the PLO as the sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian people and as truly expressive of their will and aspirations. In our view, any
attempt at a solution of the Middle East question
that does not recognize the political reality of the
existence of an independent Palestinian identity and the
imperative
of independent Palestinian statehood is
doomed to failure.

90. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Spunish):
The next speaker is the representative
of Jordan.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

84. Freedom and independent statehood for the Palestinian people will be achieved by continuous
armed struggle under its own leadership and that of
the PLO, with the solidarity of the Arab, Moslem and
non-aligned countries, as well as the support of peaceloving nations throughout the world.

91. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): The question of Palestine is now at a most crucial crossroads both iu
occupied Palestine itself and in the international forum
of the United Nations. Time and inaction have exacted
an unbearable, if not crushing, toll and clouded any
prospect of peaceful accommodation
based on justice.
The situation with which the Palestinian people are
confronted today is one in which an exclusivist,
expansionist, oppressive and discriminatory
Zionist
entity is bent upon, and in hot pursuit of, the eventual
total extinction of the Palestinian people and their
removal from their ancestral homeland.

85. Like any other people in the world, the Palestinian people have a basic human right to selfdetermination,
to return to their land and properties
and to the establishment
of their independent
State in accordance with the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, the Charter and the relevant resolutions of the United Nations.
86. We are resolutely against the Camp David framework agreements, but absolutely not against Egypt.
Egypt is the greatest Arab country where Al-Azhar
Al-Sharif and other glorious religious and cultural
institutions symbolize the common Arab heritage and
destiny. Many of the leading Arab politicians
and
intellectuals were educated in Egypt, and all of them
harbour only feelings of fraternity and love for the
great Egyptian people.

92. In 1947 and 1948 that goal was massively achieved
behind the pre-1967 Zionist armistice line. In the post1967 era, there was relentless occupation and colonization, a thinning-out and reshaping of the demography as well as the geography of an area which has
already reached over 32 per cent of the remnants of
Palestinian territory.

87, The Camp David conspiracies are undoubtedly
distorting Egyptian history; they are distorting the
glorious record of the Egyptian people, which fought
against all invaders of their homeland and against the
imperialist invasions of other Arab and African lands.
We in the Yemen Arab Republic will never forget the
contribution
of revolutionary
Egypt to the Yemeni
Revolution against the autocratic Imams in the north
and British imperialism in the south. It is a source of
pleasure to note that we are not alone in our rejection
of the Camp David agreements. A substantial number
of Egypt’s leading intellectuals as well as a large
number of students have publicly announced their
rejection of those agreements.

93. In the aftermath of 1948, the Knesset legally
institutionalized
the political reality of racist, imperialist, exclusivist Israel by its passage in 1950 of its
notorious Law of Return granting exclusive citizenship rights to all members of the Jewish communities
throughout the world-one
hears of residents hailing
from Canada, the United States, the Soviet Union,
Czechoslovakia
and from all over the world-while
closing the door totally and unconditionally
to the right
of return of the Palestinian
refugees, the lawful
inhabitants of Palestine since the dawn of history,
94. It is axiomatic that this notorious law is predicated on the premise that a Jewish State, to the
extent that it is Jewish, can neither offer redemption
to the Palestine people in exile nor afford the tiny
remnants which remained any semblance of demo
cratic equality or civil and human rights, let alone
political rights. Ninety per cent of pre-1967 Palestin-

88. Only within the framework of the United Nations
and with the participation of the PLO can a reasonable
solution to the Middle East problem possibly be found.
WithOUt
its
participation, no’solution to the chronic
problem is viable.
10

ians had their lands confiscated during the period
from 1948 to 1967. No wonder that the Palestinians
inside Palestine, which became Israel, remained under
military confinement and constraint until the mid1960%and their plight was the subject of yearly discussions at every session of the General Assembly,
as many old-timers remember all too well. They lived
under military rule for 15 years. Those wanting to go
from Nazareth to Haifa had to have a special permit
from the military Governor, even though they were
supposed to be Israeli citizens. Joseph Weitz, former
Deputy Chairman of the Jewish National Fund and
a leading Zionist, stated his convictions in his diary
as early as 1940 and reiterated them after 1967. He
wrote:

in any form, as under the old Jewish Hierarchy,
would be a leap backward of two thousand years.
. . . We ask that Palestine be constituted as a free
and independent State, to be governed under a
democratic form of government, recognizing no
distinctions of creed or race or ethnic descent, and
with adequate power to protect the country against
oppression of any kind. We do not wish to see
Palestine, either now or at any time in the future,
organized as an exclusively Jewish State.”
98. Professor Morris Jastrow, one of those who
signed that memorandum, wrote a book entitled
Zionism and the Future of Paiestine, in which he said:
“I should like to envisage a Palestine that may
become a beacon-light for the world, that may again
become a spiritual focus, furnishing further inspiration for mankind. . . . Such a Palestine, however,
cannot be built up through the creation of a Jewish
State. A Jewish State would simply mean a glorified
ghetto, narrow in its outlook, undemocratic in its
organization, and that may well turn out to be
reactionary in its tendencies.”

“Among ourselves it must be clear that there is
no place in the country for both peoples together.
With the Arabs, we shall not achieve our aim of
being an independent people in this country. The
only solution is Eretz Ysrael. And there is no other
way but to transfer the Arabs from here to the
neighbouring countries. Transfer of all, not one
village or tribe should remain.”

We have seen how progressive it has turned out to be.

We know how many villages have been destroyed in
implementation of his views: at least 375 villages and
scores of towns,

99. The Neturei Karta of the United States, a Jewish
religious organization, has published declarations on
many occasions since 1947opposing a Jewish State in
Palestine. One of the latest declarations was a letter
to the Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim,
published in The Wall Streef Journal of 13 November
1975, which states:

95. The Zionists have indeed gone a long way towards
achieving this goal both in terms of land and in terms
of population. There should be no mistake about it.
There can be no solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict
SO long as Israel continues to be dominated by Zionist
nationalism, which is the antithesis of the true Judaic
ancient spiritual relationship to parts of the Holy
Land-a relationship that we recognize. Indeed, the
truly religious regard the establishment of Israel in the
mundane sense as sacrilegious, and they categorically
refuse to recognize it or even to deal with it.

“We would like to call to your attention that
even after 27 years of the State of Israel’s existence,
there are large numbers of Jews in the Holy Land
and in the entire world who are opposed to Zionists
and to the Zionist State.”

96. In 1951, a rabbi at Princeton said to me, “I agree
with everything you have said but, believe me, we have
been threatened that unless we toe the line we will
not be buried in Jewish cemeteries”.

But we know that any dissenting voice is immediately
silenced and its owner even accused of treason.
“The Zionist State has usurped without justification the holy name of Israel. Torah true Jews wish
to live in peace and harmony with their neighbours
and with the community of nations.”

97. In 1919, before the Zionists gained a stranglehold on American Jews, by means fair and foul, a
memorandum signed by 300 prominent American Jews
was presented to the Peace Conference through President Wilson. Those distinguished American Jews
stated:

100. Thus, there might have been a totally different,
more humane, more civilized and more tranquil turn
of events in the whole of the Middle East region if
the original handful of zealots, helped enormously by
the inhumanity of other peoples, let alone imperialist
designs in other regions of the world, had not inflicted
their views upon the masses of ordinary Jews in
Europe. But why should that have been taken out on
the Palestinians who in those days did not even know
of what was happening elsewhere? That was in the days
before the radio and television, and communications
were extremely poor.

“We raise our voices, in warning and protest,
against the demand of the Zionists for the reorganization of the Jews as a national unit, to whom now
or in the future, territorial sdvereigny in Palestine
shall be committed, . . . The re-establishment in
Palestine of a distinctively Jewish State is utterly
opposed to the principles of democracy which it
is the avowed purpose of the World Peace Conference to establish. . , . To unite church and State,
11

“The establishment of the independent State will
be preceded by a transitional period throughout
which His Majesty’s Government will retain responsibility for the government of the country.“’

101. I am sure one does not have to be a political
scientist to differentiate between autonomy or socalled self-rule, even if maximized, and true freedom
and independence, which is the inalienable birthright of
every nation. The United States in the eighteenth
century enjoyed a great deal of autonomy, particularly
municipal autonomy, and yet it rebelled against British
colonial rule in its struggle for freedom and independence, even though the people on either side of the
Atlantic in those days were closely related.

103. The Zionists in Palestine and indeed abroad
rejected the British White Paper and revolted against
the British administration of Palestine. From 1941 to
1947 the three Zionist terrorist gangs-the Haganah,
the b-gun and the Stern-carried out the most dastardly
crimes and massacres against the civilian Arab
population, as well as against officials of the British
Government.

102. And so it is with the Arabs of Palestine, whose
independence was recognized in 1919by the League of
Nations and, as I said in my earlier statement, 30 years
later by the British Government itself. After numerous
rebellions in which over 100,000 Palestinians, Moslem
and Christian Arabs lost their lives, particularly
between 1936 and 1939-and, of course, tens of
thousands were detained in concentration camps and
prisons-the British Government issued the White
Paper of May 1939. That White Paper remained
applicable until the British, fed up with the problem,
handed it over to the trusteeship of the United Nations.
That White Paper stated, inter alia:

104. It will thus be seen that the question of Pal.
estine should be put back on the right track, in
consonance with international law and justice, which
provide the only standards by which the United
Nations is guided.
105. Military occupation does not displaceor transfer
sovereignty. Sovereignty belongs to each people which
has had it for a prolonged and uninterrupted period.
In the case of Palestine, sovereignty belongs to the
indigenous Palestinian people and has done so for
5,000 to 6,000 years. So long as the people of the
occupied territory do not accept military conquest, so
long as they can manifest their unalterable will to regain
freedom, their sovereignty-even though thwarted,
restricted and, as it were, sent into exile-still exists,

‘6 * . . The proposal of partition recommended by

the Royal Commission”-namely,
the establishment of self-supporting independent Arab and
Jewish States within Palestine-“has been found
to be impracticable.
“. ..

106. The late Dag Hammarskjiild stated the following
in 1961 in the introduction to his last annual report on
the work of the Organization:

‘L. . . His Majesty’s Government therefore now
declare unequivocally that it is not part of their
policy that Palestine should become a Jewish State.
They would indeed regard it as contrary to their
obligations to the Arabs under the Mandate, as well
as to the assurances which have been given to the
Arab people in the past”-presumably,
of course,
referring to the McMahon-Hussein agreements“that the Arab population of Palestine should not
be made the subjects of a Jewish State against their
will.
“. ..

“Were nations, under the Charter, to be allowed,
by the use of their military strength, to achieve
ends contrary to the principle . . . ofjustice, it would
obviously deprive those very principles of all
substance and significance. . . . the organs of the
United Nations have consistently maintained that
the use of force, contrary to the Charter as interpreted by those organs, cannot be permitted to yield
results which can be accepted as valid by the
Organization and as establishing new rights.“*
This idea is also included in Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338(1973), namely, the inadmissibility of the
acquisition of territory by force,

“The objective of His Majesty’s Government is
the establishment within 10 years of an independent
Palestine State. . . .”

107. I need hardly add that the inhabitants of the
occupied West Bank, including Jerusalem, the Gaza
Strip and the Golan Heights, are living in a large concentration camp. For 13years there have beendeportations, large-scale imprisonment, the heinous torture of
10,000 young boys and girls, in rotation, and the
desecration of Holy Places. For example, the Al-Aqsa
Mosque sanctuary has been subjected to continuous
drilling to a depth of 10to 15 metres, which, of course,
threatens the whole structure. Also the Sayyiduna
Al-Khalil Mosque sanctuary in Hebron has been
virtually converted into a synagogue. Theseare simply

The interim period of 10 years was dictated not by
any dilly-dallying but by the fact that the Second
World War had broken out and the British were in
need of a transitional period because they were engaged
in a life-and-death war. They told the Arab leadership
that
“The independent State should be one in which
Arabs and Jews share in government in such a way
as to ensure that the essential interests of each community are safeguarded.
12

B RARY

what does the international community propose to do
about them?

examples of the desecration of Holy Places. Many
other Holy Places have since been destroyed in the
Old City of Jerusalem. The intensity of repression,
oppression, intimidation, harassment and outright confiscation and expulsion is unparallelled anywhere in the
world.

110. A solution to the Palestine question should be
achieved right here at the United Nations and not anywhere else. Anyone who thinks otherwise is simply
being deluded and deceived by what are the real designs
of the Zionists and their ultimate goal. The Palestinians
are not so deceived.

108. Is it not high time, after 35 years of inaction,
that the Council took action-oriented steps to redeem
the inalienable rights of the Palestinians, particularly
to achieve total Israeli withdrawal from all occupied
territories and to restore the right of return to every
Palestinian who chooses to return to his homeland?
There are at least 100,000 inhabitants of Jerusalem,
both of East and West Jerusalem, who are deprived
of the right of return to their homes and homeland.
This deprivation applies equally to Palestinian exiles
from numerous other towns and villages through the
length and breadth of Palestine. They are the Pales tinian refugees. The autonomy talks provide-if
anything, and temporarily at that-a brief respite; they
give Palestinians no entitlement to the territory in
question, as Begin never tires of asserting, except as
guest residents, until the process of natural attrition
and human repression takes its normal toll.

111. Jordan, which is a principal party, and other
concerned parties are willing to play a constructive and
positive role in any authentic United Nations initiative.
But Jordan will never abandon or forsake the inalienable rights of its brethren, the Palestinian people.
112. The PRESIDENT (intcrpretatiorz
from
Spanish): There are no further speakers on my list for this
morning’s meeting. Since we have decided to deal with
another subject of urgency tomorrow, the next meeting
of the Council, to continue consideration of the item
on the agenda, will be scheduled in consultation with
members of the Council.
The meeting

109. Even resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) have
been blatantly flouted, even though those resolutions
did not take the Palestinian dimension into account
or refer to the only recognized representative of the
Palestinian people, namely the Palestine Liberation
Organization. In other words, what will be the fate of
the 4 million Palestinians dispersed all over the world?
That is the question that I posed in my first statement:

rose ut I .I.5 pm.

NOTES

I Palestine: W/erncr~t c?f Policy, Cmd. 6019, London,
Stationery Offke, 1939, pp. 3, 4 and 6.
2 OfJcial
Slcpplernetrf

13

Records
of the General
No. I A,
2-3.

pp.

Assembly,

Sixteertrh

HM

Session,

llllll

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

publications
may be obtained liom bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
your bookstore
or write to: United Nations, Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
SE PROCURER

LES PUBLKATLONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaires du
monde entier. Mormez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous a : Nations Unies. Section
des ventes, New York ou Get&e.

HwaHkw
3nnax

OpraHwaaqrrH

O(l%e~mterrubrs

H arewwmax
a0 ncex
pailonax
Bauh3.t
KHIIWHOM
Mara3mie
nm
n~mffe
WaqlrA,CexqHRnonpo~awteI(3~aHHA,Hh~-'L*Iop~Hn~~~e~esa.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

Haunfi

MOH(HO uynrrrb

a KHHJKKHL~Y Sara-

nwpa,
HaBOAHTe
cnpamui
no anpecy
: Oprauu3atturr

DE LAS NACIONES

06

n3Aanwix

a

06reAatremrbrx

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas estan en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas panes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Section de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

00300

83-61462-August

1986-2.4~.
