A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/54/66
11 February 2000

Fifty-fourth session
Agenda item 86
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/54/573)]
54/66.

Effects of atomic radiation

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 913 (X) of 3 December 1955, by which it established the United Nations
Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation, and its subsequent resolutions on the subject,
including resolution 53/44 of 3 December 1998, in which, inter alia, it requested the Scientific Committee
to continue its work,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects
of Atomic Radiation,1
Reaffirming the desirability of the Scientific Committee continuing its work,
Concerned about the potentially harmful effects on present and future generations resulting from the
levels of radiation to which mankind and the environment are exposed,
Noting the views expressed by Member States at its fifty-fourth session with regard to the work of
the Scientific Committee,
Conscious of the continuing need to examine and compile information about atomic and ionizing
radiation and to analyse its effects on mankind and the environment,
1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 46 (A/54/46).

00 28362

/...

A/RES/54/66
Page 2

1. Commends the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation for the
valuable contribution it has been making in the course of the past forty-four years, since its inception, to
wider knowledge and understanding of the levels, effects and risks of atomic radiation, and for fulfilling
its original mandate with scientific authority and independence of judgement;
2. Reaffirms the decision to maintain the present functions and independent role of the Scientific
Committee, including the present reporting arrangements;
3. Requests the Scientific Committee to continue its work, including its important activities to
increase knowledge of the levels, effects and risks of ionizing radiation from all sources;
4. Endorses the intentions and plans of the Scientific Committee for its future activities of scientific
review and assessment on behalf of the General Assembly, including publication of its next comprehensive
report in 2000;
5. Requests the Scientific Committee to continue at its next session the review of the important
problems in the field of radiation and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its fifty-fifth session;
6. Requests the United Nations Environment Programme to continue providing support for the
effective conduct of the work of the Scientific Committee and for the dissemination of its findings to the
General Assembly, the scientific community and the public;
7. Expresses its appreciation for the assistance rendered to the Scientific Committee by Member
States, the specialized agencies, the International Atomic Energy Agency and non-governmental
organizations, and invites them to increase their cooperation in this field;
8. Welcomes, in this context, the readiness of Member States to provide the Scientific Committee
with relevant information on the effects of atomic radiation in affected areas, and invites the Scientific
Committee to analyse and give due consideration to such information, particularly in the light of its own
findings;
9. Invites Member States, the organizations of the United Nations system and non-governmental
organizations concerned to provide further relevant data about doses, effects and risks from various sources
of radiation, which would greatly help in the preparation of future reports of the Scientific Committee to
the General Assembly.
71st plenary meeting
6 December 1999
