A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/53/208
14 January 1999

Fifty-third session
Agenda item 117
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/53/744)]
53/208. Pattern of conferences
A
The General Assembly,
Recalling its relevant resolutions, including resolutions 40/243 of 18 December 1985, 43/222 B of
21 December 1988, 47/202 A of 22 December 1992, 48/222 A of 23 December 1993, 49/221 A of 23 December
1994, 50/206 A of 23 December 1995 and 51/211 A of 18 December 1996 and section A of resolution 52/214
of 22 December 1997, and its decision 52/468 of 31 March 1998,
Reaffirming the mandate of the Committee on Conferences,
Having considered the report of the Committee on Conferences,1
1. Takes note with concern of the observations of the Committee on Conferences in paragraph 135 of
its report, and encourages members to participate in the work of the Committee;

1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-third Session, Supplement No. 32 and corrigendum (A/53/32
and Corr.1).
99-76165

/...

A/RES/53/208
Page 2

2. Invites the Committee on Conferences to consider the question of the participation of observers in the
work of the Committee in accordance with the relevant rules of procedure of the General Assembly;
3.

Notes with appreciation the work of the Committee on Conferences, and takes note of its report;

4. Approves the draft revised calendar of conferences and meetings of the United Nations for 1999 as
submitted by the Committee on Conferences,2 subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
5. Authorizes the Committee on Conferences to make adjustments to the calendar of conferences and
meetings for 1999 that may become necessary as a result of actions and decisions taken by the General Assembly
at its fifty-third session;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all the conference services required as a result of decisions
taken by the General Assembly at its fifty-third session, taking into account, as necessary, the procedures
established by the Assembly in its resolutions 41/213 of 19 December 1986 and 42/211 of 21 December 1987;
7.

Reaffirms its decision that the headquarters rule shall be adhered to by all bodies;

8. Decides that waivers to the headquarters rule shall be granted solely on the basis of the calendar of
conferences and meetings of the United Nations recommended by the Committee on Conferences for adoption
by the General Assembly;
9. Invites all its subsidiary bodies that are authorized to meet away from their established headquarters
to keep under review the exception to the headquarters rule in the light of their current work situation and to
report any changes to the General Assembly through the Committee on Conferences;
10. Notes with appreciation that the Secretariat took into account the arrangements referred to in
paragraphs 5 and 6 of section A of General Assembly resolution 52/214 and that the two holidays of Id al-Fitr
and Id al-Adha, which occur in 1999 on 18 January and 29 March, respectively, shall be observed as official
holidays of the United Nations, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure strict implementation of those
arrangements when preparing all future draft calendars of conferences and meetings of the Organization;
11. Decides that United Nations bodies should be invited to avoid holding meetings on 9 April 1999 and
that this arrangement should be taken into account when drafting future calendars of conferences and meetings;
12. Requests the Committee on Conferences to consider, at its next session, the proposal that United
Nations bodies should avoid holding meetings on lunar New Year’s Day;
13. Emphasizes that, when planning the calendar of conferences and meetings, every effort should be made
to avoid simultaneous peak periods at the various duty stations, and requests the Secretariat, when drafting future
calendars of conferences and meetings, to merge into one section the draft list of meetings of treaty bodies
established under the auspices of the United Nations and the draft calendar of conferences and meetings of the
principal organs of the specialized agencies;

2

Ibid., annex.
/...

A/RES/53/208
Page 3

14. Also emphasizes the importance of providing adequate conference-servicing resources to all United
Nations conference centres;
15. Notes with appreciation that the overall utilization factor for 1997 exceeded the benchmark of 80 per
cent, in particular at Geneva and Vienna;
16. Notes the efforts by the Secretary-General to improve utilization rates of the conference facilities at
the United Nations Office at Nairobi for 1996 and 1997;
17. Expresses concern that the conference facilities at the United Nations Office at Nairobi are still
underutilized, as recorded during the period 1996–1997;
18. Reiterates its call for better utilization of the conference facilities at Nairobi;
19. Requests the Secretary-General, in view of the fact that the United Nations Office at Nairobi has been
upgraded to a full-fledged United Nations centre, to explore the possibility of establishing a permanent
interpretation service at the centre and to submit a comprehensive report thereon to the General Assembly at its
fifty-fourth session;
20. Also requests the Secretary-General, without prejudice to the practices currently used to meet
interpretation requirements, to examine the provision of interpretation services to other locations from permanent
interpretation structures based in New York, Geneva, Vienna and Nairobi and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its fifty-fourth session, taking into account the request contained in paragraph 19 above for the
establishment of a permanent interpretation service at Nairobi;
21. Invites all subsidiary bodies of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme
and the Commission on Human Settlements and encourages Member States, intergovernmental bodies and
regional and other major groupings to consider increasing their use of the conference facilities at Nairobi;
22. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to assist the aforementioned bodies in improving this
situation, and requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session, through
the Committee on Conferences, on the actions taken to this end;
23. Reiterates its request to the Committee on Conferences to continue to consult with those bodies that
consistently utilized less than the applicable benchmark figure of their allocated resources for the past three
sessions, with a view to making appropriate recommendations in order to achieve the optimum utilization of
conference-servicing resources;
24. Requests that the Chairperson of the Committee on Conferences transmit a letter to the chairpersons
of all bodies that utilized less than the applicable benchmark figure (80 per cent) of their allocated conference
resources in the previous year, informing them of the problem and drawing their attention to the significant loss
of meeting time, with a view to encouraging appropriate action on their part so as to improve the utilization of
conference resources;
25. Notes the importance of meetings of regional and other major groupings of Member States for the
smooth functioning of sessional bodies, in view of the increased requests for meetings of regional and other major
groups, and welcomes the fact that 81 per cent of the requests for such meetings were met;

/...

A/RES/53/208
Page 4

26. Notes with concern the difficulties experienced by some Member States owing to the lack of conference
services for some meetings of regional and other major groupings of Member States;
27. Regrets that 19 per cent of the requests for interpretation services made by regional and other major
groupings of Member States were not met, while recognizing that meetings of Charter and mandated bodies must
be serviced as a priority;
28. Decides to include all necessary resources in the budget for the next biennium to provide interpretation
services for meetings of regional and other major groupings of Member States upon request by those groupings,
on an ad hoc basis, in accordance with established practice, and requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session, through the Committee on Conferences, a report on the
implementation of this decision;
29. Urges intergovernmental bodies to spare no effort at the planning stage to take into account meetings
of regional and other major groupings of Member States, to make provision for such meetings in their
programmes of work and to notify the conference services, well in advance, of any cancellations so that unutilized
conference-servicing resources may, to the extent possible, be reassigned to meetings of regional and other major
groupings of States;
30. Deeply regrets that the reports requested in paragraphs 9 and 15 of section A of its resolution
52/214 were not submitted to the General Assembly, and notes, in this context, that those reports were presented
only in an oral form to the Committee on Conferences;
31. Requests the Secretary-General to submit the reports requested in paragraphs 9 and 15 of section A
of its resolution 52/214 before 31 March 1999, and decides, without prejudice to the provisions of
paragraph 8 (a) of its resolution 50/206 C of 23 December 1995, that an oral report cannot substitute for a report
requested by the General Assembly;
32. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the use of remote interpretation and translation will
not affect the quality of interpretation and translation and will not in itself lead to a reduction of language posts;
33. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session,
through the Committee on Conferences and the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,
a report on possible measures to alleviate the excessive vacancy rates in language services at some duty stations
and ensure the required quality of conference services Secretariat-wide;
34. Requests the Secretary-General to intensify his efforts aimed at filling vacancies in language services
at all duty stations;
35. Also requests the Secretary-General, when filling the posts of translators and interpreters, irrespective
of the proposed contractual status of candidates, to take duly into account their professional qualifications,
including pre-job training and experience, in order to maintain at all times the highest possible quality in the
interpretation and translation services, and to ensure the equal treatment of language units of the Secretariat;
36. Stresses that the quality of interpretation in the six official languages should be improved in accordance
with its resolution 52/214, and decides that the standards that govern the staffing of the interpretation booths
shall continue to be observed;

/...

A/RES/53/208
Page 5

37. Welcomes the new organizational structure of conference services, which will allow for more effective
coordination among the four United Nations conference-servicing centres in New York, Geneva, Vienna and
Nairobi, and requests the Secretary-General to review the administrative instruction of 8 May 19873 on guidelines
for the preparation of host Government agreements falling under General Assembly resolution 40/243 of
18 December 1985 so as to reflect the new organizational structure.
93rd plenary meeting
18 December 1998
B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 47/202 B of 22 December 1992, 48/222 B of 23 December 1993, 49/221 B of
23 December 1994, 50/206 B and C of 23 December 1995, 51/211 B of 18 December 1996 and 51/211 F of
15 September 1997 and section B of its resolution 52/214 of 22 December 1997,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General4 and the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions5 on translation issues,
1. Expresses deep concern about deficiencies in the quality of some reports and documents originating
in the Secretariat, and requests the Secretariat to take all necessary measures to address the situation and to
develop measurements to evaluate improvements made in the quality of reports and documents;
2. Notes with deep concern the low rate of compliance with the six-week rule for the issuance of
documentation;
3. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to ensure that documentation is available in accordance
with the six-week rule for the distribution of documents simultaneously in the six official languages of the
General Assembly;
4. Requests the Secretariat to carry out a study on the possible relationship between the late issuance of
documentation and the low utilization of conference services by some bodies;
5. Regrets that there continue to be delays in the submission of documents to the conference services,
expresses concern that most of the delay in the issuance of a document is due to the late submission of documents
from the substantive departments, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure that substantive departments
prepare their programme of work to meet the deadline for the issuance of documents;
6. Reaffirms its decision that, if a report is issued late, the reasons for the delay should be indicated when
the report is introduced;
7.

Regrets that its decision taken in paragraph 5 of its resolution 50/206 C has not been implemented;

3

ST/AI/342.

4

A/53/221.

5

See A/53/507.
/...

A/RES/53/208
Page 6

8. Decides that if a report is submitted late to the conference services, the reasons for this should be
included in a footnote to the document;
9. Endorses the request of the Committee on Conferences to the Secretariat that a report containing
detailed data on the reasons for delays in the issuance of documentation and an analysis of the additional costs
incurred by document-processing services and of other financial implications of the late submission and issuance
of documents be presented to the Committee at its 1999 substantive session;
10. Notes with concern that the provisions of paragraphs 24 and 25 of section B of its resolution 52/214
are not always being implemented, despite reiteration of these provisions in its decision 52/471 of 31 March
1998;
11. Reiterates its request that the Secretary-General direct all departments to include, where appropriate,
the following elements in reports originating in the Secretariat:
(a) A summary of the report;
(b) Consolidated conclusions, recommendations and other proposed actions;
(c) Relevant background information;
12. Reiterates that all documents submitted to legislative organs by the Secretariat and expert bodies for
consideration and action should have conclusions and recommendations in bold print;
13. Stresses once again that press releases should reflect accurately the statements of Member States as
delivered in their original languages;
14. Notes with concern that the provisions of paragraphs 1.21 and 1.22 of the medium-term plan for the
period 1998–20016 are not being implemented, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Department
of General Assembly Affairs and Conference Services of the Secretariat conducts consultations and coordinates
the assignment of responsibilities for the implementation of all General Assembly resolutions and decisions and
follows up to ensure timely action by relevant departments and bodies;
15. Stresses once again the need for compliance with existing page limits, and invites all
intergovernmental bodies to consider, where appropriate, the possibility of further reducing the length of their
reports from thirty-two to twenty pages without adversely affecting either the quality of presentation or the
content of the reports;
16. Calls upon the Secretariat to make its procedures for obtaining waivers to the sixteen-page rule more
rigorous, while maintaining, however, the necessary degree of flexibility, with a view to encouraging author
departments to reduce the length of their submissions while maintaining high standards of quality;
17. Requests the Secretariat to submit to the Committee on Conferences, every two years, updated
information on the number and length of documents;

6

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-first Session, Supplement No. 6 and corrigendum
(A/51/6/Rev.1 and Corr.1).
/...

A/RES/53/208
Page 7

18. Also requests the Secretariat to continue consultations with the secretariats of intergovernmental bodies
with a view to informing them on the speedy issuance of unedited verbatim transcripts and the cost savings
derived therefrom, and encouraging them to follow the example of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space in carrying out the experiment with unedited verbatim transcripts, so as to enable the Committee on
Conferences to make final recommendations on the matter;
19. Emphasizes that the choice of unedited verbatim transcripts should be consistent with the needs of the
bodies concerned;
20. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to improve the quality of the translation of documents into
the six official languages in a timely manner;
21. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that summary and verbatim records are issued in all six
official languages concurrently;
22. Further requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts, where appropriate, to introduce new
technologies such as machine-assisted translation and common terminology databases while ensuring that there
are no adverse effects on the quality of documentation and translation;
23. Notes with appreciation the efforts made by the Secretariat to address the concerns expressed by
delegations on translation-related matters, and encourages the Secretariat to continue its efforts to improve quality
and proficiency in all six translation services;
24. Takes note with appreciation of the decision by the Secretariat to reduce the utilization of self-revision
to the recommended level so as to ensure the desired quality of parliamentary texts, and emphasizes that the
measures taken in relation to the revision of job descriptions, the training of staff, peer review and spot checks
and other related initiatives should be continued;
25. Expresses concern over continued high rates of self-revision during peak workload periods and
occasional inadequate translations, which have sometimes hampered the work of delegations, and emphasizes
the importance of continuous training for all translators at all duty stations and of developing measures to provide
translators with increased support from submitting offices and secretariats;
26. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the post of reviser is provided in the six official
languages in accordance with paragraph 19 of section B of its resolution 52/214 and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session;
27. Stresses that the United Nations should maintain a permanent interpretation and translation system
capable of responding to its average workloads;
28. Encourages the Secretariat to continue its efforts to ensure effective linguistic quality control through
to the final stage of document production and distribution and to report to the Committee on Conferences on the
steps taken in that regard;
29. Regrets the difficulties being faced by language service staff in relation to their career development;
30. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at its fifty-third session
analysing such problems as may exist related to career development in language services and taking into account

/...

A/RES/53/208
Page 8

the fact that the numbers and grade levels of staff should be commensurate with the needs of the Organization
as well as the fact that requirements differ between languages as well as between duty stations;
31. Recommends that due account should be taken of returns in terms of, inter alia, possible savings and
efficiency gains in planning new technology;
32. Also recommends that computer-assisted translation systems should be compatible with the existing
computer platforms used in the United Nations, that they should be upgradable to future technological
developments such as speech recognition and remote access, and that the experience of all duty stations should
be taken into account in their development;
33. Takes note of paragraph 62 of the report of the Committee on Conferences;1
34. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at its fifty-third session
on the impact of economy measures on the delivery of mandated conference services;
35. Also requests the Secretary-General, when preparing budget proposals for conference services, to
ensure that all necessary resources are proposed for such services, giving priority to redressing the inadequacies
in the provision of conference services in the most efficient manner for continuous improvements in the quality
and delivery of those services;
36. Decides to defer until its resumed fifty-third session consideration of the report of the Joint Inspection
Unit,7 the note by the Secretary-General transmitting his comments thereon,8 the report of the Committee for
Programme and Coordination9 and the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions10 on United Nations publications.
93rd plenary meeting
18 December 1998
C
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 50/206 D of 23 December 1995, 51/211 C of 18 December 1996 and 51/211 F
of 15 September 1997 and section C of its resolution 52/214 of 22 December 1997,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General11 and the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions5 on access to the optical disk system,

7

See A/51/946.

8

A/52/685.

9

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-third Session, Supplement No. 16 (A/53/16), part one,
chap. IV.

10

A/53/669.

11

A/52/803.
/...

A/RES/53/208
Page 9

Stressing the importance of equal access to, and benefit from, the optical disk system and other new
technologies in all six official languages for all Member States and the need to overcome the difficulties faced
by some Member States, in particular by developing countries, in acquiring the technology to access the optical
disk system, as well as other available technologies,
Appreciating the actions taken by the Ad Hoc Open-ended Working Group on Informatics of the Economic
and Social Council to achieve universal connectivity between United Nations databases and those of Member
States, including through their permanent missions, and the training programmes initiated to that end,
Appreciating also the efforts of the Secretary-General to incorporate new information technologies in the
work of the Organization,
1. Welcomes the efforts of the Secretariat to improve access to the optical disk system, particularly the
establishment of additional centres for the optical disk system;
2. Recognizes the efforts to provide wider access to the optical disk system, while continuing to ensure
the availability of hard copies of documents for Member States, in particular for developing countries;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all resolutions and decisions, and any annexes thereto,
adopted by the principal organs of the United Nations are posted to the optical disk system expeditiously;
4. Notes with appreciation that the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat launched United
Nations Web sites in Russian, Arabic and Chinese this year;
5. Stresses the need for the continuous development, maintenance and enrichment of United Nations Web
sites, with a view to achieving equal treatment of the six official languages on those Web sites;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit proposals in this connection to the General Assembly at its
fifty-fourth session through the Committee on Conferences and the Committee on Information;
7. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to ensure that the texts of all new public documents,
in all six official languages, and information materials of the United Nations are made available through the
United Nations Web site daily and are accessible to Member States without delay;
8. Notes that, in addition to the free-of-charge connection, via the Internet, of all permanent and observer
missions, requests have been received by the Organization for access to the optical disk system from a number
of intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations;
9. Reaffirms that, as provided for in its resolution 51/211 F, access to the optical disk system will continue
to be provided free of charge to permanent and observer missions and other government offices of Member
States, with a maximum of ten access passwords for each Member State, and that the optical disk system will
continue to be made available to all staff of the Secretariat;
10. Endorses the recommendation of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
in paragraph 13 of its report5 that a way be found, while maintaining the quality of service and priority given by
the General Assembly to the users mentioned in paragraph 1 of its resolution 51/211 F, to apply income generated
through optical disk system subscriptions directly to help to meet the cost of maintaining and/or expanding the
optical disk system, and to establish a mechanism to monitor satisfaction with the optical disk system.

/...

A/RES/53/208
Page 10

93rd plenary meeting
18 December 1998
D
The General Assembly,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General12 and the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions5 on the cost-accounting system for conference services,
Stressing the need to provide Member States and United Nations bodies with more comprehensive and
accurate information on the costs of meetings and documentation,
1. Emphasizes the need for the Secretariat to take into consideration the experience of all duty stations
when improvements were made in existing information systems;
2. Endorses the view expressed by the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
in paragraph 10 of its report5 that the report of the Secretary-General does not provide sufficient information at
this stage to allow the General Assembly to endorse the full-fledged development of a cost-accounting system;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at the earliest opportunity,
taking into account the observations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
contained in paragraph 10 of its report.
93rd plenary meeting
18 December 1998
E
The General Assembly,
Recalling its decision 38/401 of 23 September 1983 and section E of its resolution 52/214 of 22 December
1997 concerning the prohibition of smoking in small conference rooms and the discouragement of smoking in
large conference rooms,
1. Calls upon representatives of Member States to abide by its decision 38/401 and section E of its
resolution 52/214;
2. Encourages all users of United Nations conference facilities, in order to avoid involuntary exposure
to passive smoking, to refrain from smoking, in particular in conference rooms.
93rd plenary meeting
18 December 1998

12

A/52/1000.
