S/PV.8185

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8185

th meeting
Wednesday, 21 February 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Sheikh Al-Sabah . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kuwait)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Amon-Tanoh
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Tileuberdi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Czaputowicz
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Allen
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations in the maintenance
of international peace and security
Letter dated 1 February 2018 from the Permanent Representative of Kuwait to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2018/85)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-04705 (E)
*1804705*

S/PV.8185

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

But I believe that eastern Ghouta cannot wait, and so
my appeal to all those involved is for an immediate
suspension of all war activities in eastern Ghouta,
allowing humanitarian aid to reach all those in need
and for the evacuation of an estimated 700 people who
need urgent treatment that cannot be provided there,
and creating the possibility for other civilians to be
effectively treated on-site. This is a human tragedy that
is unfolding before our eyes, and I do not think we can
allow things to go on happening in this horrendous way.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations in the maintenance of
international peace and security
Letter dated 1 February 2018 from the
Permanent Representative of Kuwait
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2018/85)
The President (spoke in Arabic): I wish to warmly
welcome the Secretary-General, the former SecretaryGeneral, Ministers and other representatives present
in the Security Council Chamber. Their presence
today underscores the importance of the subject matter
under discussion.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, former Secretary-General of the
United Nations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/85, which contains a letter dated
1 February 2018 from the Permanent Representative
of Kuwait to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note on the
item under consideration.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. António Guterres.
The Secretary-General: Allow me, in this very
important debate related to the Charter and to the
maintenance of international peace and security, to
convey, before reading out my statement, a personal
emotion that I cannot hide.
I am deeply saddened by the terrible suffering
of the civilian population in eastern Ghouta, where
400,000 people live in hell on Earth.
I know that very important consultations are taking
place in the Council, aimed at achieving a cessation
of hostilities in Syria for a month, with a number of
conditions, and of course I fully support that effort.
2/29

21/02/2018

I thank the Government of Kuwait for organizing
this briefing. I would like to express my appreciation
to Kuwait for hosting last week’s International
Conference for Reconstruction of Iraq. I reiterate the
call I made there for global solidarity with Iraq in
the task of reconstruction. Let me also acknowledge
that the liberation of Kuwait from the forces of
Saddam Hussein took place 27 years ago this month.
This anniversary — of an undertaking in which the
international community used the Charter to uphold the
Charter — is a fitting backdrop to today’s discussion.
The Charter of the United Nations has stood the
test of time. Drafted following the utter collapse of
international order, it helped to stitch the world back
together. Drawn up as the full scope of the Holocaust
was emerging, it is part of the global bulwark against
international crimes today. But of course, the founders
of our Organization understood that recovering
from the Second World War was not only a matter of
preventing crimes. They placed people at the heart of
the Charter and proclaimed that the true basis of peace
was to be found in promoting respect for human rights
and securing social progress and better standards of life
in larger freedom for all.
Today, the Charter’s principles — non-use of force,
peaceful settlement of disputes, non-intervention,
cooperation, self-determination and the sovereign
equality of Member States — remain the
foundation of international relations. The values it
proclaims — equal rights, non-discrimination, tolerance
and good-neighbourliness — remain guideposts for
global harmony. However, the challenges we face
have evolved, the drivers of conflict have become
more complex, new threats have emerged, and the
consequences of instability now flow far beyond their
source. Addressing the challenge of migration, as well
as the threats of climate change and inequality, will test
the Charter and our capacity to secure a better world for
all. Thus, while the Charter’s principles are as relevant
18-04705

21/02/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

as ever, we must continue to update its tools, we must
use those tools with greater determination, and we
must go back to the Charter’s roots for inspiration as
we strive to deliver for “we the peoples”.
That work starts with prevention. As I said to
the Council at the beginning of my mandate, the
international community spends far more time and
resources responding to crises than in preventing them.
We have to rebalance our approach to international
peace and security. Our goal must be to do everything
we can to help countries avert the outbreak of crises
that take a high toll on humankind. This vision extends
beyond wars and conflicts to natural disasters, fragility
and other kinds of stress. Our commitment must be to
all human rights — civil, political, economic, social
and cultural — and to eliminate discrimination based
on gender, religion, race, nationality or other status.
Across this work, we must recognize the great power of
women’s participation, which makes peace agreements
sturdier, societies more resilient and economies
more vigorous.
Preventing crises is primarily the responsibility of
Member States. Chapter VI of the Charter describes
the tools that are available to them for that purpose:
negotiation,
enquiry,
mediation,
conciliation,
arbitration, judicial settlement and other peaceful
measures and means. The United Nations is there to
offer support to States in resolving their disputes and
preventing the emergence of crises.
The International Court of Justice is the principal
judicial organ of the United Nations. I encourage
Member States to accept the compulsory jurisdiction
of the Court and to make greater use of the Court and
of other international courts and tribunals to help settle
and avoid the escalation of their disputes.
The United Nations prevention efforts in The
Gambia, Guinea and Burkina Faso over the past several
years, always taken in coordination with and often in
direct support of the activities of the African Union
and the Economic Community of West African States,
highlight the conditions under which these efforts are
most successful. The role played in those contexts by
the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel underscores the value of United Nations regional
political presences, as in other contexts does the work of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
and the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia.

S/PV. 8185

Mediation is among the paths suggested by Chapter
VI. In recent weeks, the new High-Level Mediation
Advisory Board has undertaken its first initiative. We
have planned a number of other missions — with the
agreement of the countries concerned — to Member
States facing stability challenges. My own good offices
are available to the Security Council at all times to help
prevent, manage or resolve conflicts.
Of course, the Charter confers upon the Security
Council powers and responsibilities in the field of
conflict prevention. At this time, it is especially urgent
for the Security Council to uphold its responsibility
to bring about a political settlement on Syria, in
accordance with resolution 2254 (2015), under United
Nations auspices.
Sustaining peace is a key part of prevention. My
report on sustaining peace (S/2018/43) is now before
the entire membership, and I look forward to taking
forward its proposals. Prevention also depends crucially
on advancing sustainable and inclusive development.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development offers
an integrated framework for addressing the economic
and social drivers of conflict and for building stable
societies, including through a focus on institutions and
the rule of law.
The word “peacekeeping” does not appear in the
Charter, but that flagship United Nations activity is
firmly rooted in the Charter’s ideals and demonstrates
the Charter’s flexibility. Peacekeeping has a solid record
of service, sacrifice and success, and it has ably served
as a tool to assist in the peaceful settlement of disputes,
as well as to achieve more robust objectives. However,
today peacekeeping faces major challenges. Often,
peacekeepers are deployed indefinitely to dangerous
environments where there is little peace to keep,
where there are no political solutions in sight, where
there are multiple armed groups and where casualties
are rising sharply from attacks on peacekeepers. For
these and other reasons, the United Nations ends up
serving as a crisis baby-sitter or focusing on simple
containment — and that is simply not sustainable.
A detailed plan of action to enhance the safety
and security of peacekeepers is being implemented by
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and our
missions. The Department is also carrying out a series
of strategic reviews under the guidance of the Security
Council. There is no one-size-fits-all operation.
Our aim is to refocus peacekeeping with realistic

18-047053/29

S/PV.8185

Maintenance of international peace and security

expectations; with well-structured, well-supported and
well-equipped forces; and with the support we need
from host countries. We look to the Security Council
to provide clear and focused mandates, and we call for
greater engagement on the part of all Member States
in providing personnel and political, material and
financial backing.
At the same time, peacekeeping is not the solution
to all crisis situations. Different contexts may require
other kinds of action, including peace enforcement and
counter-terrorist operations undertaken by coalitions
of Member States. Here, too, clear Security Council
mandates and predictable, adequate funding will be
critical.
Today, we have the highest number of United
Nations sanctions regimes in the history of the
Organization. Since implementation goes beyond
Member States, greater attention may need to be paid to
the private sector, in particular the financial industry.
We must be careful to avoid unintended consequences,
including humanitarian ones.
Let me turn now from Chapters VI and VII to
Chapter VIII. Even before most regions had created
regional or subregional organizations, the drafters of the
Charter recognized the value of regional arrangements
and agencies as a first resort for the pacific settlement
of local disputes. Regional perspectives are critical
in understanding challenges. Regional capacities are
crucial for rapid deployment. Regional ownership is
essential for solutions to take root.
Among the most vital and dynamic of today’s
partnerships is our work with the African Union.
Our organizations have signed two new framework
agreements — on peace and security, and on the
alignment of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development with Africa’s Agenda 2063. I again call
on the international community to ensure predictable
and adequate financing for African forces operating in
Somalia, the Sahel and around Lake Chad. We are also
forging closer ties with the European Union and several
other organizations.
The purposes and principles of the Charter speak
to today’s challenges as firmly as they spoke to people
who had just lived through the most horrible war the
world has ever seen. The reforms in which we are all
engaged, which span peace and security, development
and management, aim to make us more effective in
fulfilling the Charter’s vision. The Charter is our living
4/29

21/02/2018

template for serving “we the peoples”. The Secretariat
stands ready to help Member States embrace the full
spirit of the Charter and use it to its full potential across
all pillars of our work.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
Mr. Ban Ki-moon: As this is my first time back at
the United Nations and addressing the Security Council
as a former Secretary-General of the United Nations,
I would like to express my sincere appreciation to
the President of the Security Council, His Excellency
Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, for having
invited me to take part in this important meeting. I also
commend the Government of Kuwait for its successful
presidency of the Security Council in the month
of February.
The world we live in today is completely different
from what it was seven decades ago, when the United
Nations was founded. While we have seemingly moved
on from the era of large-scale war between States,
today we face an increasing number of emerging
global challenges. They include climate change, tens of
millions of refugees, violent extremism, terrorism and
nuclear proliferation, to name just a few. At the same
time, the fourth industrial revolution, represented by
enormous technological advancements — such as in
the areas of artificial intelligence, nanotechnology and
biological engineering — has brought about dramatic
changes in the shape and form of our daily lives. They
will also have a significant impact on the security
environment of the future world.
Under those dramatically changing circumstances
of today’s world, some are questioning the role and
effectiveness of the United Nations as a whole. However,
those critics may also agree that, without the United
Nations, the international community could have never
succeeded in preventing another world war in the past
70-plus years. Furthermore, if it were not for the United
Nations, the international community would not have
been able to make significant gains on eradicating
extreme poverty, promoting public health and scaling
up access to education. Who else would have been able
to provide legitimacy for the actions that the Security
Council takes in addressing conflicts today?
The primary responsibilities vested in the Security
Council to maintain international peace and security
18-04705

21/02/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

are therefore needed now more than ever. In that regard,
I value the Council’s improved working relations with
the other interconnected pillars of the United Nations
system, and also its increased focus on the concept of
sustaining peace. Addressing the root causes of conflict
and working towards preventing conflicts before
they escalate, alongside national and international
stakeholders, will ultimately make the Council, and the
Organization, stronger as a result.
In order to effectively respond to non-traditional
and transnational security challenges such as climate
change, terrorism and violent extremism, nuclear
proliferation and cross-border insecurity, the Security
Council should undergo reforms to be more flexible in
its decision-making process. Reform of the Security
Council is long overdue.

S/PV. 8185

to spin out of control as a result of deteriorating
regional security.
In addition, after losing its territories of terror
in the Middle East, we cannot dismiss the possibility
of ISIS moving on to settle in vulnerable places such
as Libya.
The division among member States of the Gulf
Cooperation Council is also of serious concern. In that
regard, I highly commend the mediating role played by
His Highness Sheikh Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah,
Amir of Kuwait.

We must also remind ourselves of the fact that the
primary responsibility for preserving peace and security
lies with Member States themselves. The failure of some
national leaders to fulfil their responsibilities to their
own peoples significantly undermines the role of the
United Nations in resolving conflicts. That can also lead
to some Member States neglecting their responsibility
to protect their own citizens, while hiding behind the
concepts of national ownership and State sovereignty.

Exposure to the spread of terrorism and violent
extremism is especially alarming in places like the
Sahel region in Africa. As extreme poverty, terrorism,
the illicit arms trade and human trafficking are all
prevalent in a volatile cross-border environment, we
must bolster our collective actions to address such
vulnerabilities. During my tenure as SecretaryGeneral, in June 2013, I established the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel to address such issues.
I am pleased to see that Secretary-General António
Guterres, the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission are working in triangular cooperation to
advance that important effort.

Those political leaders often create dire political
and economic instabilities where innocent civilians bear
the bulk of the suffering. We have learned by now that,
in order to hold such leaders accountable, the Security
Council should not limit itself to simply calling for
actions in rhetoric or statements. The Council must act
on those situations.

Towards the end of my second term as SecretaryGeneral, in April 2016, the Security Council and the
General Assembly adopted twin resolutions (resolution
2282 (2016) and General Assembly resolution 70/262) on
the review of United Nations peacebuilding architecture.
The resolutions expressed deep concern about the high
human cost and suffering caused by armed conflict.

Having said that, I would like to touch on several
international and regional conflicts.

Today, not only do international peace and security
issues remain at a critical juncture, but multilateralism
is also at stake. We must remember that multilateralism
cannot be upheld by one Member State alone or a group
of States. The United Nations, especially the Security
Council, must continue to endeavour to strengthen that
driving ideal, while overcoming whatever challenges
may loom over the horizon.

In the Middle East, we must now be prepared for the
post-Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) era. The
Security Council must focus more on northern Syria,
the ongoing civil war in Syria, tension in the Golan
Heights and the continuing Syrian crisis of refugees
and internally displaced persons. Those issues could
resurface, seriously threaten regional stability and lead
to further conflicts among States in the region. Such
instability could lead to exacerbating tensions between
Iran and Saudi Arabia, and bring Israel and Iran closer
to direct conflict.
Violence between Israel and Hizbullah in Lebanon
and other regional threats could also have the potential

In that regard, I must emphasize that the entire
United Nations membership should faithfully and
thoroughly implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change, while coping with other new challenges,
including the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, among others.

18-047055/29

S/PV.8185

Maintenance of international peace and security

21/02/2018

In that connection, as Secretary-General António
Guterres has stated, I believe that the situation on
the Korean peninsula is currently our most serious
and imminent challenge. As we all know, today the
Korean peninsula is faced with serious challenges as
a result of the continued nuclear tests and long-range
ballistic missile launches conducted by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. At the end of last year, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea announced its
“completion of State nuclear force” and proclaimed
itself a “nuclear State.” That is a serious threat to
international peace and security and clearly violates all
the relevant Security Council resolutions and the regime
established by the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons.

establishment of wider peace and stability in NorthEast Asia, thereby setting the stage for greater regional
development and prosperity.

In fact, the Security Council has responded with
tough measures, including increasingly stronger
sanctions, to deter the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea’s nuclear development. Six of the 10 different
resolutions adopted since its first nuclear test, in 2006,
were adopted in the past two years alone. Firm and
unified actions by the Security Council will be essential
until North Korea’s nuclear weapons and programmes
are completely, verifiably and irreversibly dismantled.

Throughout my years as Secretary-General, I
witnessed the unique power of sports in contributing
to peace and development in many places around the
world. I am happy to have seen such positive energy once
again in my country during the PyeongChang Winter
Olympics. In that regard, I would like to commend
Mr. Thomas Bach, President of the International
Olympic Committee, for his visionary leadership in
facilitating the North Korean athletes’ participation
in the Games, particularly that of the joint women’s
ice-hockey team.

In that regard, I urge the authorities of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to fully abide
by the relevant Security Council resolutions. At the
same time, I urge all Member States to do their part
in helping to resolve the North Korean nuclear issue
through diplomatic efforts. Only by seeking solutions
to all these problems through peaceful means can we
uphold the purposes and principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations.
In that regard, the participation of North Korean
athletes in the XXIII Winter Olympic Games, in
PyeongChang, South Korea, has aroused much hope
and expectation around the world. I warmly welcome
the recent resumption of inter-Korean dialogue and the
resulting reconciliatory atmosphere between the two
Koreas that was created before, and has existed during,
the Olympic Games.
We must keep alive that hard-won and newly
created momentum for dialogue, so that the narrow
window of opportunity it has provided will be able
to lead to a more meaningful and genuine dialogue
process towards reconciliation, peace and the ultimate
denuclearization of North Korea. The denuclearization
of the Korean peninsula would also help to spur the
6/29

That process also requires the whole-hearted
support of the United Nations, and I count on the
Security Council in moving the whole process to that
end. We need genuine and strong commitment from
both South and North Korea to engage in dialogue,
while supported by the United States, China, Japan and
Russia. The current reconciliatory atmosphere must be
nurtured through the continued engagement of both the
South and North Korean authorities. The United States
can also play a crucial role in engaging with North
Korea, as was suggested by President Moon Jae-in of
the Republic of Korea.

Once again, I would like to thank the President and
the members of the Security Council for inviting me to
address the Council, during which I look forward to an
active exchange of thoughts and ideas.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Ban
Ki-moon for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kuwait.
At the outset, allow me to thank Secretary-General
António Guterres for his valuable briefing. I assure him
that the State of Kuwait will spare no effort during its
mandate to be a good supporter to his efforts and vision
towards improving the mechanisms of the United
Nations, thereby strengthening its effectiveness in
reducing the dangers and threats facing our world today.
I would also like to thank former SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for participating in this
meeting and delivering a valuable briefing that is the
result of a decade at the helm of the United Nations.
This is a historic moment. We are in the presence of
18-04705

21/02/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

two — the current and former — Secretaries-General
in one meeting. I am therefore deeply grateful that they
accepted the invitation to participate in this meeting.
We will not find a better person to address the Security
Council on the importance of our topic today than a
former and present Secretary-General.
It is appropriate to start this meeting on the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations in
the maintenance of international peace and security by
quoting the first lines of the Preamble of the Charter,
which illustrate the reason for our meeting:
“We the peoples of the United Nations
determined to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war, which twice in our lifetime has
brought untold sorrow to mankind and to reaffirm
faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity
and worth of the human person, in the equal rights
of men and women and of nations large and small”.
The State of Kuwait decided to convene
this important meeting to discuss our collective
responsibility and commitment regarding the purposes
and principles of the Charter, which represent a
constitution pertaining to multilateral and international
action. The members of the Council are gathered in
the Chamber today to examine the tools set out in
the Charter, which the Council has at its disposal, to
effectively maintain international peace and security
and address the challenges currently facing the world.
The Charter of the United Nations is an instrument
of an international legal nature that serves as a clear
framework for regulating relations among States. If we
abided by its provisions, threats undermining peace
and security would decrease. It is also necessary to
implement its provisions on an equal footing, effectively
and collectively, while committing ourselves to its
purposes and principles. It is essential that we work
together as one to end violence and aggression, establish
friendly relations among nations; ensure respect for the
principles of sovereignty and non-interference in the
internal affairs of others, as well as equal rights and the
right to self-determination; and promote and encourage
respect for human rights. Despite the fact that those
purposes and principles exist and that all Members of
the United Nations should abide by them, we find that
they are flagrantly flouted in ways that undermine not
only regional peace and security, but also international
security in general. We in the State of Kuwait underwent
a very trying situation, which everyone is aware of, as a

S/PV. 8185

result of grave violations of the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations.
The State of Kuwait did not decide to choose the
purposes and principles of the Charter as the topic
for today’s meeting at random. We are currently the
smallest Member State on the Council in terms of
our physical size. However, the issue of respecting
the provisions of the United Nations Charter and the
rules of international law is extremely important for
all countries, in particular the small ones. In fact, the
principles and purposes of the Charter represent the
first line of defence for small countries. The holding
of this meeting in February was also not based on a
random decision. Every year on 26 February, The
State of Kuwait celebrates its liberation from the Iraqi
occupation in 1991. That liberation was the consequence
of the international community’s commitment to abide
by the purposes and principles of the Charter. In a few
days from now, we will celebrate the twenty-seventh
anniversary of our liberation.
The example of Kuwait’s liberation clearly attests
to what we can do when the international community
pools its efforts under the umbrella of the United
Nations, as well as through the legitimate Security
Council resolutions supporting the rule of law and
upholding rights, justice, while combating tyranny
and injustice. The process leading to the liberation
of Kuwait is a historic and successful model that
highlights the Security Council’s ability to set right the
situation caused by an act of aggression, the goal of
which was to undermine and violate the noble purposes
and principles of the Charter. In that context, I would
like to raise three important issues.
First, the tools that the Security Council has at
its disposal in order to shoulder its responsibilities.
Seventy years after the founding of the United Nations,
its Charter has in no way diminished in importance.
The Charter includes tools that enable us to confront
challenges, including Chapter VI, which provides an
important tool for resolving disputes through peaceful
means, negotiations, mediation and arbitration, to
name a few. This tool should be further activated.
In fact, measures adopted by the Council in times of
crisis frequently represent a delayed reaction to an
event. Often, the Council fails to consider preventive
measures to prevent emerging crises by addressing
them from the outset.

18-047057/29

S/PV.8185

Maintenance of international peace and security

The root causes of crises are often attributable
to economic and social issues, such as poverty and
unemployment. The Security Council often forgets that
the third pillar of the United Nations Charter — after
peace and security, and human rights — is development.
Working to achieve sustainable development requires
an environment that is conducive to political stability
and security, and confronting the root causes of the
challenges that we are aware of. In this context, we note
that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
includes a very specific Sustainable Development
Goal — Goal 16 — which calls for peaceful, just and
inclusive societies.
Early warning and addressing conflicts before they
erupt requires the political will of the Council. Let us
recall some of the massacres and tragedies when the
Council failed to adopt the measures necessary to
save thousands and even millions of lives, such as the
Rwanda genocide and the Srebrenica massacre. Those
are examples that demonstrate the failure of the Council
and the international community to act to prevent such
crises in a timely manner. They are lessons for us all.
We are also aware that, in certain circumstances,
mediation, negotiations and other peaceful means
probably will not lead to resolving crises, but in those
cases Chapter VII allows for the use of force so as to
maintain or restore international peace and security.
The liberation of Kuwait demonstrated the effectiveness
and legitimacy of Chapter VII through a legitimate
military response to a despicable military invasion.
That response was mandated by resolution 678 (1990)
after all diplomatic means had been exhausted.
With regard to Chapter VIII, we firmly believe
in the constructive role that regional and subregional
organizations can play in contributing to the
establishment of peace and security regionally and
internationally. We call for greater cooperation between
the Security Council and such regional organizations.
My second point concerns the unity of the Security
Council. The Council has many tools at its disposal
for settling crises, including those that promote their
peaceful resolution before they erupt. However,
being able to use such tools successfully depends on
the Council’s unity and ability to agree and reach a
consensus. Over the years and decades, we have seen
the Council sometimes unable to settle crises because
of divergent points of view among Council members,
above all regarding the use of the right of veto. Among
8/29

21/02/2018

the issues that have been affected most negatively by the
failure of the Council to act is the Palestinian question,
which has been on the Council’s agenda for more than
70 years and has yet to be resolved. There is also the
Syrian crisis, which is entering its seventh year and has
cost the lives of more than 400,000 people. The unity
of the Security Council, in particular its five permanent
members, is of the utmost importance if it is to function
and take decisions effectively and decisively.
My third point relates to the Secretary-General.
We highly appreciate the efforts of Secretary-General
António Guterres to improve the two pillars of peace
and security in the work of the United Nations organs.
We support his vision, in particular concerning
international diplomacy and the need to take all
preventive measures before emergency situations
erupt. We stress the important and key role played by
the Secretary-General in bringing any matter to the
attention of the Security Council, pursuant to Article
99 of the Charter.
In conclusion, I should like to emphasize that the
State of Kuwait has returned to the Council after 40
years with the same principles that it defended during
its first term in 1978 and 1979, despite the major
changes that the world has undergone over the last
four decades. That is the Kuwait that members have
known over the years: contributing in the efforts to
maintain international peace and security; believing
in dialogue over brute force; seeking good neighborly
relations and ensuring the best relations with its
neighbors; leading regional mediation and settling
conflicts through peaceful means; active in multilateral
diplomacy; leader in supporting humanitarian work;
and committed to the the purposes and principles of the
United Nations, both in letter and spirit.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Poland.
Mr. Czaputowicz (Poland): First of all, let me thank
the State of Kuwait, and in particular His Excellency
Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, for
convening today’s important debate. Let me also
thank Secretary General António Guterres for his
valuable remarks, and former Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his important comments. Those comments
demonstrate the continuation of work of the Security
18-04705

21/02/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

Council in the field of maintaining international peace
and security.
It is indisputable that the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations proclaim the most
fundamental values for the international community
of States. They describe both the goals that should be
pursued and the essential rules that should be followed.
I would like to reiterate that Poland has always been
deeply committed to the fundamental ideas constituting
the legal basis of the United Nations, beginning with the
signing of the Declaration by United Nations in 1942.
Throughout over 70 years of our membership in the
United Nations, Poland has been strongly committed
to maintaining international peace and security.
That strong commitment continues until the present
day — when Poland, as a non-permanent member of the
Security Council, makes efforts aimed at strengthening
the Charter and enhancing trust in international law.
Let me recall the sometimes underestimated
principle set out in Article 2, paragraph 2 of the Charter,
which states:
“[a]ll Members, in order to ensure to all of them
the rights and benefits resulting from membership,
shall fulfill in good faith the obligations assumed
by them in accordance with the present Charter.”
That principle should be considered as a
Grundnorm — in other words, a fundamental norm — for
United Nations Members. In fact, as a horizontal system
of cooperation, international law depends on the
reliability and constancy of commitments undertaken
by States. That principle consists of two parts, namely,
the fulfilment of the obligations assumed and acting in
good faith.
With regard to the first part — the fulfilment of
the obligations assumed — we stress that respecting
obligations by every State is a basic tenet of
international legal relations. It ensures confidence and
trust among States.
As for the second part, the principle of good faith
obliges States to apply their international law duties
reasonably and in such a manner that their purpose can
be achieved legally. That principle works as a corrective
factor and prevents the abuse of one’s rights. Respecting
international law obligations in good faith therefore
means that States must abstain from acts contrary to
the purpose of their commitments and obligations.
Let me stress that, if a State acts without respect for

S/PV. 8185

the principles set out iin Article 2, it diminishes the
significance of the Charter and, in consequence, the
global peace architecture based on it.
In that context, it is indispensable, once again,
to strengthen our call for the peaceful settlement
of international disputes. The date of today’s
debate — 27 years after the liberation of the State of
Kuwait, in which Poland was actively engaged — is a
forceful reminder for the international community of
States. Today too we face one of the most egregious
expressions of the threat to international peace
and security, that is, the aggression of one State
against another.
We reiterate that the Security Council has proved
to be a guardian of the purposes and principles of the
Charter. Therefore, the Council should be considered
the ultimate custodian of States’ territorial sovereignty,
the peaceful settlement of disputes between States,
the prohibition of the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of any
State and respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all and without distinction. It is also the
Security Council that can take significant initiatives
and actions in that regard. One of the most prominent
examples of the pivotal role of the Security Council as a
guardian of the maintenance of international peace and
security wascthe liberation of the State of Kuwait from
the Iraqi occupation.
Moreover, actions taken to prosecute the alleged
perpetrators of the most heinous international crimes
through the establishment of the International
Criminal Tribunals for Rwanda and the former
Yugoslavia, as well as through the referral of cases to
the International Criminal Court, have also been of
paramount importance. Equally, Council resolutions
aimed at combating international terrorism must be
acknowledged and commended.
Nonetheless, there are still flagrant violations of
international law posing threats to international peace
and security, as well as to the protection of human rights
and fundamental freedoms, such as the illegal annexation
of Crimea and support for separatist forces in eastern
Ukraine. In that vein, we are also deeply concerned
about violations of international humanitarian law and
the Chemical Weapons Convention in Syria.
Having mentioned Syria, I must also refer to very
worrying developments we learned about yesterday
with regard to further shelling of eastern Ghouta. There

18-047059/29

S/PV.8185

Maintenance of international peace and security

is no justification for indiscriminate attacks on innocent
civilians and civilian infrastructure, including health
facilities. They must stop, and parties to the conflict
must strictly comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law. We call upon everyone
to alleviate the suffering of civilians, including children,
by granting them free and safe access to humanitarian
assistance. We urgently call for stopping hostilities in
all of Syria.
As stated by the Secretary General,
“[p]eace is a tireless undertaking, to which
all United Nations agencies and bodies must
work, in accordance with their mandates and
responsibilities.” (S/PV.7926, p. 2)
We therefore pledge to engage actively in all efforts
to strengthen the role of the Security Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security, in
accordance with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter. We cannot forget that the
Security Council is not only one of the guardians of
the purposes and principles of the United Nations, but
is also obliged, under the Charter, to act in accordance
with them.
Mr. Amon-Tanoh (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I should like to welcome the convening
of this meeting on the maintenance of international
peace and security and the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, the relevance and
timeliness of which invites us to turn to the resources
of the Charter and the Security Council for answers to
the concerns of our world regarding peace and security.
I also wish to express my sincere appreciation for the
kind invitation to participate in this high-level meeting.
I
congratulate
Secretary-General
António
Guterres on the quality of his statement, as well as the
former Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his
insightful contribution.
The convening of this meeting by your country,
Mr. President, 27 years after its liberation by an
international coalition led by the Security Council, in
accordance with the provisions of the Charter of our
common Organization, is a strong symbol of the strength
of our principles. My country, as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council at that time, in 1990
and 1991, contributed significantly to the triumph of
the law and the values enshrined
​​
in the Preamble to
the Charter by playing a decisive role in the adoption
10/29

21/02/2018

of resolutions 678 (1990) and 687 (1991), seeking
to end Iraq’s annexation of Kuwait. Côte d’Ivoire’s
resolute affirmation of the founding principles of our
Organization at a decisive moment in its existence
reflects the deep values ​​of my country and its faith in
the ideal of the United Nations Charter.
Born from the resolve of States to protect people
from further destructive conflicts, the United Nations is
constantly working to maintain international peace and
security. Its Charter advocates the peaceful settlement
of disputes and regulates the use of the coercive
measures it provides in the event of the persistence of
a conflict. Our Council is therefore conversant with
Chapters VI, VII and VIII of the Charter, in addition
to the provisions of Articles 1 and 2 of Chapter I, on
building and preserving peace.
The geopolitical changes of the world have
reinforced the need to put the Charter and the Security
Council at the centre of our reflections on international
peace and security by going beyond the constraints of
sovereignty — increasingly brandished by Member
States — and prioritizing our obligation to end serious
attacks on the right to life. The sustainability of the
architecture of the maintenance of international peace
and security is therefore based on the ability of the
Charter to adapt to the requirements of each major
period in history, as well as that of Member States to
restore the strength of moral values in their relations.
In such circumstances, it is necessary to assess the
impact of the changing nature of conflicts and the
emergence of new global threats on the effectiveness of
the instruments of the Charter for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Côte d’Ivoire is convinced that one of the greatest
responsibilities of the international community today
is the prevention of armed conflict, which, if properly
managed, could save humankind from further suffering.
It is in that spirit that the participants in the 2005 World
Summit, held here at the United Nations, emphasized
the pressing need to promote a culture of prevention. In
that context, it is appropriate to highlight and commend
the good offices of the Office of the SecretaryGeneral, which constitute a fundamental element in
conflict prevention and resolution through preventive
diplomacy. The effectiveness of that instrument,
however, lies in the ability of the Secretary-General to
embody the moral authority of our Organization and his
persuasive force, particularly in regard to the Security
Council and General Assembly.
18-04705

21/02/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

Our Organization has transformed itself
structurally so as to be able to detect the beginnings
of conflict and ensure that conflict prevention
and diplomacy are no longer discrete tools largely
dependent on, inter alia, the good will of the parties
and cooperation of neighbouring countries. To that end,
we must make conflict prevention a key component in
how the United Nations operates in the area of peace
and security. My delegation encourages training in and
support for early warning mechanisms put in place by
subregional and regional organizations, and support for
the establishment of prevention mechanisms by civil
society structures. We must, however, recognize that
the efforts of the international community to prevent
conflict have not been enough to prevent the outbreak
of conflicts in the world.
By signing the Charter of the United Nations in
1945, the founding Members sought to create a new
world order based on multilateralism and its mission to
make peace a universal common good, the preservation
of which has been entrusted to the United Nations
and the Security Council, within the framework of its
fundamental responsibilities.
The proliferation of intra-State conflicts and civil
wars is straining the United Nations peacekeeping
system, established during the Cold War, in response to
the problem of global insecurity. It raises as a priority
the question of the legitimacy, legality and necessity
of the use of force against a Member State, without the
prior authorization of the Security Council, in order to
prevent civilian massacres.
That issue, which remains relevant, especially in
the light of the paralysis of our Council when facing the
most serious crises, is central to the doubts concerning
the effectiveness of the instruments of the Charter.
Indeed, the effectiveness of those instruments is
sorely tested when confronting serious human rights
violations and mass crimes such as those perpetrated in
Somalia in 1993, Rwanda in 1994 and Bosnia in 1995,
even though a peacekeeping operation was present on
the ground.
Beyond peacekeeping operations, the issue of the
legality and necessity of the use of force also arises with
regard to armed interventions by coalitions formed to
act in the name of peace. For my country, the use of
force to maintain international peace and security must
be authorized exclusively by the Security Council in

S/PV. 8185

order to give it the legal authority necessary to prevent
any type of excess and abuse.
The leaders of our world Organization and its
Member States have always courageously found in the
painful events we have faced, as well as in the Charter,
the instruments and means to rebound and reform the
system to maintain peace. It is hard to speak of the
change in our Organization’s response to global disorder
without highlighting the profound and multidimensional
transformations of peacekeeping operations, inspired
by the lessons of the Srebrenica massacre in Bosnia
and the genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda, which
the Brahimi report (S/2000/809) brought to light.
While those responses remain imperfect, they are in
many cases the only ones that have saved millions of
people and led to success in many countries, including
Cambodia, El Salvador, Guatemala, Mozambique,
Namibia, Tajikistan, Timor-Leste, Sierra Leone, Côte
d’Ivoire, Liberia and Haiti.
My country can attest to the effectiveness of the
range of provisions of the Charter concerning the
maintenance of international peace and security when
they enjoy the necessary legitimacy and legality and
are accepted in good faith. The success of the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire, which we celebrated
in this Chamber, was the culmination of a process in
which all the measures set forth in the Charter and
adopted by the Security Council were put into practice
in my country. I would point to the most important steps,
including a political agreement and the authorization
of the parties prior to the deployment of the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire; a sanctions regime,
including an embargo against arms and diamonds, as
well as individual sanctions; the authorization to use
force to destroy heavy weapons threatening civilians;
and respect for the political agreement and the ballot
results certified by the United Nations.
The international peace and security system,
derived from the Charter, is at a crossroads. It should
provide new responses to global challenges, such as
terrorism and climate change. My country calls upon
the Council to take stock of its impact on international
peace and security. These new developments oblige
the United Nations to redefine its functions and
methods by focusing on ways to prevent crises, expand
partnerships and broaden the scope of its activities
for peace and security. As Secretary-General António
Guterres underscored,

18-0470511/29

S/PV.8185

Maintenance of international peace and security

“Prevention requires us to address root causes
across the three pillars of the United Nations: peace
and security, sustainable development and human
rights. It must be the priority in everything we do.”
(A/71/PV.60, p. 13)
Côte d’Ivoire believes that the much-needed reform
should also involve closer cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations, which
would be an asset in the fight against terrorism. The
Council should provide increased support to entities in
that fight, such as the Group of Five for the Sahel and
the African Union Mission in Somalia, in which the
United Nations is not ready to engage.
In the light of the new challenges facing our States
and the role the United Nations must play together with
us, there is an urgency to forge ahead with Security
Council reform in order to strengthen its legitimacy and
its acceptance by all. Only a strong Security Council
that reflects today’s world will encourage States to
shoulder their primary responsibility to maintain
international peace and security.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I would
like to personally thank the Secretary-General for
being here a second day in a row, but, more important,
for his comments on Syria. I think that it is time for
us to realize that we cannot continue to look away.
I very much appreciate him taking the time to make
that personal plea. I think it is important for all of
us to know. It is certainly an honour to have former
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon with us today. We
welcome him back home and are happy to see him.
I thank Kuwait’s presidency of the Security Council
for convening today’s meeting. It is important that we
pause for a moment every so often to reflect why it is
we are here and what guides our work. We should start
by being honest. There is a lot of lip service paid to
the Charter of the United Nations. Everyone claims to
be motivated by it and to be acting in accordance with
its principles. But all too often Member States invoke
the United Nations Charter not to inspire us to act,
but to excuse their lack of action. And so we see the
Security Council frequently failing to act at the times
it is most important to defend the principles of the
Charter. However, the United Nations is not simply a
collection of nations. The United Nations Charter gives
this organ an identity and a meaning of its own. The
Charter commits all Members to the pursuit of peace
and security based on respect for the principle of equal
12/29

21/02/2018

rights and self-determination. It calls on Members to
respect human rights and fundamental freedoms for
all. In practice, however, the United Nations has all too
often fallen short of that ideal.
Sovereignty is critically important. The United
States will never forfeit its sovereign right to govern
itself and determine its future. All Member States
share that right, but they also struggle to balance their
sovereign interests with the need to work cooperatively
with other nations. In the United States our Constitution
and democratic system of Government bind us to act
in the interests of our people. I am accountable to the
American people in what I say and do. Governments
that are not accountable to their people are less
constrained. They often point to sovereignty to justify
bad behaviour and claim the Council has no business
meddling in their affairs. But sovereignty gives no
country the right to trample on the human rights and
fundamental freedoms of others.
Human rights are the Security Council’s business.
That is so because the United Nations Charter calls on
all Members to respect those rights, and also because
violations of human dignity inevitably lead to threats
to peace and security. Sovereignty is no excuse for a
Government to use violence and rape to expel a minority
group to a neighbouring country, as the Burmese
security forces have done. Sovereignty is no excuse for
the Council to do nothing. Sovereignty is no excuse for
a regime to gas its own people, as the Al-Assad regime
is doing in Syria, or for the Council to do nothing.
Sovereignty is no excuse for any dictatorship to abuse
its people, spark violence, foment regional conflict and
then get off scot-free.
If that were true there would be no reason for us to
be here. For the words of the Charter to have meaning
all Member States must be accountable and abide by
them. For the words of the Charter to have meaning, the
Security Council must be willing to act when Member
States violate them. The Security Council has done an
admirable work to address the threat of North Korea, but
too many Member States have failed to abide by their
Charter obligation to enforce the sanctions the Council
has imposed. In the meantime Pyongyang continues to
develop its nuclear arsenal, threaten its neighbours and
categorically refuse to discuss denuclearization. We
must do better.
For far too long the Council has watched Iran play
a deeply destabilizing role in the Middle East, without
18-04705

21/02/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

addressing the urgent regional threat it poses. In
Ukraine Russia remains an occupying force in Crimea
and a destabilizing force in eastern Ukraine. Let me
repeat: the sovereign rights of nations are fundamental.
But when we do not uphold the principle of sovereignty
by allowing the Kim, Al-Assad and Putin regimes
to act with impunity, just the opposite is true. When
the Security Council provides accountability for
nations that violate the United Nations Charter, we
protect sovereignty. Such was the case in 1990, when
Saddam Hussein invaded Kuwait. After the invasion,
Saddam proceeded to ignore 11 resolutions calling for
him to withdraw. On 29 November 1990 the Security
Council rightly invoked Chapter VII of the United
Nations Charter. It gave Saddam Hussein one last
chance to do what was right. In January 1991, after he
refused to comply, a coalition of 34 countries, led by
the United States, began the fight to liberate Kuwait.
That coalition’s efforts were successful. The proof is
in the Chamber today. The sovereign nation of Kuwait
presides as President of the Security Council.
I once again thank our Kuwaiti friends for calling
today’s important meeting. It is a great reminder of the
purposes of this body. And I congratulate the entire
nation of Kuwait for being a living reminder of what
this institution can accomplish when it lives up to the
principles of the Charter.
Mr. Tileuberdi (Kazakhstan): At the outset, allow
me to start by thanking the delegation of Kuwait for
convening today’s timely briefing.
Today’s theme has been fundamental to the
United Nations since its establishment. The purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
remain relevant even in the contemporary history
of international relations. More than 70 years ago,
the peoples of the United Nations announced their
determination to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war, reaffirm faith in fundamental human
rights and in the dignity and worth of the human
person, establish conditions under which justice and
respect for the obligations arising from treaties and
other sources of international law can be maintained,
and promote social progress and better standards of life
in larger freedom. However, the world remains at war
today. Around the world, there are approximately 40
armed conflicts of varying intensity. The existence of
more than 65 million displaced people and uncontrolled
migratory flows constitute a favourable environment
for trafficking in human beings and replenishing

S/PV. 8185

the budgets of international organized crime and
terrorist groups.
All these phenomena are an exorbitant price to pay
for States’ and Governments’ irresponsible behaviour
in international relations or for the sake of their own
peoples. The violations that we witness overlook or
distort our perceptions of the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the Organization and international
law, which were formulated after the bloodiest war in
the history of humankind — a conflict that claimed
more than 60 million lives. Today, the world has
come closer than ever to the point at which serious
international conflicts are ready to erupt. The threats
of the use of weapons of mass destruction, the growing
rivalry among regional Powers, the high tension among
military-political blocs, and the crisis of trust among
the key actors in international relations are of very
serious concern to us. They underline the need for an
urgent and dramatic shift in thinking from high-level
dialogue and deliberative platforms to real action.
Kazakhstan’s vision of global anti-military measures
is set forth in the manifesto of President Nursultan
Nazarbayev entitled “The World. The Twenty-First
Century”. In the manifesto, the idea of a comprehensive
programme for achieving a world without conflict by
the United Nations centennial in 2045 — “The TwentyFirst Century: A World Without War” — was evoked.
Given that two of the main purposes of the Charter of
the United Nations are to save subsequent generations
from the scourge of war and to adopt effective collective
measures to prevent and eliminate threats to peace, we
must make a determined and concerted effort through
the collective and responsible actions of nations to
destroy the disease of war and conflict.
At a briefing held in the Security Council on
18 January on the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction (see S/PV.8160), during our country’s
presidency of the Council, a broad and useful exchange
of perspectives took place. My delegation highlighted
the significance of confidence-building measures in
achieving peace and security goals, which, in turn,
play a key and ever-increasing role in the prevention of
conflicts and the resolution of pressing global problems.
We know this from our own experience. Indeed,
upon the initiative of my country, the Conference on
Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia,
which brings together 26 countries, was established
20 years ago and continues properly to function today.
Kazakhstan’s efforts in its two-year non-permanent

18-0470513/29

S/PV.8185

Maintenance of international peace and security

membership in the Security Council are aimed at
practical ways of ensuring international peace and
security, in particular through making Central Asia a
model regional zone of peace and security, sustainable
development and prosperity.
We support a three-part conflict resolution strategy:
reconciling peace and security with sustainable
development in order to achieve lasting progress,
implementing regional responses to such cross-border
problems as terrorism, ecological devastation and
poverty, and coordinating the interaction of United
Nations structures operating as One United Nations so
as to achieve maximum efficiency and effectiveness in
the Organization’s activities in the field.
We have at our disposal all the needed and
time-tested strategies and best practices to change
the world for the better. In this way alone, through
responsible and predictable domestic and foreign
policies, can we effectively and collectively address
the challenges and threats of our times, advancing on
the path of creation, progress, economic well-being
and international security for all, without leaving
anyone behind.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank you, Sir,
for focusing the Security Council’s attention on the
purposes and principles of our Charter of the United
Nations. I also thank the Secretary-General and His
Excellency the former Secretary-General, Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, for their briefings today.
Today’s meeting, as the President has said, takes
place around the twenty-seventh anniversary of the
liberation of Kuwait, which was a clear example of
the United Nations fulfilling one of its main purposes,
namely, to maintain international peace and security.
As States Members of the United Nations, we have a
responsibility to adhere to the Charter’s ideals and to
work within the United Nations framework to solve the
most challenging global problem. When the horrific
violence in Rakhine state forced the Rohingya to flee,
the Security Council played a vital role, focusing the
world’s attention on the situation and encouraging
action by the authorities on the ground. We must now
take further action to ensure safe and voluntary returns
take place, and we should visit the region.
The Council must work together to achieve the
Charter’s purposes. When we do, we are successful. We
have remained united in our commitment to providing
the tools to achieve peace in Colombia and in our support
14/29

21/02/2018

for the peace process in Cyprus. We were successful
in Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire. We have remained
united in our condemnation of Da’esh and the need
for accountability for that group’s atrocious actions,
and we have remained united in our condemnation
of the flagrant violations by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea of international law, where we have
used sanctions to constrain the that country’s pursuit
of illegal nuclear and ballistic-missiles programmes. In
this context, sanctions play a crucial role in maintaining
international peace and security. The implementation
of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, which
balances sanctions relief with strict nuclear restrictions,
is another significant achievement of the Council and
marks a major step forward in preventing Iran from
developing a nuclear-weapon capability.
However, there are instances where Council
disunity halts our progress. We cannot ignore Russian
attempts to redraw the boundaries of Europe. This month
marks the fourth anniversary of the illegal annexation
of Crimea, in breach of Article 2 of the Charter. We
remain deeply concerned by the degradation of human
rights in eastern Ukraine, and we call upon on Russia to
abide by the Minsk agreement commitments that it has
undertaken. It is crucial that we uphold the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Ukraine.
Nor can we ignore the conflict that continues to rage
in Syria or its causes. The Syrian conflict in all of its
abhorrent acts and human misery is an example of what
we all set up the United Nations to prevent. We have
proved that we can work together to ease the suffering
of the Syrian people. When we adopted resolution 2393
(2017), the United Nations was empowered to continue
to deliver urgently needed humanitarian aid across
conflict lines and borders.
Knowing that we can deliver results makes our
failures even more frustrating. These failures are having
devastating consequences. The Al-Assad regime’s
brutal assault of eastern Ghouta, including reports
of chemical-weapon use, is causing unprecedented
levels of suffering. The targeting of civilians and
civilian infrastructure is a violation of international
humanitarian law. Eastern Ghouta is not a de-escalation
zone; it is a zone of death and destruction. We must work
together to end the conflict and prevent further suffering
of the Syrian people, and I hope the Council will soon
be able to pass a resolution to that effect. The Geneva
talks represent the only sustainable path to peace. The
opposition continues to engage constructively and in
18-04705

21/02/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

good faith and without preconditions. The Al-Assad
regime must do the same.
We must also hold the Syrian regime and others
to account for the repeated use of chemical weapons.
Our failure here is acceptable. We must demonstrate
that such abhorrent actions have consequences. An
independent expert international investigation set up
by the Security Council concluded that the regime and
Da’esh have used chemical weapons. We must not allow
Russian actions to force the closure of this investigation
to deter us from pursuing accountability.
Despite our differences in the Security Council, we
have demonstrated our capacity to show unity in the
face of adversity. We must strive to do this more and to
think creatively about how we find common solutions.
The United Kingdom is a proud signatory to the code of
conduct put forward by the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group, and we are committed to never
voting against a credible draft resolution on preventing
or ending a mass atrocity.
We fully support the Secretary-General’s efforts
and proposals to improve the United Nations ability
to prevent and respond to conflict and promote
development. That includes reforms to peacekeeping,
and I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
millions of military, police and civilian personnel who
have helped to protect civilians around the world.
We must also continue to tackle relentlessly the
scourge of sexual violence and sexual exploitation
and abuse, and recognize the disproportionate adverse
effects of conflict on women and the important role of
women in peacebuilding.
We must encourage increased cooperation with
regional organizations and arrangements, as set out in
the Charter, whether with the African Union Mission in
Somalia in its fight against Al-Shabaab, the Economic
Community of West African States in its resolution of
conflict, or the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel to combat terrorism in West Africa.
Our predecessors drafted the Charter of the United
Nations in the name of the peoples of the world to help
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war.
In some places, we are succeeding; elsewhere, we are
falling woefully short. Let us all reflect on what more
we can do to live up ideals of the Charter — our Charter.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China highly commends the Kuwaiti presidency for its

S/PV. 8185

initiative to convene today’s debate. I warmly welcome
the Kuwaiti Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs, His Excellency Sheikh Al-Sabah, to
New York to preside over this meeting.
I wish to thank Secretary-General António Guterres
and welcome back the former Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
The United Nations was born in the afterglow
of the world victory against fascism. The Charter of
the United Nations gave expression to the reflections
of peace-loving peoples around the world and
carries the optimistic hopes of all nations for peace
and development.
Today’s world is undergoing profound changes not
seen in a century. We should stay true to our agenda,
uphold our mission, resolutely safeguard the principles
and purposes of the Charter and continue to carry
forward the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations.
We should work together to build a new type of
international relations featuring win-win cooperation,
and establish a community of shared destiny for
humankind. I should like to share the following ideas
with the members of the Security Council.
First, countries should build partnerships based
on equality, consultation and mutual understanding.
Equality in sovereignty is an important norm governing
inter-State relations. The sovereignty of countries big or
small, strong or weak, poor or rich must be respected.
Interference in the internal affairs of other countries
must not be permitted. The international community
should uphold multilateralism, pursue mutual trust
and win-win cooperation, abandon the Cold War
mentality and zero-sum games, and act upon the five
principles of peaceful coexistence and the Charter of
the United Nations in steadily promoting democracy in
international relations and in governing global affairs
through consultation.
Secondly, countries should strive for a world of
universal security through joint contributions and
sharing. In the face of traditional and non-traditional
security threats, including terrorism, regional conflict,
the refugee crisis and climate change, no single country
can stand aloof. It is important to foster an outlook of
comprehensive, common, cooperative and sustainable
security, promote international cooporation across the
board, adopt a holistic approach to addressing issues
fundamental to world and regional security, and build
universal security.

18-0470515/29

S/PV.8185

Maintenance of international peace and security

Thirdly, countries should respect the work of the
United Nations as the main channel of mediation and
safeguard the mission and authority of the Council.
The Council, as the collective security machinery for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
is equipped with a sacred Charter mandate. We should
support the Council, acting in accordance with the
Charter, in seeking the peaceful settlement of conflict
by political means and by fully bridging differences
through dialogue and consultation.
As the first signatory of the Charter, a founding
Member of the United Nations and a permanent member
of the Security Council, China is ready to shoulder all
its responsibilities, stay committed to maintaining the
international system built around the United Nations,
uphold the basic norms governing international
relations underpinned by the Charter, work alongside
other Member States and the United Nations, and
make greater contributions to world peace, common
development and international cooperation.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We join others in expressing
appreciation to the Kuwaiti presidency for organizing
this high-level debate and we are pleased to see you,
Sir, presiding over the meeting. At a time when we
are facing unprecedented challenges and threats to
global peace and security, the need for multilateralism
has never been more indispensable to ensuring a
collective response.
That is why reaffirming the principles and
purposes of the Charter of the United Nations is
imperative to preserving the current global order on the
basis of renewed partnership, in the spirit of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. We know from
history that the League of Nations, the predecessor
of the Organization, failed to prevent the outbreak of
the Second World War mainly because its members
remained indifferent to the blatant disregard of the
purposes and principles of international law governing
inter-State relations.
Of course, no one can speak better, more forcefully
and with authority on this issue than the SecretaryGeneral himself and his predecessor, Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
and we thank both of them for their important remarks.
We are truly pleased to see Mr. Ban Ki-moon here with
us today.
In spite of so many challenges and shortcomings,
the United Nations has been and continues to be an
indispensable Organization. Its Charter principles and
16/29

21/02/2018

purposes also remain as relevant today as they were
70 years ago in safeguarding international peace and
security, promoting respect for human rights, and
ensuring sustainable development for all. The issue is
how we can apply them in a manner that is consistent
with the realities of our time in order to meet the needs
and aspirations of current and future generations. That
is why we support the reform agenda, in the words of
the Secretary-General,
“to make the United Nations more able to respond
to the needs and aspirations of we, the peoples, that
generated this Organization”.
We are indeed living in an increasingly
interconnected and interdependent world, and what
happens in one corner of the world can easily affect us
all, whether it is terrorism, the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, climate change or a health
pandemic. No one can be immune from these problems,
nor can anyone claim to have the panacea to address
them alone. We can do so only if we collectively work
together, in line with the principles and purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations.
That requires us to carry out our obligations in
good faith, and there have no doubt been instances of
failure that have tarnished the image and credibility of
the Organization and given enough reason to sceptics
to be critical. But we should also not forget that there
have indeed been instances when the Organization has
proved its mettle and defended its principles with vigour.
Because of that, a country whose territorial integrity
was aggressed 27 years ago, in flagrant violation of
the Charter, not only was able to regain its sovereignty
but can now contribute its part to the promotion and
maintenance of international peace and security.
How symbolic is it, therefore, that today this
country is presiding over the work of the Security
Council, 27 years after its liberation? We wish to take
this opportunity to congratulate the people and the
Government of the State of Kuwait on this important
occasion. It is indeed a historic coincidence that Ethiopia
was a member of the Security Council at the height
of the Gulf War and took a principled position based
on the United Nations Charter to stand in solidarity
with Kuwait, not only to condemn its invasion but
also to fully support all the relevant Security Council
resolutions aimed at restoring its sovereignty. We should
certainly draw lessons from some of the achievements
of the United Nations and also have the courage to
18-04705

21/02/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

admit shortcomings and make all efforts necessary to
replace them.
The Security Council has a number of tools,
envisaged in the Charter, at its disposal to address the
multifaceted problems that the world is facing. Chapter
VI of the Charter is clear on the primacy of the peaceful
settlement of disputes while being strong on the need
to take preventive measures in order to avert conflicts
before they erupt.
Chapter VII provides the parameters for action
with respect to threats to the peace, breaches of the
peace and acts of aggression, while Chapter VIII
provides for regional arrangements. Unfortunately,
we have yet to take full advantage of what the Charter
can offer to help us overcome the constraints of selfdefeating policies based on narrow national-interest
calculations, which, ipso facto, lead to double standards
that in turn undermine the credibility of the Security
Council as the organ with the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
Here the most critical issue is the need is to be
consistent in our fidelity to the principles of the Charter:
sovereign equality, territorial integrity, political
independence, non-intervention and the peaceful
settlement of disputes. Failure to do so can have grave
consequences; my own country is witness to this. It is in
this respect that I wish to quote Emperor Haile Selassie,
who appealed for justice when Ethiopia was aggressed
in 1935 but who nonetheless remained unwavering in
his commitment to the international collective security
system in spite of the utter failure of the then League
of Nations. What he said in his address to the General
Assembly in October 1963 still resonates today, and it
is with those words that I wish to conclude my remarks:
“The Charter of the United Nations expresses
the noblest aspirations of man: the abjuration
of force in the settlement of disputes between
States … [and] the safeguarding of international
peace and security. But these, too, as were the
phrases of the Convenant [of the League of Nations]
are only words; their value depends wholly on our
will to observe and honour them and give them
content and meaning … This Organization and
each of its Members bear a crushing and awesome
responsibility: to absorb the wisdom of history and
to apply it to the problems of the present, in order
that future generations may be born, and live, and
die in peace.” (A/PV.1229, p. 1)

S/PV. 8185

Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is
grateful to the State of Kuwait for having convened
this debate, which affords the States Members of the
United Nations a chance to consider and reiterate the
importance of the principles of the Charter. This event
coincides with the twenty-seventh anniversary of the
invasion of Kuwait by Iraq, in 1991; international
cooperation was decisive in the liberation of Kuwait,
and we are particularly pleased to see here with us
today the Deputy Prime Minister of Kuwait. We would
also like to thank Secretary-General António Guterres
for his incisive intervention and welcome the presence
of and the statement made by Mr. Ban Ki-moon, the
former Secretary-General.
The United Nations as we now know it was born as a
consequence of the ravages caused by the Second World
War at a time when the devastation caused by that war
was still fresh in the collective memory of humankind.
It is for that reason that the conviction took root among
those who met in San Francisco that there should not
be a repeat of the same mistakes that led to two bloody
world wars. Both conflicts represented a huge setback
for humankind in every respect, and the goal, therefore,
was to come up with an appropriate formula to enable
the peoples of the world to live together in peace thanks
to just rules that would enable them to prosper. The
main purpose in drafting the Charter was to achieve a
lasting peace for humankind.
In order to achieve the peace and prosperity we so
fervently sought, it was vital to establish equitable rules
for coexistence within a system in which any problems
that might arise could be collectively addressed. The
establishment of an Organization such as the United
Nations therefore proved justified, as this gave rise
to the possibility of holding meetings that would
enable us to debate problems that could jeopardize our
common coexistence.
His Excellency Mr. Obiang Nguema Mbasogo,
President of Equatorial Guinea, highlighted the
principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations in the statement he made during the general
debate of the General Assembly at its seventy-second
session, on 21 September:
“It should be recalled once again that Chapter
I of the Charter of the United Nations enshrines
the intent of its Member States to build a world of
peace and well-being for humanity by encouraging

18-0470517/29

S/PV.8185

Maintenance of international peace and security

21/02/2018

friendly relations and mutual respect for the
independence and sovereignty of every nation.”
(A/72/PV.13, p. 9)

among Member States and, of course, to insist on
the democratization of the Organization’s internal
structures and processes.

The words of my President are in line with the
Secretary-General’s conviction of the importance of
collective security as an instrument for prevention
and the idea of the urgent need to increase the use of
diplomacy for peace. In this paradigm, sanctions, for
example, cannot be seen as an end in themselves, and
interventions, be they peacekeeping operations or
measures geared to re-establishing global order, are
but a reflection of the inability of the system and its
stakeholders to implement the principles of preventive
diplomacy to which the Secretary-General referred.

We must not be naive or become complacent. The
world is changing, and the Organization must know how
to adapt and anticipate such change. The Organization’s
success and its relevance in a constantly evolving
world depends largely on what I have just outlined.
The Charter of the United Nations is flexible enough
to be able to respond to the complex new challenges
before us. However, it is up to us, the Member States,
to be brave enough to modernize the Organization’s
structures and procedures; otherwise, the credibility,
legitimacy and moral authority of the purposes and
principles of the Charter will be increasingly questioned
and undermined.

We cannot deny some of the important
achievements and progress recorded by United Nations
over its more than seven decades of existence in
fostering peace, security and international cooperation.
These achievements led to real and irreversible
changes in today’s world. We as Africans have firsthand knowledge of these achievements, which made
a significant contribution to enabling some of our
countries to take their rightful place as fully fledged
Members of the United Nations after having achieved
independence.
The Charter remains a valid instrument that has lost
none of its relevance; we must all continue to decisively
defend its purposes and principles. International
relations, which must be just and democratic, must
be underpinned by the principles enshrined in the
Charter: equality among countries; respect for national
sovereignty and territorial integrity; non-interference in
the internal affairs of States; and the peaceful settlement
of disputes. These principles must continue to be held
as sacred and must be defended by all countries.
Relations and interactions among States must be
guided by mutual respect, on a basis of equality, so
that all can contribute to achieving the common good.
Issues of international and regional interest must
be addressed through consultation, cooperation and
negotiation. Only in this way can challenges such as
terrorism, threats to peace, conflicts, disputes between
countries and climate change, inter alia, be resolved
satisfactorily. Regrettably, we continue to note breaches
of the Charter, which weaken the central role that the
United Nations must play as a framework for dialogue
and diplomacy. To interrupt that trend, it is important
to renew multilateralism and a spirit of compromise
18/29

Developments in the current scenario present a clear
challenge for all. International affairs are undergoing a
process of change, which, on the one hand, can yield
new opportunities for economic cooperation, and,
on the other, presents the challenge of having to face
security threats and challenges.
Building the global economy, promoting sustainable
development, eradicating poverty, countering environmental
degradation, and so on, are actions that must lead to
the effective implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, which should have a positive
impact on the greater well-being of, and equality
among, the various peoples of the world. Those needs
are most pressing in Africa, the continent that suffers
most from the shortcomings of the modern world.
As we have already said, the world is in constant
flux and is no longer what it was 70 years ago. That
is evident in the nature of armed conflicts, especially
their capacity to inflict devastation and suffering. The
response of the international community should adapt
to the new reality and the challenges we all face. In
that process, the role of the United Nations is vital,
and its purposes and principles, if used effectively,
remain useful.
The world must be guided by the principle of
peaceful coexistence in international relations. When
it comes to choosing social systems and development
models, the unique traits of every country must be
respected. The principle of the sovereign equality of all
countries must remain intact, international justice and
equality must prevail and the rules of international law
must always be applied, without double standards.
18-04705

21/02/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

Equatorial Guinea has had its security threatened
on several occasions, the last of which occurred last
December. Thanks to international cooperation, which
we wish to mention here, we were able to avoid what
could have been a true massacre on Equatorial Guinean
soil. I therefore conclude my statement by stating that
the motto of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea — unity,
peace and justice — which guides the actions of our
country’s foreign policy, is in full accordance with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru
welcomes the convening of this meeting. We are also
grateful for the enlightening briefing delivered by
Secretary-General António Guterres, and we welcome
to New York former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
whom we thank for his very valuable presentation. In
particular, we welcome the presence of Sheikh Sabah
Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait, and other
senior officials.
In view of the growing complexity of the
global challenges we face today, Peru believes that
strengthening multilateralism and rejuvenating the
Organization to make it more coherent and efficient
in supporting the maintenance of peace is of the
utmost importance. We therefore support the reforms
promoted by the Secretary-General, and we encourage
him to persevere in that regard. Moreover, we believe
that this is a highly opportune moment to reflect on the
validity of the purposes and principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations in the maintenance of
international peace and security.
On this occasion, we will focus on the importance
of the principle of the pacific settlement of disputes
and on a more active Organization in the promotion
of the peaceful means listed in Chapter VI of the
Charter: negotiation, enquiry, mediation, conciliation,
arbitration, judicial settlement and resort to regional
bodies and arrangements.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s initiatives
in that area, more specifically his mediation and the
provision of his good offices in numerous countries,
with a view to preventing conflicts and their
escalation. We eagerly await the establishment of a
high-level consultative council on mediation and the
Security Council.

S/PV. 8185

In line with that initiative, Peru encourages
the Council to play a more active role in its work to
promote and recommend that Member States resort to
the peaceful means I have just mentioned, which we
are convinced would constitute a major contribution
to international peace and security. That conviction
is based on our own experience. In its recent history,
Peru has resorted to the International Court of
Justice, arbitration and negotiations supported by
friendly countries to resolve sensitive and complex
border disputes with its neighbours — neighbours
with whom, now such disputes have been peacefully
resolved, we enjoy the best of relations concerning trust
and cooperation.
Peru is committed to international law and its
progressive development, which is why we are concerned
by the unsystematic manner in which the Charter of the
United Nations is often interpreted. Such interpretation
attributes absolute qualities to certain principles, to
the detriment of others. On the one hand, there is often
conflict among the principles of sovereignty, territorial
integrity and non-interference; and on the other, among
those of justice and the fulfilment of the obligations of
States in accordance with the Charter itself, including
responsibilities in the area of human rights. That usually
results in an impasse, which unfortunately hampers the
cooperation that is required for the collective security
system to develop effective preventive diplomacy in
favour of international peace and security.
Given this situation, we must bear in mind that the
principles listed in Article 2 of the Charter are geared
towards collective action, and that, in that sense, they
are complementary. The Charter requires all Member
States to cooperate, while respecting their respective
areas of sovereignty, to carry out the purposes listed in
Article 1.
In that respect and to conclude, we wish to recall
that the first purpose enshrined in the Charter is to
specifically maintain international peace and security.
To that end, the Charter expressly requires us to take
effective and collective measures to prevent and
eliminate threats to peace.
As was mentioned, this month we commemorate
the liberation of your country, Mr. President, which was
possible thanks to the Council’s response to a flagrant
act of aggression, in its implementation of Chapter VII
of the Charter 27 years ago. On that occasion, SecretaryGeneral Javier Pérez de Cuéllar drew some important

18-0470519/29

S/PV.8185

Maintenance of international peace and security

conclusions from the historic episode and presented
them in his annual report. In view of their relevance
to a more effective application of Chapter VI of the
Charter, I would like to mention some of them here:
“The hostilities in the Gulf have made it
agonizingly clear that the devastation of two States,
with untold loss of innocent lives ... damage to the
environment and immense suffering of millions,
represented a startling failure of collective
diplomacy. In the aftermath of these hostilities,
therefore, a renewed emphasis is rightly being
placed on the need for preventive diplomacy ...
Preventive diplomacy presupposes early warning
capacity, which, in turn, implies a reliable and
independently acquired database. There is a
complementarity between the Secretary-General
being fully equipped with the means presupposed
in Article 99 of the Charter and the Security
Council (in conformity with the spirit of Article
34) maintaining a peace agenda not confined to
items formally inserted.” (A/46/1, p. 3)
More than a quarter of a century later, the challenges
and threats to peace and security are perhaps more
complex, but it is clear that the principles and purposes
enshrined in the Charter remain valid and relevant.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to begin by
expressing my gratitude to Kuwait for convening this
important debate on the anniversary of its liberation
in 1991. This remains an excellent example of how
the Security Council shouldered its responsibility by
taking collective measures in line with the Charter. The
fact that Kuwait just hosted a donor conference on Iraq
shows a deep understanding of how the prosperity and
stability of ones neighbor contributes one’s own security
and well-being. Regional cooperation is enlightened
self-interest and represents one of the cornerstones of
international peace and security.
I should like to pay tribute to the presence here
today of former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
all his work to reinforce the values of the Charter. I
also want to pay tribute to the Secretary-General for
his briefing this morning. We strongly underscore and
echo his call for an urgent cessation of hostilities to
allow for humanitarian relief in eastern Ghouta and
elsewhere in Syria. We are working very hard, together
with Kuwait and other States members of the Council,
to ensure that we can take a meaningful decision on
that issue very soon.
20/29

21/02/2018

The Charter of the United Nations was adopted
in in the shadow of two world wars. At that time, the
purpose of the Charter was clear. As Secretary-General
Guterres told us when he assumed office: “The United
Nations was established to prevent war by binding
us in a rules-based international order” (S/PV.7857,
p. 3). The Charter is the foundation of our collective
security system. However, making this system work
for all means that every Member State must play its
role. It is contingent upon each Member State to abide
by and defend the rules-based order prescribed by the
Charter. This is not just a question of political will, but
a legal obligation.
Under the Charter’s provisions much has been
achieved, but we must also recognise that for many, the
aspirations captured in its purposes and principles — to
live in peace and security without violence — remain
elusive. The continued aggression and illegal annexation
in Ukraine, the intolerable suffering inflicted on the
civilian population in Syria, our inability to find a
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the continued
violence and humanitarian crises in the conflicts in
Yemen, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Libya, and the horrendous reports of violations in
Myanmar are all an affront to this system.
Under Article 24 of the Charter, the Council — elected
and non-elected members alike — acts on behalf of
all members of the United Nations and must do so in
in accordance with the Charter, its purposes and
principles. The permanent members have a special
responsibility. That is why the use of the veto to
protect narrow national interests in situations of
mass atrocities is totally unacceptable. I call on all
members to adhere to the code of conduct put forward
by the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group and the Franco-Mexican initiative on restraint
in the use of the veto, especially in the event of mass
atrocities. In addition, the global world order must be
based on a fair and just system in which States have
equitable representation. We repeat the need for reform
of the Council in order for it to reflect the realities of
today’s world.
The provisions on peaceful settlement of disputes,
as laid out in Chapter VI of the Charter, contain
powerful instruments to resolve disputes before they
escalate into serious conflicts. I would like to highlight
five tools that the Council should make better use of.
18-04705

21/02/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

The first is early action to resolve conflicts
peacefully, in accordance with Article 33. A recent
example was the Council’s response to the crisis in
The Gambia last year. Early and swift Council action
contributed to preventing a potential outbreak of
violence. A unanimous Security Council, working
closely with the Economic Community of West African
States and the African Union, adopted resolution
2337 (2017), defending democratic principles. The
collective security system worked and the rules-based
international order was upheld.
Secondly, the Council should support mediation
and good offices in an engaged, supportive and
united manner. We welcome the formation of the
Secretary-General’s High-Level Advisory Board on
Mediation, and the Council should examine how it can
be supported. Women’s meaningful participation in
conflict prevention and resolution is key. The Swedish
Women’s Mediation Network is contributing to peace
processes around the world, and we are happy to bring
that experience to the table.
Thirdly, regional organizations are key actors
in preventing conflict and the settlement of disputes
at the regional level. The Council should make full
use of Chapter VIII of the Charter and encourage the
settlement of disputes through regional arrangements
and be kept informed of how the Council can support
regional efforts to prevent conflict. In this context, we
welcome regular meetings between the Council and
the African Union Peace and Security Council, as well
as cooperation between the United Nations and the
European Union. The Helsinki process in Europe can
serve as a model for building trust and confidence where
such assets are missing, such as in the Middle East.
Fourthly, judicial bodies, such as international
courts, contribute to resolving disputes based on
the rule of law. The International Court of Justice
continues to play an important role in this regard. The
Council should more actively consider the possibility of
recommending referrals to the Court. In addition to the
International Court of Justice, the number of dispute
settlement mechanisms and resort to such mechanisms
are increasing. The International Criminal Court, as
a deterrent of international crimes, has a key role in
preventing conflict. The decision to activate the Court’s
jurisdiction over the crime of aggression arises directly
from the United Nations Charter.

S/PV. 8185

Finally, we call upon the Secretary-General to
make even greater use of his prerogatives, including
under Article 99, to bring to the attention of the
Council any matter that, in his opinion, may threaten
the maintenance of international peace and security. Of
course, we encourage Council members to be responsive
to such petitions. The Secretary-General took this
step in relation to Myanmar late last year, bringing
our attention to the situation there and its potential
implications beyond the borders of that country.
Former Secretary-General Kofi Annan said in
2005 that
“we will not enjoy development without security,
or security without development. But ... we will
not enjoy either without universal respect for
human rights”.
Therefore, the role of the Council in preventing conflicts
must be seen within the broader context.
Prevention requires addressing the root causes
of conflict and instability long before they reach the
Council’s agenda. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development — with its aim of peaceful, inclusive and
sustainable societies — together with the sustaining
peace agenda, represents the masterplan for prevention.
We welcome the joint United Nations and World Bank
study Pathways for Peace on inclusive approaches to
preventing violent conflict, and we strongly support
the Secretary-General’s reform agenda, which aims
to put sustainable development, conflict prevention
and sustaining peace at the centre of the United
Nations work.
Violations and abuses of human rights can be
the first indicators of a nascent conflict. Conversely,
respect for and the protection of human rights contribute
to addressing the root causes of instability, thereby
helping to prevent and resolve conflicts and sustaining
peace. We fully support the Secretary-General’s Human
Rights Up Front initiative as a tool for early warning
and prevention.
It is more important than ever for Member States
to act on principles and to base their decisions and
actions on international law. I would therefore like to
conclude by again stressing that the Security Council
is central to upholding the rules-based international
order, as reflected in the Charter. This means that
Member States are expected to act in accordance with
the Charter, and that the Council must ensure that

18-0470521/29

S/PV.8185

Maintenance of international peace and security

States, as well as individuals, are held accountable
for the most serious of violations of the Charter. This
wonderful and visionary text — a copy of which I have
here in highlighted colour, which I hope will help in its
implementation — is still very valid, but we need to
make better use of its provisions and the instruments
that it offers.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I am pleased to see you, Sir, presiding over the
Security Council. We know the significance of today’s
date and that it coincides with a momentous occasion.
We are also grateful to the two Secretary-Generals for
their participation in today’s meeting. I am very happy
to see Mr. Ban Ki-moon among us.
We thank you, Mr. President, for organizing today’s
meeting. The topic that you have proposed is extremely
relevant within the context of the current state of
international relations and the role that the United
Nations and Security Council play in that regard.
The purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations — the independence and
sovereign equality of States, non-interference in
their internal affairs, and the peaceful settlement
of disputes — represent the basis for neighbourly
relations among States and their mutually beneficial
and constructive cooperation for the benefit of all.
Unfortunately, throughout the history of the United
Nations, the world has witnessed numerous examples
of open disregard for the Charter, right up to the
illegal use of force, blatant interference in the affairs
of States, destruction by outsiders of traditional social
principles, violent regime change and the imposition
of alien cultural and social norms. In order to achieve
those ends, we often see the manipulation of concepts
such as the responsibility to protect, the rule of law,
human rights up front and other intrusive instruments
that do not necessarily enjoy consensus support. As a
result, the burden on the Security Council, which is
responsible for the maintenance of international peace
and security, never lessens. Conflict situations, often
provoked from outside, arise with remarkable regularity.
At the same time, however, instead of efforts to solve
all these problems together, through professional
dialogue based on mutual respect and equality, we
often see the artificial pumping up of an atmosphere
of tension and mistrust. Instead of collective action, we
see unilateral measures, economic pressure and threats,
22/29

21/02/2018

including threats of force, none of them methods that
are compatible with international law and order.
The reason, as we see it, is quite clear. Some states
are finding it difficult to accept the obvious fact that the
era of the Cold War, along with the world’s post-bipolar
stage, is over. The world is in the process of establishing
a new, more just, democratic, polycentric world order.
Its essence lies in the emergence and strengthening of
new centres of economic power and political influence.
The fact is that this multipolarity is the embodiment of
the cultural and civilizational diversity of the modern
world, of peoples’ desire to determine their own destiny
and of their natural yearning for fairness. We should be
reconciled to the fact that States want to build their own
lives without others’ prompting or unsolicited advice.
Incidentally, I would like to remind Mrs. Haley that
there is no regime in Russia. What we have is a legally
elected President and appointed Government. I would
like to ask the United States delegation to observe at
least the most basic diplomatic conventions in future.
And, also incidentally, Syria is also a legal Government,
whether one likes it or not.
We have seen Yugoslavia and Libya bombed
in gross violation of international law and Security
Council resolutions and the occupation of Iraq on
false pretences. No one took responsibility for any
of those criminal acts, despite the international
criminal tribunals established by the Council and the
experiments whereby cases were transferred to outside
structures that preferred to turn a blind eye, shamefully,
to all of this, whether the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia or the International Criminal Court.
The chaos sown in the Middle East and North Africa
enabled the rise of international terrorism and led to
the creation of Al-Qaida, the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant, and Jabhat Al-Nusra. Ultimately, the world
found itself up against an entire terrorist quasi-State that
has brought terror and incalculable suffering. Its final
defeat, at enormous cost, has yet to be achieved. And at
the same time the question of Syria’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity continues to be a bargaining chip in
the geopolitical aspirations of a slew of external players.
The chaos created in Libya has severely exacerbated
the terrorist threat in Africa. When we recall where
this crisis originated and who brought democracy to
that country with its bombs, they look away in shame.
We must consider the consequences of our actions, not
live by slogans. We must settle protracted crises and
18-04705

21/02/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

conflicts such as the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, not
provoke more and more new ones.
Open incitement from outside led to unconstitutional
regime change in Ukraine and the rampant spread of
nationalism and neo-Nazism, and to internal armed
conflict and huge numbers of casualties in the southeastern regions of the country. Why, I wonder, did we
not hear at the time, in 2014, about the importance of
conflict prevention, a subject that is so popular today
with a number of delegations? By the way, this very
day, 21 February, marks the fourth year since President
Viktor Yanukovych and the leaders of the opposition
signed an agreement on a political settlement in
Ukraine. I would like to remind the Council that the
agreement was defied by the opposition members who
seized power in Kyiv the very next day, with the silent
acquiescence of its guarantors. Russia has a direct
interest in ending the conflict in Ukraine as soon as
possible and is ready to do everything in its power to
achieve that. We are working actively in the contact
group in Minsk, in the Normandy format, and we have
put forward various initiatives in the Security Council.
However, while Kyiv continues to sabotage the Minsk
process and sell the world its story of what is happening
in Ukraine, and while the Kyiv authorities continue to
exploit the support of their patrons, there is little hope
for constructive developments.
Today we are witnessing a new phenomenon, on
a historically unprecedented scale, of indiscriminate
accusations of countries’ interference in internal
affairs and processes. That is a very convenient way of
justifying unlawful acts without bothering to produce
evidence, and at the same time making the world forget
about one’s persistent interference in the affairs of
sovereign States.
I would like to remind the Council that in
December of last year the General Assembly adopted
resolution 72/172, on the promotion of a democratic and
equitable international order, which clearly outlines
the inadmissibility of interference in the internal
affairs of sovereign States, the non-recognition of
coups d’état as a method of regime change, and the
necessity of banishing attempts to exert unlawful
pressure, including the extraterritorial application of
national legislation, from international relations. An
overwhelming majority of the States Members of the
United Nations voted in favour of the resolution. It is
time to start implementing it, to reject double standards
and show a genuine commitment to the system-defining

S/PV. 8185

principles of the Charter of the United Nations, which
is more essential than ever in today’s increasingly
complex international relations.
Today a great deal has been said about eastern
Ghouta and about the concerns that Member States and
the Secretary-General himself have expressed about the
situation there. We have a concrete proposal. We would
like to ask the presidency to convene an open meeting of
the Security Council tomorrow to discuss the situation
in eastern Ghouta. I think that it is essential, in view of
the concerns that we have heard today and so that all
sides can present their views and understanding of the
situation and propose solutions to it.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to begin by conveying the call made by
Mr. Emmanuel Macron, President of France, for a
humanitarian truce in Syria. France firmly condemns
the current bombing of eastern Ghouta, where the
civilian population are the principal victims, and calls
for the Council to adopt the draft resolution prepared
by Sweden and Kuwait as soon as possible, in order to
enable a cessation of hostilities in Syria. The need for it
is urgent and total, since the situation there is as dire as
it has been since the tragedy in Syria began.
Let me thank the Kuwaiti presidency of the Security
Council for having convened this debate on a topic that
we hold dear, namely, respect for the purposes and the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations as a
central element of the maintenance of international peace
and security. This debate is being held at a particularly
salient moment — 27 years after the liberation of your
country, Kuwait, Mr. President, in which France is
proud to have participated. Your presence, Sir, marks
the importance of this meeting. Although our Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian, could
not attend, he has asked me to convey to you that he
welcomes and fully supports your initiative. I also
welcome the Secretary-General and thank him for his
briefing. As well, I welcome Mr. Ban Ki-moon and
thank him for his briefing.
The maintenance of international peace and
security is the primary purpose of our Organization,
as enshrined in Article 1 of the Charter, which for
more than 70 years is the framework that brings us
together and the founding cornerstone of our action.
The Charter is the heart and the origin of our system
of global governance, which is the foundation for
multilateral order — built on the rubble of the Second

18-0470523/29

S/PV.8185

Maintenance of international peace and security

World War with the universal ambition, from the
beginning, of sustaining peace through a realistic
system of rules applicable to all. To quote President
Macron in his statement before the General Assembly
in September, “in today’s world, nothing is more
effective than multilateralism.” (A/72/PV.4, p. 8) Our
greatest challenges — the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, terrorism, climate change, migration,
unequal development, massive violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law and the new
challenges posed by technology — are global and can
be addressed only globally on a multilateral basis. It is
France’s deep conviction that, each time that we accept
that the resolution of international crises is taking place
outside of the multilateral framework and the system of
rules we adopted in 1945, we are allowing the law of the
jungle to prevail.
More than 70 years after the signing of the
Charter, which instructs us to “take effective collective
measures for the prevention and removal of threats to
the peace, and for the suppression of acts of aggression
or other breaches of the peace, and to bring about by
peaceful means”, the Council must continue its efforts
to fully utilize the tools that the Charter provides us to
enable us to fulfil our primary responsibility, namely,
the maintenance of international peace and security. In
that regard, I would like to highlight three main areas
for our current and future work.
First of all, we must make our peaceful settlement of
disputes more effective by making conflict prevention
a reality. The peaceful settlement of disputes is one of
the principal tools of the Charter, as set out in Chapter
VI. It plays a key role, particularly when the States
involved are willing and able to engage in sincere and
constructive dialogue or to resolve their dispute through
an independent and impartial body. It may seem selfevident, but Article 33 of the Charter helpfully reminds
us that negotiation is one of the main tools for the
peaceful settlement of disputes. It regularly yields
concrete results in the maintenance of peace and in all
domains of international affairs. As a product of long
and complex negotiations and fruit of the perseverance
of those involved, the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action, approved by the Council in resolution 2231
(2015), regarding the Iranian nuclear question, is an
excellent example. The Colombian peace process is
another case in point, in a different framework, of
success as a result of the patient work of negotiation
24/29

21/02/2018

and mediation. Indeed, the Charter identifies mediation
and conciliation among the tools at our disposal.
In that regard, we welcome the efforts of the
Secretary-General to strengthen that dimension of his
work by making full use of his good offices, as well
as the mediation mechanisms and expertise in the
Secretariat, which France wholeheartedly supports.
That mobilization depends on the ability to anticipate
and act prior to crises, through early warning and
action. The establishment of a High-Level Advisory
Board on Mediation is likely to further strengthen the
Secretary-General’s capacity for action. In many of
the issues on the Council’s agenda today, the Special
Representatives and Special Envoys of the SecretaryGeneral have the primary function of being mediators
for complex but necessary negotiations. That applies
particularly to Syria, Libya and Yemen today.
Mediation is one of the ingredients of what should
be, more generally, a priority — prevention. As the
Secretary-General has emphasized since the start of
his mandate, we must, collectively, be more effective
in preventing the deterioration of situations and the
outbreak of conflict and its recurrence. We must
mobilize to make that goal a reality. That implies having
a proactive and global vision. Mediation can help ease
political tensions, but beyond that, we must take into
account the multiple factors of fragility, foremost
among which are human rights, the economic and social
dimensions and the impact of climate change.
Promoting sustainable peace following the twin
resolutions of 2016 (Council resolution 2282 (2016) and
General Assembly resolution 70/262) is essential to
meeting that goal. The report of the Secretary-General
on peacebuilding and sustainable peace (S/2018/43)
is an important contribution to that end, but I also
wish to highlight the efforts of Mr. Ban Ki-moon in
that connection.
Secondly, we must continue to promote respect
for international law and our reliance on international
justice, which fully contribute to the peaceful settlement
of disputes. In that respect, France underlines the
essential role of the International Court of Justice, one of
the organs established by the Charter to strengthen the
international rule of law. We recognize its formidable
contribution to this indispensable framework. Through
its work, it helps us understand that the rule of law
is not limited to the handling of theoretical concepts
18-04705

21/02/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8185

and concretely serves the maintenance of peace and
international security.

Mr. President, on this occasion, to warmly welcome
your country’s support for this initiative.

The maintenance of international peace and security
cannot be understood without respecting and protecting
human rights and international humanitarian law. Yet
human rights violations and humanitarian disasters
continue in front of our eyes, in an unbearable litany. In
Syria, as I stated at the outset, in Yemen, in Burma and
in many other armed conflicts, we must take action to
ensure respect for international humanitarian law. That
is not only a requirement to protect the peoples of the
United Nations — as enshrined in the Charter — but it
is also the best guarantee that the most reprehensible
actions will not be committed during a conflict.

Thirdly, and finally, where circumstances so
require, the Council not only has the opportunity but
also the obligation to use tools to enforce the purposes
and principles of the Charter. Foremost among those
tools are peacekeeping operations. Since 1948, 3,438
men and women have lost their lives in such operations,
and I want to pay special tribute to their sacrifice today.
We are all indebted to them for our safety.

More than ever, we must remember that respect
for human rights and international humanitarian law is
not a concession or a favour but an imperative. Finally,
the fight against impunity is a necessary safeguard to
prevent the recurrence of those violations and to ensure
that peace and reconciliation are still possible. The
international partnership launched on 23 January to
combat impunity on the part of those who are guilty of
the use of chemical weapons is a reminder of France’s
decisive role on that issue.
The mass crimes still being committed today
shock our universal conscience and remind us of every
principle that inspired the drafting of the Charter.
Each of those crimes is a collective failure of our
responsibility to protect civilian populations. It is due to
those collective security failures that France highlights
the role of the International Criminal Court, which is
celebrating its twentieth anniversary this year, so that
victims of mass atrocities can find redress and justice.
But the Council also has a role to play in ensuring
that such tragedies do not occur. Since 2013, the French
President of the Republic has called for a suspension
of the veto for mass atrocities — as an expression of
the political, voluntary and collective commitment of
the five permanent members of the Security Council
with regard to their special responsibility. We have
taken that initiative with Mexico and more than half of
the States Members of the United Nations support that
effort and that ambitious and pragmatic reading of the
Charter. It is indeed our duty to stress that holding a
permanent seat is a responsibility, not a privilege, and
implies the exercise of that responsibility in the light of
the purposes and principles of the Charter. Allow me,

The principles by which the nearly 100,000
peacekeepers around the world today operate are at
the very heart of the Preamble to the Charter — to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
to work together to maintain international peace and
security and to affirm our faith in fundamental human
rights. In the face of increasingly complex conflicts, our
peacekeeping operations have to carry out difficult yet
essential tasks, including, first and foremost, protecting
civilians and promoting the political settlement of
conflicts. While we have seen peacekeepers succeed in
Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia, Sierra Leone and Timor-Leste,
for example, we are aware of the difficulties they have
to deal with, and we must work collectively — with
troop-contributing countries, the General Assembly,
host States and regional organizations — to make
peacekeeping an ever more effective tool, strategically
and operationally.
In that respect, it is particularly important to
support the rise of our regional partners, who have
become major players in the resolution of crises. Here
again the Charter has proved its foresight, in Chapter
VIII. It is through the Council’s consolidated and
coordinated action with regional organizations on both
the political and operational fronts that we will be able
to respond to today’s challenges to peace and security.
Chapter VII of the Charter offers us another tool that
does not require the use of force, by which, of course, I
mean international sanctions, and here I want to stress
that they are both coercive and incentive. They are
intended to be reversible once the targeted individuals
and organizations no longer threaten international peace
and security or flout their international obligations. In
this way, the incentivizing sanctions that the Council
imposed on Iran paved the way for resolution 2231
(2015). That shows the strong potential for effective
interaction among the various tools available to the
Council when they are implemented strategically.

18-0470525/29

S/PV.8185

Maintenance of international peace and security

I would also like to point out that the increasingly
targeted nature of sanctions against individuals and
organizations threatening international peace and
security minimizes their impact on civilians. The
Council has done a great deal of work in that regard,
and the progress in recent years has been remarkable.
Finally, as you said, Mr. President, Kuwait’s
experience of its liberation in 1991, which resulted from
the joint work of many States with the authorization of
the Security Council, showed that the use of force, in
accordance with the rules of the Charter, is sometimes
necessary to uphold international law.
In conclusion, I would like to say that respect for
the purposes and principles of the Charter should not be
a reason for rejected any reform of it at all. The Charter
was reformed in 1965 in order to enable the Security
Council to be expanded. It should be reformed again in
order to adapt the Council’s composition to the realities
of the world today, and to ensure a fair representation
of emerging Powers, while preserving its executive and
decision-making nature. France is in favour of Security
Council reform, and our position on it is well known. It
includes an expansion of the two categories of members,
for which we support adding a permanent seat for the
members of the Group of Four and an increased African
presence, including among the permanent members.
The new international order, the proliferation of
crises and threats and the tragic persistence of the
wars and horrors that they leave in their wake — as the
situation in Syria reminds us every day — demand that
we reform our Organization in order to adapt it to the
challenges of our time. That will require the Council
to make demands of itself in order to find the means
to overcome its divisions, with a view to ensuring that
the purposes and principles of the Charter continue to
be an effective guide for our action in the service of
international peace and security. It is both our shared
responsibility and in our common interest.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): On behalf of the
Kingdom of the Netherlands, I would like to express our
sincere thanks to Kuwait for convening this meeting,
27 years after its liberation. I would particularly like
to thank the Kuwaiti presidency for supplying my
delegation with a number of copies of the Charter of
the United Nations with an orange cover, which is the
national colour of the Kingdom of the Netherlands. We
also want to thank the Secretary-General and former
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for their briefings. It
26/29

21/02/2018

is a great honour, Mr. President, that you, as Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Kuwait, are presiding over our meeting.
In 1945, the Charter of the United Nations
established a new international rules-based order. The
Charter protects States against acts of aggression, and
the example of Kuwait is a case in point, and especially
of the impact that the Council can have when it is united.
The Charter provides the conditions for security, safety,
human rights and sustainable economic development. It
is the foundation of the international legal order, and
the Constitution of the Kingdom of the Netherlands
obliges our Government to promote the development of
the international legal order.
The Charter came into being in San Francisco
72 years ago. Edward Stettinius, the Secretary of
State of the United States at the time, was one of
the key players in the United Nations Conference on
International Organization. At the first meeting of the
Security Council, he said,
“Whether it succeeds or not, however, depends
upon the manner in which the members of the
Security Council discharge the special obligation
which they have assumed. This is the obligation to
agree so that the Council may be able to act, and act
effectively” (S/PV.1, p. 7).
Let me repeat what he said. Security Council members
have the obligation to agree so that the Council can
act effectively, and that obligation is especially for
the permanent members of the Council and their use
of the veto. In the light of that, I will focus on three
important areas where we believe the Council can
act more effectively — effective prevention, effective
peacekeeping and effective accountability. My first
point is about effective prevention.
One of the most effective ways to prevent armed
conflict is through the peaceful settlement of disputes.
Article 33 of the Charter sets out all the mechanisms
at the disposal of the parties to a dispute, including
judicial settlement, arbitration and mediation. I vividly
recall the 2013 event at the Peace Palace in The Hague
on Article 33 in which the Secretary-General at the
time, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, participated. The Hague,
which is the legal capital of the world, is the proud host
of the Peace Palace and home to the Permanent Court
of Arbitration and the International Court of Justice.
The International Court of Justice is the principal
judicial organ of the United Nations. It can achieve
18-04705

21/02/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

its objectives only when all Member States accept its
compulsory jurisdiction, and they should therefore do
so, especially the permanent members of the Council.
The Council has the tools and responsibility to ensure
that parties effectively settle their disputes peacefully.
Let us use them.
My second point is about effective peacekeeping.
When prevention fails, the Council has the primary
responsibility to restore international peace and
security. The flexibility of the Charter is demonstrated
by the fact that the Council is able to deploy
peacekeeping operations, although it does not mention
the word “peacekeeping”, as such. Today’s complex
and high-risk environments create new challenges for
peacekeeping operations, as the Secretary-General
indicated this morning. When we assume the presidency
of the Council in March, therefore, we will focus on
collective action to improve peacekeeping operations,
which will be the theme for our high-level debate on
28 March.
All key players in peacekeeping operations
share the responsibility to ensure that peacekeeping
operations become more effective. It is the Council’s
responsibility to provide robust mandates that address
the operational challenges in the field. It is also its
responsibility to act effectively when host States renege
on their commitments, undermine the activities of the
United Nations or target their own citizens.
My third point is about effective accountability.
Sustainable peace cannot be built on impunity. The
Council established the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda. It has referred two situations to
the International Criminal Court. It has established an
independent investigative team for crimes committed
in Iraq by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS),
which we welcome. With those actions, it sent a clear
message to victims that justice would be delivered, and
to perpetrators that they would be held accountable.
When national Governments fail to ensure criminal
accountability, it becomes the responsibility of the
Council to provide it. A referral alone is not enough;
the International Criminal Court needs the Council’s
enforcement power when States refuse to comply
with its decisions. When large-scale violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law
are taking place, Member States expect the Council
to act. Investigations of crimes committed by ISIS

S/PV. 8185

are not enough. The Council must also ensure that the
perpetrators are prosecuted and brought to justice.
When chemicals are used as a weapon, the Council
and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons should act. A total of 115 Member States,
including my country, support the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group’s code of conduct
regarding Security Council action against genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes. Of course,
we also support France and Mexico’s initiative on
renouncing the use of the veto by permanent members
when mass atrocities have occurred. It is our view
that Security Council members have an obligation to
agree so the Council can act effectively. That applies
particularly to the current situation in Syria, as the
Secretary-General highlighted today. The human
suffering in Syria, especially in Ghouta, must end. We
need a cessation of hostilities now. We call the Russian
Federation in particular to use its influence and do its
utmost to end the hostilities and enable the Council to
act effectively. I hope that if we do have a meeting on
Ghouta tomorrow, it will lead to effective action by the
Council to end the violence.
In conclusion, today marks the twenty-seventh
year since the liberation of Kuwait from aggression. It
is a powerful example that the Council can be effective
when it is united and determined. It can succeed, but
only if its members fulfil the special obligation they
have assumed. As I just said, it is their obligation to
agree so that the Council can act, and act effectively.
Mr. Eelco van Kleffens was head of the Dutch
delegation in San Francisco in 1945. He became
President of the General Assembly in 1954. He expressed
the wish that the United Nations should not limit itself
to international peace and security. It should also
create international law, an international legal order.
The Charter, including the Statute of the International
Court of Justice, made his wish come true. The Hague
proudly hosts the International Court of Justice, the
International Criminal Court, the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and many more
international organizations that play a key role in
that international legal order. Those institutions are
based on the Charter. As one of the founding fathers
of the United Nations, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
remains committed to promoting and protecting the
international legal order and the Charter.

18-0470527/29

S/PV.8185

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia is honoured to have
you here with us, Mr. President, and as the last speaker
in today’s debate, I thank you for remaining with us
until every speaker has taken the floor. My delegation
would like to congratulate the Permanent Mission of
Kuwait, and, in particular, you, Sir, as First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Kuwait, for taking the initiative to convene the debate
on this issue. We would like to thank Secretary-General
António Guterres for his statement and to welcome and
thank former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
statement also.
We believe that today’s debate on the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations is
a timely one, because multilateralism is under attack.
The international order, based on the sovereign equality
of States, our joint participation in our Organization
and governance of its system and on our development
of common strategies and rules, is under threat. We
believe that the effectiveness of our Organization’s
efforts to protect and maintain international peace and
security depends on the level of adherence to, respect
for and compliance with the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, as well as respect
for the sovereign equality of States, on the part of each
and every Member State. Bolivia reiterates that as a
country that respects international law and promotes
a culture of peace, it has always advocated for the
peaceful settlement of disputes, preventive diplomacy,
mediation, the obligation to negotiate, reconciliation,
arbitration and judicial settlement as measures that are
universally recognized by the international community
as effective tools for preventing hostilities, the escalation
of violence, war and its terrible repercussions.
The provisions of Chapters VI and VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations are crucial to a
comprehensive discussion of conflicts and their
distinctive features, while respecting multilateralism,
the sovereign equality of States and non-interference
in their domestic affairs. The role of regional and
subregional organizations is also vital to strengthening
such efforts. Bolivia categorically rejects the use or
threat of use of force under any circumstances. It should
be considered as a last resort only when all peaceful
means of dispute settlement have been exhausted, in
accordance with Chapter VII and in strict compliance
with the system of multilateralism that underpins our
Organization. However, all of our efforts to prevent and
28/29

21/02/2018

resolve conflicts at the highest level, which are based
on the Charter, will fall short if we do not address the
root causes of those conflicts, such as colonialism,
expansionism, attempts to control natural resources
and policies aimed at creating zones of influence or
as some call them, one’s backyards. It is important to
make it clear that interventionist policies and efforts to
accomplish regime change exacerbate conflicts.
When a Power claims that its interests prevail
over those of the rest of the world and is willing to
use its military might to protect those interests, it is
clear that we are talking about imperialism, which is
at antithetical to international law and the concept of a
multipolar world. Unilateral actions in flagrant breach
of the purposes and principles of the Charter do not
occur only through acts and campaigns for intervention
but also with the threat of the use of force. We saw
that in our own region not years but just a few days
ago, when one Power actually called for a coup d’état,
in disregard not only for the equality, sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of States, but for
every fundamental principle of international law.
With regard to implementation of Chapter VII of
the Charter, we firmly believe that sanctions cannot be
viewed as an end in themselves but must be temporary
and preventive. Such measures should not be used
as a tool to promote double standards and unilateral
political objectives. They should be designed and
developed with fair and transparent procedures that
clearly establish the conditions to which the States or
parties must adhere. Periodic evaluations should also
be carried out to take stock of their effects and make
the necessary adjustments to modify or lift them based
on changes in a situation. We must always seek to have
the least possible humanitarian impact on civilian
populations, to safeguard their rights and guarantee
their well-being. Needless to say, we firmly oppose the
implementation of unilateral sanctions.
An additional fundamental element in terms of
respecting the purposes and principles of the Charter
is maintaining a focus on the specific powers and
mandates of each entity of the United Nations, in
order to avoid duplication of effort or encroachment
on a body’s specific mandate. We must also avoid any
accumulation of power and the exploitation of any of the
Organization’s organs, including the Security Council,
for political purposes. When we speak of the United
Nations, of course, we speak of it in its entirety, and not
just of the various bodies that are explicitly discussed
18-04705

21/02/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

in the Charter but also those that arise from it. When
we say, for example, that the Security Council can lay
claim to the right to address issues that fall within the
purview of the Human Rights Council, we are seeing a
very clear example of the manipulation of the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
As a State that promotes the principles of
multilateralism and operates according to them,
Bolivia welcomes and appreciates the important work
of the International Court of Justice as the principal
judicial organ of the United Nations, whose probity
and independence are indispensable for guaranteeing
peace and security for the international community.
The work of the Court must be supported by all States
so as to consolidate and strengthen the pre-eminence of
international law. Justice exists above all to promote the
fraternal coexistence of peoples by emphasizing peace
and dialogue rather than the use of force, aggression,
invasion or unilateral action.

S/PV. 8185

Bolivia reiterates that the joint work of the
Organization and the unity of its Member States are
vital to guaranteeing and maintaining international
peace and security. The success of our work is measured
in terms of the conflicts that we manage to prevent, the
dialogues or negotiations that we are able to establish,
and the confidence-building measures that we can
strengthen. Our failure, on the other hand, will be
measured in the unresolved conflicts and interventions
by its Member States in pursuit of their own interests
at the cost of the lives of millions of innocent people.
In conclusion, the great challenge proposed by the
Charter of the United Nations is as valid today as it was
more than 70 years ago. The primacy of politics, of the
use of peaceful means for resolving disputes, and of
international law are intimately and indissolubly linked
to respect for the Charter of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.

18-0470529/29
