S/PV.8899

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8899th meeting

Monday, 8 November 2021, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez/Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco

(Mexico)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mr. Hamani Baba Babo
Ms. Juul
Ms. Evstigneeva
Ms. King
Mr. Ladeb
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield
Mr. Dang

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-32413 (E)
*2132413*

S/PV.8899

Peace and security in Africa

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Ethiopia to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs; and His Excellency Mr. Olusegun
Obasanjo, High Representative of the Chairperson for
the African Union Commission for the Horn of Africa.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity
to brief the Security Council on the situation in
Ethiopia. I welcome the presence today of President
Obasanjo, African Union High Representative for the
Horn of Africa.
The year-long conflict in the Tigray region of
Ethiopia has reached disastrous proportions. The
fighting places the future of the country and its people,
as well as the stability of the wider Horn of Africa
region, in grave uncertainty. In recent days, Tigrayan
forces have advanced southwards towards Addis Ababa,
acting in coordination with the Oromo Liberation Army.
The Government of Ethiopia has declared a nationwide
state of emergency and has stated that it is fighting an
existential war. Elsewhere, insecurity in the Oromia
region continues to worsen, while the situation in parts
of the Benishangul-Gumuz region remains tense.
There has been much speculation concerning
how the crisis will unfold over the coming weeks. In
a country of more 110 million people, 90 different
ethnic groups and 80 languages, no one can predict
what continued fighting and insecurity will bring. But
let me clear: what is certain is that the risk of Ethiopia
descending into widening civil war is only too real.
That would bring about a humanitarian catastrophe and
consume the future of such an important country.
2/16

08/11/2021

The political repercussions of intensifying violence
in the wider region would be immense, compounding
the many crises besetting the Horn of Africa. Just in
northern Ethiopia today, more than 7 million people are
in need of humanitarian assistance. Efforts to mobilize
assistance in Tigray, where more than 5 million people
need food and an estimated 400,000 people are living
in famine-like conditions, continue to be undermined
by an inability to move cash, fuel and supplies into
the region. No aid trucks have reached Mekelle since
18 October amid continued air strikes.
United Nations Humanitarian Air Service flights
have remained suspended since air strikes on 22 October
forced a flight to return to Addis Ababa. We have been
unable to move fuel into Tigray since August. While
some emergency supplies have been moved, it has been
four months since the last major shipment of medicines
and health supplies into Tigray. A lack of access means
that humanitarian organizations have had to scale back
core, life-saving activities, including water trucking,
food distributions, mobile clinics and support for
acutely malnourished children and mothers. Needs and
protection concerns are also rapidly escalating in the
Amhara and Afar regions, with large numbers of people
fleeing their homes as the fighting continues to expand.
Let us recall that this expanding crisis is happening
in a country that was already grappling with enormous
humanitarian challenges, including local conflicts,
flooding, drought and infectious disease outbreaks.
While needs are most acute in the north, across Ethiopia
as a whole more than 20 million people are estimated
to need some form of humanitarian support. More than
5 million people are internally displaced. Emergency
Relief Coordinator Martin Griffiths travelled to Ethiopia
over the weekend to review Ethiopia’s increasing needs
and plan for a greater humanitarian response, should
the fighting continue, as is feared. Unfettered access to
conflict areas remains key.
Last week, the report of the joint Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human RightsEthiopian Human Rights Commission investigation
into the conflict in Tigray, covering the period between
November 2020 and June 2021, shed light on the
horrific suffering civilians have endured. The report
concludes that there are reasonable grounds to believe
that all parties to the conflict, including the Ethiopian
National Defence Forces, the Eritrean Defence Forces,
the Amhara Special Forces and allied militia on one side
and Tigrayan forces on the other, committed violations
21-32413

08/11/2021

Peace and security in Africa

of international human rights law, humanitarian law
and refugee law, to include attacks on civilians and
civilian infrastructure, indiscriminate attacks resulting
in civilian casualties and extrajudicial killings, torture,
arbitrary detentions, sexual and gender-based violence
and forced displacement.
The report states that war crimes and crimes against
humanity may have been committed. It also outlines
steps that should be taken to ensure accountability for
those acts. High Commissioner Bachelet highlighted
in her remarks last week that incidents of serious
human rights violations have continued. More recently,
incidents of hate speech and targeting of ethnic groups
have increased at an alarming rate. In that regard, the
Security Council’s call on 5 November for refraining
from inflammatory speech and incitement to violence
is welcome and timely.
There must be an immediate cessation of hostilities.
That has been the call of the Secretary-General, African
Union Commission Chair Faki, Intergovernmental
Authority on Development Executive Secretary
Workneh Gebeyehu, the leader of Ethiopia’s key
neighbour Kenya President Uhuru Kenyatta and the
Security Council. They have also called for negotiations
on a lasting ceasefire and for the creation of conditions
for an inclusive Ethiopian dialogue to resolve the
crisis and create the foundation for peace and stability
throughout the country.
The Secretary-General has been in frequent contact
with Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed Ali, urging restraint
and dialogue and offering his good offices. Furthermore,
the Secretary-General has offered President Obasanjo
the full support of the United Nations for his efforts to
resolve the conflict. United Nations colleagues on the
ground continue to urge all sides to the conflict to show
restraint and provide unfettered access to vulnerable
populations.
The recently concluded elections in Ethiopia
demonstrated the people’s commitment to the
democratic process. At the ceremony to mark his new
mandate last month, Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed Ali
spoke of his Government’s commitment to resolving
the ongoing challenges and his intention to launch a
national dialogue. The urgency for such an inclusive
initiative has never been greater.
In conclusion, let me stress that the United Nations
is steadfastly committed to staying and delivering in
Ethiopia, in support of all the people of the country.

S/PV. 8899

We continue our work there, including thanks to the
dedication of our Ethiopian national staff, who must
be provided full protection by national authorities,
regardless of their background.
Ethiopia, a founding member of the United Nations,
needs our support. We urge Ethiopians to come together
to build a shared, prosperous future before it is too late.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Obasanjo.
Mr. Obasanjo: It is a great pleasure and honour for
me to be invited to the briefing of the Security Council
to discourse the situation in Ethiopia, within the context
of its agenda item of peace and security in Africa.
I wish to express my heartfelt thanks and
appreciation to the President and members of the Council
for today’s invitation, which will allow me to exchange
views on the pertinent unfolding developments in one
of the strategic countries of the continent of Africa.
I also wish to thank the Chairperson of the
African Union (AU) Commission for my nomination,
on 26 August, to the post of African Union High
Representative for the Horn of Africa, to intensify
engagement with all relevant political actors and
stakeholders towards promoting entrenched durable
peace and stability within the Horn of Africa, as
well as support to AU-led strategies and diplomatic
interventions in the region, through the facilitation of
inclusive political dialogue, reconciliation and social
cohesion processes.
The appointment is a delicate one for two principal
reasons. It is the first-ever appointment by the AU of a
High Representative for an entire region. The second
reason is that each of the eight countries of the region
has a specific context. My assignment is part of the AU
drive to promote peace, security, stability and political
dialogue all over the Horn of Africa region. It has
allowed me to engage with most of the leaders of the
region, relevant bilateral or multilateral partners, as
well as key political actors and stakeholders, especially
in Ethiopia.
Apart from those meetings, I also paid visits
to Europe, met with the President of the Republic of
France, and to Brussels to meet with the leaders of the
European Union, from 5 to 8 October. I also travelled
to the United States of America, where I met with

21-324133/16

S/PV.8899

Peace and security in Africa

the Secretary-General and the Secretary of State of
the United States of America, from 9 to 14 October.
Those initial visits offered me the opportunity to
discourse with world leaders about the objective of the
appointment, as well as to solicit their logistical and all
other support for the implementation of my mandate.
Since I began the assignment, I have briefed the
AU Peace and Security Council on two occasions, the
first of which was on 8 October, concerning the region,
and the second just this morning, specifically on the
situation in Ethiopia.
The Under-Secretary-General has given us a brief
outline of the situation developing in Ethiopia. It is
pertinent to point out that the crisis situation in northern
Ethiopia has continued to drastically deteriorate in
recent weeks, leading to a serious escalation of the
situation. I have been following those developments
with keen attention, and it is owing to the rapid changes
in trends that I am here in Ethiopia to pay another visit
in order to engage all stakeholders in de-escalating
the situation.
It should be noted that, following days of reports
of intense fighting in the north of the country, the
Ethiopian Cabinet declared a nationwide state of
emergency with immediate effect on 2 November,
while the central authority urged citizens to prepare
to defend the capital. A large demonstration that took
place yesterday, 7 November, as well as other similar
demonstrations in several cities in support of the
Federal Government is evidence of the present reality.
Since my arrival in Ethiopia on 4 November, after
my visit to the Sudan a day earlier, I have met with the
Prime Minister of Ethiopia, the President of Ethiopia
and the President of Oromia and held meaningful
discussions with them on the ongoing escalation with
reflections on how to de-escalate tensions and to pave
the way for dialogue.
During my meetings with the Prime Minister, we
agreed that I would pay a visit to Mekelle to meet the
Tigrayan leaders. It is in that context that I travelled to
Mekelle yesterday, 7 November, to engage the leaders
of the northern region in an effort to de-escalate
tensions and to begin to find an amicable solution to
the situation.
To summarize our discussions, all the leaders here
in Addis Ababa and in the north agree individually that
the differences between them are political and require
4/16

08/11/2021

a political solution through dialogue. That therefore
constitutes a window of opportunity that we can
collectively tap into to assist the people of Ethiopia to
find a lasting solution to the ongoing crisis.
It is, however, important to mention that the
window of opportunity we have is very small and that
time is limited when it comes to an intervention in that
regard. The ongoing conflict situation continues to have
severe humanitarian consequences for the population,
with a huge impact on socioeconomic development
and stability. The time is now for collective action in
finding a lasting solution to avoid further escalation
of the situation, which may have a direct effect on the
strategic Horn of Africa region as a whole.
Please permit me, in light of all this, to urge the
Council to consider the following.
The Council should, first, strongly urge and
encourage the Federal Government of Ethiopia and
the Tigrayan People’s Liberation Front to engage in
political dialogue without any preconditions; secondly,
call for an immediate and unconditional comprehensive
ceasefire and the cessation of hostilities by all parties;
thirdly, call for immediate and hindered humanitarian
access; fourthly, call on the parties to ensure respect
for and compliance with international humanitarian
law and human rights laws and practices; fifthly, call
for the immediate commencement of an all-inclusive
national dialogue and reconciliation; and sixthly, call
on the international community to rally behind the
AU-led process in order to ensure coherence and unity
of purpose in our peacemaking efforts in the Horn of
Africa, particularly in Ethiopia.
In the past 48 hours, as I said, I have visited
Mekelle, the capital of Tigray. I have consulted with
the Prime Minister of Ethiopia, the President of Tigray
and the President of the Oromia region, as well as the
President of the Federal Republic of Ethiopia. I have also
consulted with the Chairperson of the AU Commission.
Tomorrow, I will be paying a visit the Amhara and
Afar regions, all in an effort to harmonize the leaders’
views in the area of the withdrawal of troops from
regions that are not their own, as well as in maintaining
humanitarian access.
All of those are, I believe, very important and
constitute the priority areas as indicated by most of
the leaders that I have consulted with. With the efforts
currently under way, I hope that, before the end of the
week, we will have a programme in hand that will
21-32413

08/11/2021

Peace and security in Africa

indicate how we can address the humanitarian situation
and the withdrawal of troops together so as to meet the
immediate demands of the stakeholders.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Obasanjo for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I want to start by
thanking Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and, in
particular, High Representative Obasanjo, for their
very important briefings.
In the context of what we have just heard and the
excellent work that the High Representative is already
doing despite the uncertainties we heard from UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo, we want to believe that
we may just be beginning to see possible pathways
emerging for an end to this crisis. We certainly share the
view that we dare not miss the window of opportunity
for peace.
That is why, when I consider this conflict, my
abiding feelings are of shame and frustration — shame
because, as the Council, we around this table have stood
by as this crisis intensified over the past year, causing
immeasurable suffering for millions of Ethiopians, and
frustration, because the Council’s voice matters on
this issue, and it has the power to deliver change. We
remained silent for too long.
But today I want to commend our African
colleagues, with whom we worked to gain agreement at
last on a Council statement last Friday (SC/14691) — a
Council statement that calls squarely for an immediate
ceasefire. That African leadership in New York is also
manifest at African Union (AU) headquarters, where
we saw the AU Peace and Security Council meet just
today, and, importantly, also on the ground, where it
matters most to the people of Ethiopia.
We depend on regional leaders, in particular
High Representative Obasanjo. We rely on regional
organizations, including the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, which have a crucial
role to play in engaging with all sides, supporting
mediation efforts and ultimately assisting Ethiopia to
find a solution to this crisis. We welcome the efforts
that are taking place as we speak. We call on everyone
in Ethiopia to embrace this opportunity. Time is of
the essence. The people of Ethiopia are putting their

S/PV. 8899

faith in their country. For the good of their country, the
fighting needs to stop, and the talking needs to start.
We are one year on from the beginning of this crisis.
Today we must ask ourselves if we, as the Security
Council, have done enough to prevent a catastrophe — a
catastrophe that is causing untold harm to the people
of Ethiopia. As each month passes, we have seen the
situation deteriorate. For the futures of ordinary people
in Ethiopia are being stripped away.
As we heard last week from the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the
Ethiopian Human Rights Commission, there have been
shocking human rights abuses committed during this
conflict. Women, men and children have been raped in
horrific fashion. Indeed, let me be clear: civilians have
borne the brunt of violence, international humanitarian
law and human rights norms have been cast aside, while
life-saving aid has been blocked from reaching starving
and sick people.
In recent days, the situation has become even
more grave. Humanitarian operations across northern
Ethiopia have effectively ground to a halt. Military
operations have escalated. A state of emergency has
been declared, suspending the basic rights of Ethiopian
citizens. More people have been displaced. Lives and
livelihoods have been lost. We have also witnessed
increasingly shocking incidents of hate speech and
dehumanizing language that risk inciting the worst
type of violence against individuals or groups within
Ethiopian society. We cannot stand by and allow this
to continue. Too many lives are at stake. Meanwhile,
continued military actions and mobilization now
threaten the very stability and territorial integrity that
are vital for Ethiopia and the region.
Today our messages are to all parties, and they are
clear and simple. First, it is paramount that all parties
immediately facilitate the provision of life-saving
humanitarian aid to those who desperately need it, in
line with international humanitarian law. Secondly,
we need an immediate end to the fighting. Civilians
must be protected. Thirdly, we need all parties to the
conflict to embrace negotiations towards a lasting
political resolution. Fourthly, the chilling hate speech,
dehumanizing language and incitement to violence
must end. Accountability is imperative. Fifthly, we
need an inclusive and Ethiopian-led national dialogue
that embraces all regions and stakeholders. We cannot
wait any longer to act on these five important steps.

21-324135/16

S/PV.8899

Peace and security in Africa

Ethiopia has been an inspiring example of peace
and stability in Africa. Ireland’s relationship with
Ethiopia is one of our oldest and closest on the African
continent. We remain deeply committed to supporting
Ethiopia and its people.
It is also shocking and tragic that the entire country
now risks being overrun by violence and conflict. This
unnecessary war must end now. All sides in Ethiopia
must turn the tide towards peace and now steer the
country back to where the people of Ethiopia deserve to
be: on a hopeful pathway to peace.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia): I take the floor on behalf
of the three African members of the Security
Council — Kenya, the Niger and Tunisia — as well
as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1), on the
developing situation in Ethiopia.
I wish to express our sincere condolences to the
Government and the people of the Niger for the heinous
terrorist attack that took place recently in that country.
I thank His Excellency President Obasanjo, the
High Representative of the African Union for the Horn
of Africa and Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, for
their insightful briefings. We thank President Obasanjo
for his extensive efforts within the African Union-led
process and welcome, in this regard, the communiqué
of the African Union Peace and Security Council on
the situation in Ethiopia issued today. I also welcome
the participation of the Permanent Representative
of Ethiopia.
One month after our previous meeting on this
subject (see S/PV.8875), the situation in Ethiopia
continues dangerously to deteriorate, especially during
the last two weeks, bringing this sister nation every day
closer to a full-scale civil war, which, if not stopped
immediately, could result in unprecedented violence
and widespread atrocities and threaten the unity and
territorial integrity of Ethiopia, with the potential for
occasioning destabilizing effects in the wider region.
The A3+1 is deeply concerned over the escalation
of military confrontation in northern Ethiopia and its
expansion to the Amhara and Afar regions as well as
its impact on the humanitarian front. Once more, we
highlight that the priority at this stage is to achieve
an immediate ceasefire, which is crucial for allowing
for unrestricted humanitarian access to the affected
6/16

08/11/2021

communities as well as for the re-establishment of
public services in all the conflict areas.
We therefore call for the immediate cessation of
hostilities, the full respect for the life and property of
civilians and State infrastructure and urge the parties to
the conflict to constructively engage in discussions to
seek a peaceful solution and pave the way for an inclusive
Ethiopian-led dialogue and national reconciliation in the
interests of the country. At the same time, we remind all
parties that they should respect their obligations under
international humanitarian law and human rights law,
with particular regard for the protection of civilians,
which requires all parties to urge their supporters to
abstain from acts of reprisal against any community,
and refrain from hate speech and incitement to violence
and divisiveness, as stated by the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission on 3 November.
All Ethiopians are one people. As the A3+1 we
urge all Ethiopians to embrace one another and refuse
to be pitted against one another on account of ethnic,
religious or other identities.
Today peace and security in the Horn of Africa
is at risk. The lives of millions of men, women and
children are at stake, and we have a huge and historic
responsibility to prevent large-scale atrocities and
famine and to forestall the possible destabilization of
the region. Today we have a strong need for diplomacy
and mediation.
We welcome the initiatives of the SecretaryGeneral and all international partners and regional
leaders to find a peaceful solution to the crisis. We
believe that it is important today that we speak with one
voice and send a clear and united message to all parties
in Ethiopia that violence is not an option in resolving
the political disputes, however serious they may be.
We have witnessed during the past year how
violence led to the loss of thousands of lives and
millions of displaced persons, human rights violations
and atrocities and to a dire humanitarian situation. We
are left with the question: how much longer, and how
many more innocent Ethiopians must perish, before all
parties can understand that there can be no military
solution to the crisis?
Ethiopia, that great nation and cradle of civilization,
which has been an anchor of regional peace and stability,
deserves to have us stand with its people in these trying
times. In that regard, we believe that the African Union
21-32413

08/11/2021

Peace and security in Africa

and the neighbouring countries have a major role to
play in helping Ethiopians find their way to peace and
stability through political dialogue and reconciliation.
We should help them unite again under the common
interests of their country.
We reiterate our full support to the African Union
High Representative for the Horn of Africa, former
President Obasanjo, and commend his mediation
efforts to achieve a ceasefire and a prompt and peaceful
resolution of the conflict. We call on all stakeholders
and international partners to extend all possible support
to President Obasanjo in his highly important mission,
cognizant of the importance of coordinated action.
In conclusion, we, the A3+1, reaffirm our respect
for and commitment to the sovereignty, political
independence and territorial integrity of Ethiopia.
We stand in solidarity with our brothers and sisters in
Ethiopia through these trying times in their pursuit of
peace and stability.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank the three African
members of the Security Council — Kenya, the
Niger and Tunisia — as well as Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines and Ireland, for leading the call to add
this item to our agenda. This is indeed a time when a
strong and united message from the Council is critical.
And I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and the
African Union High Representative for the Horn of
Africa for their briefings, and not least the efforts by
the African Union (AU).
The development of the crisis in Ethiopia is
threatening the stability and the very integrity of the
country. It is hitting the civilian population hard — and
certainly the most vulnerable the hardest. As a close
friend and decades-long partner to Ethiopia and the
Ethiopian people, Norway is deeply concerned, both
by the magnitude of the crisis and its potential
regional impact.
There can be no military solution. That should be
evident to all parties: from the federal Government to
the Tigray People’s Liberation Front (TPLF) and the
Oromo Liberation Army. Further escalation of the
fighting will not lead to victory; it will only inflict
more unnecessary suffering on the Ethiopian people.
We are deeply concerned by reports of increased
ethnic profiling and discrimination. Ethnically charged
statements inciting violence will only deepen divisions,
perhaps to irreversible levels. Divisive actions today

S/PV. 8899

make peace more difficult tomorrow. We urge Ethiopian
leaders to recognize the need for a future inclusive
dialogue and reconciliation process.
All parties must exercise maximum restraint and
immediately work to de-escalate the conflict. We
specifically call on the Tigray Defense Forces, the
TPLF and forces from the Oromo Liberation Army not
to attempt an attack on Addis Ababa.
We also urge the Government of Ethiopia to
refrain from imposing any measures or restrictions
upon civilians of specific ethnicities, including Tigray
and Oromo.
Norway fully supports the AU peace initiative and
the mandate and efforts of the AU High Representative
for the Horn of Africa. We call on all parties to fully
cooperate with the High Representative, immediately
stop fighting and make the necessary concessions for a
negotiated cessation of hostilities.
The humanitarian situation is extremely dire.
Hundreds of thousands in Tigray are facing famine-like
conditions, and there is a serious risk of large-scale
famine. At least 2 million persons are displaced in
Tigray, and hundreds of thousands in Amhara and Afar.
Access to food, health care and other basic services
must be restored. And all possible modalities for that
must be explored. We call on all parties to immediately
facilitate full, safe and unhindered humanitarian access.
We know that the suffering of the Ethiopian people
also goes beyond the current humanitarian crisis.
Norway is appalled by the findings in the joint report by
the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
and the Ethiopian Human Rights Commission. While
limited in time and geographical scope, it outlines a
pattern of the killing of civilians and the widespread
and systematic use of sexual and gender-based violence.
The obligations of all are made clear: incidents must
be investigated and perpetrators brought to justice. All
parties to the conflict must fully respect international
human rights law and international humanitarian law,
even in the most dire circumstances.
Every day that the fighting continues and the
rhetoric grows only makes a credible accountability
process and a viable transitional justice mechanism
more vital. Those mechanisms will be of the utmost
importance to future national reconciliation. The
people of Ethiopia, and indeed all people in the broader
region, are dependent on the ability of the parties to

21-324137/16

S/PV.8899

Peace and security in Africa

urgently find a path to sustainable peace. And we stand
ready to assist.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo and High Representative
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
Obasanjo for their insightful briefings. I welcome the
Ambassador and Permanent Representative of Ethiopia
to our meeting today.
We are deeply concerned about the deteriorating
situation in Ethiopia, especially the continued fighting
and expansion of combat and hostilities in and around
the Tigray, Amhara and Afar regions over the weekends.
The sharp escalation in military operations and clashes
in the past few weeks have plunged Ethiopia and the
region into a more serious level of instability, pushing
the parties to a point of no return. Those developments
have also brought about consequences and adverse
impacts on the daily life of millions of people, while
hindering humanitarian activities.
We therefore urge all parties to end hostilities
immediately and start an inclusive Ethiopian national
dialogue towards an immediate, unconditional and
sustainable ceasefire. Only with a sustainable ceasefire
can the primary conditions for a credible and inclusive
dialogue be established to find a political settlement
to the long-lasting political grievances that led to
the conflict.
The escalating hostilities threaten to worsen the
already dire humanitarian situation in Tigray, Amhara
and Afar, where millions of people are in need of urgent
humanitarian assistance. There are 5.2 million people,
especially those 400,000 people who live in famine-like
conditions, who must rely on food aid every day.
We welcome progress in the practical activities
carried out over the past few months by the United
Nations, humanitarian organizations and international
and regional partners to help Ethiopians, including
people in Tigray.
We also welcome the visit made by UnderSecretary-General Martin Griffiths and the African
Union’s High Representative for the Horn of Africa,
Olusegun Obasanjo, to the northern Tigray region of
Ethiopia on Sunday in order to discuss humanitarian
access and a possible ceasefire. However, we understand
that the access to, and the distribution of, humanitarian
assistance are greatly insufficient in the face of the
urgent needs of people in the region. We therefore call for
8/16

08/11/2021

the immediate removal of restrictions and the granting
of humanitarian access, as well as full compliance with
international humanitarian law, the rapid restoration of
public services and the intensification of humanitarian
assistance. All measures must be taken to protect
civilians and humanitarian workers.
As we have stated previously, the crisis in
Tigray is due to complicated political, historical and
ethnic reasons. Therefore, rather than inciting further
hatred, the parties concerned must put the interests
of their people first and patiently engage in dialogue
and reconciliation.
It is high time for a compromise to be made towards
a comprehensive solution for the sustained stability and
development of Ethiopia on the basis of respect for the
principles of international law and the Charter of the
United Nations. Without a constructive dialogue in
place, further bloodshed and confrontational rhetoric
will drive the parties farther apart and block the path
of peace. Dialogue should start right away; otherwise
it will be too late to save Ethiopia from catastrophe.
The international community should support all
efforts to that end, including through swift and
effective actions — all while ensuring full respect for
the independence, sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity of Ethiopia.
The conflict and situation in Tigray have
had a significant impact on the region. All parties
must therefore exercise restraint. The principles of
non-interference in the internal affairs of States and
the settlement of disputes by peaceful means should be
upheld at all times.
In that connection, we support the role of the
High Representative of the Chairperson for the
African Union Commission for the Horn of Africa
and his efforts to help bring about a ceasefire and a
prompt and peaceful resolution to the conflict. We also
support the constructive engagement of neighbouring
countries and regional organizations, especially the
African Union, for the sake of peace, stability, security,
national reconciliation, national unity and development
in Ethiopia.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and
Mr. Olusegun Obasanjo, High Representative of the
Chairperson for the African Union (AU) Commission
for the Horn of Africa, for their briefings. And I
21-32413

08/11/2021

Peace and security in Africa

welcome Ambassador Amde, Permanent Representative
of Ethiopia, to today’s meeting.
Lately, the situation in Ethiopia has deteriorated.
The escalation and spread of the conflict have resulted
in increasing civilian casualties and worsening
humanitarian conditions. The AU and the leaders of
countries of the region have all expressed their concern
in that regard.
As a good friend of the people of Ethiopia, China
sincerely hopes that all the relevant parties will put
the interests of the country and its people first, keep
calm and exercise restraint in order to avoid further
escalation of the situation. We also hope that they will
commit to resolving conflict and differences through
political dialogue so as to create conditions for peace
and reconciliation.
Last Friday, the Security Council issued a press
statement on the situation in Ethiopia (SC/14691), calling
for a cessation of hostilities and the commencement of
political dialogue. We hope that all the relevant parties
will respond positively.
The current situation in Ethiopia is the result of a
combination of political, historical, ethnic and other
factors. A solution can only be found from within.
Countries of the region and regional organizations
know best with regard to the historical background and
current challenges in Ethiopia, and can therefore play a
leading role in the political settlement of the Ethiopian
issue. China has always supported African solutions to
African problems.
In that connection, we welcome the political good
offices of High Representative Obasanjo. We call on all
the parties concerned and the countries of the region to
fully support the High Representative in his work. We
also welcome the Secretary-General’s offer to extend
his good offices to Ethiopia. We call for enhanced
coordination between the United Nations and the AU so
that they can work together constructively to promote
nationwide peace and reconciliation in Ethiopia. The
international community, and the Security Council in
particular, should give the time and space needed for
the AU and others to make use of their good offices.
Using trade restrictions or cutting off aid as a means
to exert maximum pressure on Ethiopia will only
impede efforts to reach a political settlement and will
not help the parties resolve their conflict and rebuild
mutual trust.

S/PV. 8899

The current humanitarian needs in Ethiopia are
enormous. The international community should help
Ethiopia improve its humanitarian response capacity
and scale up the delivery of aid in order to ensure that
humanitarian assistance can reach as many people
as possible.
When providing humanitarian support to
Ethiopia, we should respect the country’s sovereignty
and leadership, follow the United Nations guiding
principles for humanitarian action and avoid
politicizing humanitarian issues. All the parties
concerned in Ethiopia should fulfil their obligations
under international humanitarian law, protect the safety
and security of civilians, including foreign nationals,
facilitate humanitarian relief operations and prevent
further deterioration of the humanitarian situation.
Ethiopia is a country with a long history and a
splendid civilization. At every historical juncture, the
people of Ethiopia have been able to come together
to defend the country’s sovereignty, unity and longterm development. We are confident that the people of
Ethiopia have the capacity and wisdom to overcome
the country’s current challenges, maintain national
unity and get the country back on track towards peace,
stability, development and revitalization.
China stands ready to work with the international
community to continue to support the efforts of the
people of Ethiopia.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I want to thank
High Representative Obasanjo and Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo for their important briefings. I
also thank the African members of the Security
Council — namely, Kenya, the Niger and Tunisia — as
well as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and Ireland,
for calling today’s meeting and for their work on
Friday’s statement (SC/14691) for the Security Council’s
consideration at today’s meeting.
The United Kingdom shares the serious concerns
already expressed today, including on behalf of the
African Union Peace and Security Council, about
the situation in Ethiopia. The introduction of a state
of emergency by the Government of Ethiopia must
not be used as an excuse to ignore human rights and
international humanitarian law.
Violations and abuses of human rights, international
humanitarian law and refugee law are already taking
place as a result of this conflict. The report released

21-324139/16

S/PV.8899

Peace and security in Africa

last week by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the Ethiopian
Human Rights Commission documented those in
detail, including the widespread use of sexual violence
as a weapon of war, as well as torture, attacks on
civilians and forced displacement. All parties should
act to implement the recommendations contained in
that joint report, ensure accountability and prevent
further suffering. Indeed, addressing the humanitarian
and human impact of this tragic conflict should be our
immediate focus. And when it is over, we must come
together and help Ethiopia heal.
It is therefore vital that all parties stop fighting
and start talking. The Tigrayan forces need to stop
their advances and return to Tigray. The humanitarian
blockade needs to be lifted. Hate speech and ethnic
profiling must end; they serve only to set Ethiopian
against Ethiopian and deepen divisions, which will
make recovery from this crisis even harder.
The United Kingdom gives its full support to the
Secretary-General and African Union Special Envoy
Obasanjo and urges all parties to make use of their good
offices. We stand ready to provide any support that is
required. In the past year, this conflict has brought only
destruction, suffering and despair. It is past time for all
parties to put the Ethiopian people first.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
President Obasanjo and Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for
their briefings. I would like to make three points.
Immediate action is needed to bring about a
ceasefire and facilitate the start of a political dialogue.
France calls on the Federal Government, the regional
government of Tigray and its allies to demonstrate
their openness to dialogue without delay. The parties
must immediately cease hostilities, freeze the positions
of their forces, refrain from internationalizing
the conflict and agree on a phased withdrawal to
pre-conflict positions.
France calls on the Ethiopian authorities to
withdraw the designation of the Tigray People’s
Liberation Front as a terrorist organization so as to start
urgent negotiations. The Tigray regional government
should recognize that the future of the Tigray region
can be determined only through an inclusive national
dialogue and constitutional arrangements, including
regarding the border dispute with the Amhara region.
10/16

08/11/2021

All parties should support the efforts of the African
Union, President Obasanjo and Kenya, all of whom
have expressed their deep concern for the stability
and unity of Ethiopia and the region, as well as their
hope that a dialogue can finally silence the guns. Like
the Secretary-General and Ethiopia’s main partners,
including the European Union, France supports those
steps. The Security Council has also expressed its
unanimous support for their efforts.
Such statements recalled the international
community’s commitment to Ethiopia’s unity and
territorial integrity. Actors in the region who exploit
the vulnerabilities that the conflict has exacerbated
will be held accountable. France reiterates its call for
a complete and verified withdrawal of Eritrean forces.
The international community is therefore unified
and mobilized in supporting peace efforts and providing
international guarantees to overcome mistrust. We
encourage the parties to take this opportunity.
Now more than ever, all parties need to respect
international humanitarian law and human rights.
The protection of civilians must remain a priority.
Fighting in urban areas increases the risk for the
population. France is concerned by the violence, forced
displacements and hate speech targeting the ethnic
origin of victims. It calls on all parties to put an end to
such violence, combat the impunity of its perpetrators
and shoulder their responsibility.
France takes note of the publication of the report
of the joint investigation by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the
Ethiopian Human Rights Commission. We expect all
parties to undertake credible investigations into the
alleged facts. The allegations are extremely serious,
in particular the extrajudicial executions and the many
cases of sexual violence.
All parties should ensure full access for all United
Nations humanitarian and medical personnel. The
obstruction of medical aid is unacceptable. We hope that
such obstacles will be rapidly removed. Finally, France
calls on the parties to guarantee access to prisoners and
start talks for their release.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): Let me join other
speakers in thanking His Excellency Mr. Obasanjo,
High Representative of the Chairperson of the
African Union (AU) Commission, and Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
21-32413

08/11/2021

Peace and security in Africa

Peacebuilding Affairs, for updating the Security
Council on the recent developments in the northern
parts of Ethiopia. I also welcome the presence of the
Permanent Representative of Ethiopia, Ambassador
Taye Amde, at today’s briefing.
The conflict in northern parts of Ethiopia has
seen an escalation in recent weeks and is threatening
to expand towards the central parts of Ethiopia.
The fighting has intensified and the humanitarian
situation has worsened, adversely affecting millions,
particularly women, children and the elderly. It is
concerning to note that the humanitarian efforts led by
the United Nations have been stalled in recent weeks. It
is important that humanitarian assistance be resumed at
the earliest available opportunity. We also reiterate the
importance of the founding principles of humanitarian
assistance, that is, humanity, neutrality, impartiality
and independence.
We have noted the report of the joint investigation
team of the Ethiopian Human Rights Commission and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights. We also note and welcome the
recognition and acceptance of the report by the
Ethiopian Government as an important document that
could complement ongoing efforts by the Ethiopian
Government to address the allegations of human rights
violations and abuses. We further note that the report
could not confirm the deliberate or wilful denial of
humanitarian assistance to the civilian population in
Tigray or the use of starvation as a weapon of war.
The Ethiopian Government has announced a state
of emergency in response to the persisting conflict and
expansion of violence beyond the Tigray region. The
inclusive national dialogue announced on 4 October
has not moved forward. A military offensive may not
help in the resolution of the crisis; there inevitably has
to be a dialogue. India has consistently underscored
the importance of mutual trust, engagement, dialogue
and reconciliation to address all issues related to the
ongoing conflict.
We therefore call upon all stakeholders to
purposefully take the opportunity provided by
the mediation efforts of the African Union High
Representative for the Horn of Africa, His Excellency
Mr. Olusegun Obasanjo. We welcome his meeting with
the Prime Minister of Ethiopia and take note of his visit
to Mekelle. He also briefed the AU Peace and Security
Council this morning. We also welcome the engagement

S/PV. 8899

of countries of the region in that process. We urge all
sides to exercise restraint and work together in order to
build the trust and confidence that could pave the way
for dialogue.
The political and economic stability of Ethiopia
is paramount not only to the Horn of Africa, but to
the entire African continent. It is in the interests of
the region that the current politico-military situation
be resolved within the constitutional framework of
Ethiopia. In that regard, we support the initiatives of the
African Union. It is important that regional initiatives
led by the AU be encouraged and actively supported by
the Security Council.
In conclusion, India reiterates its strong commitment
to the unity, sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of Ethiopia.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo and High Representative Obasanjo for
their briefings.
Estonia is deeply concerned about the recent
escalation in northern Ethiopia. Such developments
continue to cause civilian casualties, prolong human
suffering and risk the stability of the country and
the whole region. We call upon the Tigray People’s
Liberation Front to withdraw its troops from Amhara
and Afar, and on the Government of Ethiopia to refrain
from air strikes on civilian targets. All parties must do
their utmost to protect civilians, including humanitarian
and medical workers, in line with their obligations
under international humanitarian law.
There is no military solution to the conflict. We
call upon all parties to immediately end hostilities
without preconditions, engage in negotiations for a
lasting ceasefire and create conditions for the start of
a political dialogue.
In that context, we would also like to express our
full support for the international and regional efforts
in achieving a peaceful resolution to the conflict. We
encourage the continued engagement of the African
Union and support the mediation efforts by High
Representative Obasanjo.
The deteriorating humanitarian crisis in the Tigray,
Amhara and Afar regions is deeply worrisome, as more
and more people are in need of urgent assistance. All
parties to the conflict have an obligation to facilitate
safe and unhindered humanitarian access to all areas
affected by the conflict. It is also essential to restore

21-3241311/16

S/PV.8899

Peace and security in Africa

basic services and the entry of the fuel, cash and
humanitarian supplies needed for aid operations.
We reiterate our deep concern about reported human
rights violations and abuses, including widespread
sexual and gender-based violence. We welcome the
publication of the joint report of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the
Ethiopian Human Rights Commission. We call for the
full implementation of the recommendations of the
report and ensuring accountability for the perpetrators.
It is now up to the Ethiopian Government to carry out
its promises on that.
In conclusion, I would like to express deep regret
that, one year after the start of the conflict, the situation
in northern Ethiopia has only deteriorated, with
expanded hostilities, mounting deaths and suffering
of civilians and a catastrophic humanitarian situation.
In order to preserve the stability, unity and territorial
integrity of Ethiopia, all sides must cease the hostilities
and solve their differences through a genuine and
inclusive national dialogue.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): Let me start by recognizing and thanking
the Security Council for releasing the press statement
(SC/14691) last Friday calling for a ceasefire and
expressing our strong concerns about the situation in
Ethiopia. I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo
for her briefing. I also thank Mr. Obasanjo, High
Representative of the Chairperson for the African
Union Commission for the Horn of Africa region, for
his briefing, specifically for his on-the-ground reports
and efforts in the region. We strongly urge all parties
to support and cooperate with him as he works to bring
peace and stability to the region.
The conflict in Ethiopia has been ongoing for a
full year, and that is a tremendously sad milestone.
As my Irish colleague stated earlier, we have really
remained silent for too long. Over the past year,
we have seen constant violence; we have witnessed
widespread human rights abuses and atrocities; we
have seen credible, documented and persistent reports
from a wide range of sources of looting, displacement,
extrajudicial executions, rape and sexual violence as
weapons of war; and we have seen the threat of mass
starvation loom large as humanitarian aid and medical
supplies are delayed and denied from going to civilians
who need it most.
12/16

08/11/2021

The joint report Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the Ethiopian
Human Rights Commission details all of that very
clearly. It makes it plain that there have been many
human rights violations and abuses. And it demonstrates
that the Ethiopian National Defense Forces (ENDF), the
Eritrean Defense Forces, the Amhara regional forces
and the Tigray People’s Liberation Front (TPLF) are all
culpable. There are no good guys here; there are only
victims on all sides.
That vital report was limited in geography and
chronology. Both should be expanded to ensure that
more recent allegations from across the region can
be investigated and perpetrators held accountable. In
the meantime, the violations and abuses documented
cannot be tolerated. Suspected individuals need to
be removed from active duty pending investigation.
Independent bodies must be allowed to investigate and
ensure accountability. Humanitarians must be allowed
unimpeded access. And the violence must stop.
This is not the Ethiopia that we thought we would
see two years ago, when we were applauding the country
as the fastest growing economy in Africa. The unity
and integrity of the Ethiopian State faces an existential
threat from within, and millions of innocent civilians
are at risk as the conflict expands and warring parties
advance towards Addis Ababa.
It is time for all parties to immediately halt
hostilities and refrain from incitement to violence and
divisiveness. The bellicose rhetoric and inflammatory
language on all sides of the conflict only aggravate the
situation and lead to communal violence. It is time for
the Government of Ethiopia, the TPLF and all other
groups to engage in immediate ceasefire negotiations
without preconditions to find a sustainable path
towards peace.
It is also long past time for the Eritrean Defense
Forces to withdraw from Ethiopian territory. It is time
for them to put their weapons down. Let me repeat that:
it is time for them to put their weapons down. This war
among angry, belligerent men victimizing women and
children has to stop.
As we call for peace, I want to address some critics
who have said that the United States is biased towards
one side of the conflict. Let me be crystal clear. We
condemn violence on all sides. We condemn all human
rights violations and abuses committed by all sides. We
therefore condemn the violence by the ENDF and the
21-32413

08/11/2021

Peace and security in Africa

Eritrean Defense Forces, and we condemn the TPLF’s
violence. We condemn the TPLF’s expansion of war
outside Tigray. The TPLF must redraw from Afar and
Amhara. We call on the TPLF and the Oromo Liberation
Army to immediately stop the current advance towards
Addis Ababa.
We also call on the Ethiopian Government to respect
international humanitarian law. We are not taking sides.
Innocent people — innocent Ethiopians — are starving
in northern Ethiopia. Withholding food and medical
supplies is not acceptable. It is not an acceptable tactic
at any time, and, frankly, it is unconscionable, and not
what we would expect from Ethiopia.
The Ethiopian Government must allow United
Nations agencies and their partners to staff their
operations with the specialized expertise required to
mount an effective response. The reckless expulsion
of United Nations officials is an affront to the United
Nations and the people of Ethiopia. The Ethiopian
Government must also investigate the terrible killings of
humanitarian and human rights workers and hold those
responsible to account. It must also cease all arbitrary
detentions and ethnic targeting in Addis Ababa.
Given the nationwide state of emergency, we are
concerned about the safety of United States citizens
and Government personnel and their dependents. The
security of our facilities remains paramount. We will
do everything in our power to keep our people safe, but
we also ask that the state of emergency not be used as a
pretence to attack civilians.
We and everyone here know that the only solution
to the conflict is a political solution. To that end, the
African Union has an important role to play in resolving
the conflict and sustaining regional peace and security.
I thank President Obasanjo once again for his efforts.
Similarly, we support Kenyan President Kenyatta’s
3 November call for all parties to return to political
negotiations, as well as his efforts in that regard.
Ultimately, the only ones who can bring lasting
peace to Ethiopia are its leaders and its people. Only
a broader dialogue about the future of their State,
where all of Ethiopia’s people are represented, can
lead to broader democratic and economic renewal. It
is never too late for peace but the longer this conflict
goes on, the harder the road to peace becomes and more
people will die. As Council members heard from High
Representative Obasanjo, the window of opportunity is
limited, and time is running out. I urge all parties — I

S/PV. 8899

repeat, all parties — in the strongest possible terms to
back away from the brink, lead their people towards
peace and resume the development agenda that will
lead to prosperity for all Ethiopians.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We listened carefully to the briefings by the
High Representative of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission for the Horn of Africa, Mr. Olusegun
Obasanjo, as well as Under-Secretary-General for
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs Rosemary DiCarlo,
on the most recent developments in the situation in
northern Ethiopia.
We welcome the Permanent Representative of
Ethiopia to today’s meeting.
The Russian Federation has watched with concern
as the situation continues to develop in the Ethiopian
regions of Tigray, Afar and Amhara, where clashes are
under way between Government forces and units of
the Tigray Defense Forces and other groups that have
joined them, including the Oromo Liberation Army.
Fighting around the cities of Dessie and Kombolcha
last week clearly showed that ongoing violence will
lead to additional casualties and dire humanitarian
consequences for civilians.
The continued deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in the areas affected by the hostilities is of
particular concern. In Dessie and Kombolcha, where
a large number of refugees and internally displaced
persons lived prior to the conflict, clashes have led to
a rapid rise in the number of refugees and internally
displaced persons. As a result of ongoing attacks by the
Tigray People’s Liberation Front, the total number of
civilians in need of humanitarian assistance has already
reached 7 million. Humanitarian aid to all regions of
the country must be increased. We continue to stress
that it must be provided in close coordination with the
sovereign Government and in strict accordance with
the basic guiding principles of the United Nations.
As we have stated in the past, divisions in Ethiopia
run deep and have a complex historical context.
Moreover, developments in the country could have a
considerable negative impact on the entire region. In
that regard, over the past few months, we have called
for stakeholders with influence in the region, as well
as the media, to act responsibly to avoid escalating the
international rhetoric and to refrain from adding fuel to
the fire of already spiralling interethnic strife.

21-3241313/16

S/PV.8899

Peace and security in Africa

08/11/2021

We also believe that imposing illegal unilateral
sanctions, threatening to use such sanctions and
refusing to provide economic assistance are highly
counterproductive and will serve only to exacerbate the
situation for ordinary people who are already suffering,
rather than lead to reconciliation.

the Tigray People’s Liberation Front, the mobilization
of the Oromo Liberation Army and the continued
aerial bombardment of Mekelle by the Ethiopian army
constitute an exponential escalation of hostilities,
whose impact is now spreading to the regions of
Amhara and Afar.

There is no other way to resolve the conflict but
to support national and regional efforts to end the
intra-Ethiopian military confrontation and establish a
dialogue, with the aim of restoring peace and achieving
gradual socioeconomic stabilization throughout the
country. At various points in history, Ethiopians
have repeatedly demonstrated their ability to live
in inter-ethnic harmony and build a common State.
That was confirmed by the holding of peaceful and
democratic general elections earlier this year. The high
level of support for the country’s Government was also
demonstrated by recent mass protests in Addis Ababa.

The recent decision of the Government of Ethiopia
to declare a state of emergency clearly demonstrates that
if the parties continue the military option, the conflict
will spread to the entire country and have serious
consequences, not only for the people of Ethiopia,
already enduring them, but also for the entire region.
That is why we support and encourage regional efforts
to find a negotiated solution to the crisis, in particular
those of the African Union High Representative for the
Horn of Africa, President Obasanjo.

We are aware of the recent mediation efforts of the
United Nations and the African Union. Regrettably, as
the situation on the ground demonstrates, to date they
have failed to yield significant results. In that regard,
we hope that Mr. Obasanjo, as an honest and impartial
broker, will take the urgent steps necessary to reverse the
momentum in the direction of peace. All the necessary
signs from the Security Council were conveyed in its
press statement, adopted on 5 November (SC/14691).
We also welcome the work conducted in the region
by Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator Martin Griffiths.
We hope that those efforts will generate momentum
for the work of humanitarian personnel on the
ground, including with regard to providing unfettered
humanitarian assistance.
In conclusion, we reaffirm our commitment to
preserving the unity and territorial integrity of the
friendly country of Ethiopia. We firmly believe that
there can be no other basis for resolving outstanding
contentious issues.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Mexico.
I would, of course, like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo and President Obasanjo for
their very enlightening briefings.
We convened today’s meeting because of our deep
concern about the situation in Ethiopia. The advance of
14/16

With regard to the humanitarian situation, we are
concerned about the fact that aerial attacks in Mekelle
have already compelled the United Nations to suspend
its flights to that city. That has stopped the entry of
cash and humanitarian personnel, thereby worsening
living conditions for civilians. We are concerned about
the fact that although food and basic goods are available
for the people of Tigray, they cannot be delivered due
to the lack of fuel and money to pay contractors. The
Ethiopian Government must provide security guarantees
to ensure the resumption of, at the very least, the two
weekly flights to Mekelle, which had been operating
until a few weeks ago. All parties must respect their
obligations under international humanitarian law and
ensure unfettered access for humanitarian aid, without
further delay.
Mexico also takes note of the report of the joint
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights-Ethiopian Human Rights Commission
investigation into the conflict in Tigray, which
describes attacks on civilians, such as extrajudicial
executions, torture and forced disappearances, sexual
and gender-based violence, the forced displacement
of civilians, the denial of access to humanitarian aid
and the arrest and intimidation of journalists, inter
alia. Such violations of international human rights law
and international humanitarian law by all parties to
the conflict must be investigated and punished. In that
regard, my delegation reiterates the Council’s call on all
parties to broker a ceasefire and for the right conditions
to be established for a national dialogue. Mexico calls
for the immediate launch of negotiations, without
preconditions of any kind.
21-32413

08/11/2021

Peace and security in Africa

Mexico deplores the fact that, in spite of signs of
the destructive potential of the conflict and repeated
warnings by United Nations agencies about the gravity
of the humanitarian situation, the Security Council has
been unable to prevent an escalation of the conflict.
We are deeply concerned about the use of war-like
rhetoric that stokes animosity among ethnic groups. We
know where the use of hate speech can lead in such a
diverse country.
Nevertheless, we are confident that the Security
Council has learned from past mistakes and that, this
time, it will assume its responsibility to facilitate a
political process that will lead to peace in Ethiopia.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for giving me the floor and for allowing the participation
of my country in this briefing. I also congratulate you
on Mexico’s presidency of the Council for the month
of November.
I recognize the presence of His Excellency
President Olusegun Obasanjo, High Representative of
the African Union to the Horn of Africa, and UnderSecretary-General Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo. I thank
them both for their briefings.
A year ago, the northern command of the Ethiopian
National Defence Forces was attacked from within. The
unsuspecting men and women in uniform were slain in
the dark hours of 4 November 2020. The long-standing
service and sacrifice of the National Defence Forces
was rewarded by unprecedented levels of betrayal
and a treasonous attack waged by the Tigray People’s
Liberation Front (TPLF). Ethiopia will never forget
those patriots and their service and sacrifice. That day
will also go down as a day of infamy in Ethiopia’s proud
history. In that connection, I would like to extend our
thanks to the members of the Council who have stood
with my country during this very trying year.
In the past year, we have reversed the military threat
posed by TPLF. In parallel, we have made all efforts to
provide food and non-food items to people in need in
Tigray; we signed a humanitarian assistance agreement
with the United Nations; we spent close to 100 million
Ethiopian birr for assistance and reconstruction; we
declared a humanitarian ceasefire and withdrew our
forces; and we implored the treasonous group to hand

S/PV. 8899

over the leaders of its criminal scheme and to leave its
rank and file members to live in peace. All of that is
proven to be in vain, as it did not help us gain peace.
Today I will not provide the Council with details on
the humanitarian assistance we delivered to our people
in need. As a result of the continued and now widespread
criminal belligerence of the TPLF, the people of Tigray
that need urgent humanitarian assistance are not having
any aid delivered. The people in the Afar and Amhara
regions are rendered vulnerable. Cities and towns are
shelled; residents are killed on their doorsteps; citizens
are being robbed of the earnings from their toil. True to
its unscrupulous and cruel nature, the TPLF is causing
terror and mayhem.
As we speak, Ethiopians in the northern part of
the country are fending for their lives and the lives of
their children. The trucks we sent to Tigray with food
and medical supplies are transporting weapons and
youth combatants who have been frauded or forced
into fighting against their brothers and sisters for
no apparent public interest but for the greed-driven
political agenda of a few individuals.
We honour and respect the call for political dialogue.
It is an approach we fully prescribe to and even applied
in resolving many intra- and inter-state disputes.
Inherently, our current situation is not any
different. There are deep-seated political differences
and grievances in our nascent democracy. We are also
a diverse nation and a home to 83 languages and many
groups that the headlines do not care to mention, with
unaddressed legitimate quests and demands. However,
no political group, despite their grievances, has raised
an arm against its brethren. No ethnic or political group,
despite its unfulfilled demands, has waged war against
the motherland.
Diversity is not Ethiopia’s problem. Our challenge
is not, as some reluctantly posit, a failure to manage
diversity. Diversity is Ethiopia’s asset. Our problem is a
criminal group that refused to accept equality and let go
of ill-gained supremacy and privilege. Unfortunately,
that group garnered support from many sources: some
media outlets in the West and some staff members and
leaders of international organizations openly support
the group. It may come as a surprise that we sometimes
learn the motives and next steps of the group from
statements and speeches by high-placed officials within
those entities.

21-3241315/16

S/PV.8899

Peace and security in Africa

As members may recall, even the Council was
made to convene over false reports alleging heinous
crimes, including the use of hunger as a weapon of war.
Thankfully, the truth has come out and those malicious
accusations have been dispelled by the report of the
joint investigation by the Ethiopian Human Rights
Commission and the United Nations Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights. Our plea to members
of the international community, States and non-State
actors to refrain from providing moral and material
support went unheeded.
The TPLF became emboldened and numbed itself to
an extent. It stopped counting the lives of the Ethiopians
from Tigray whom it sacrificed on its hopeless journey.
It is now emboldened to a level where it threatens to
unseat a popularly elected Federal Government and
destabilize a nation of 112 million people. Once again,
we reiterate our plea to the group’s supporters — who
have been providing it with communications equipment,
satellite information, weapons and even fighters — to
desist from that not only illegal but immoral act.
Ethiopia is pained. What we have gone through
at the hands of that criminal group will require
intergenerational efforts to heal. For that, Ethiopia
needs its children to engage in dialogue and reconcile.
We have, time and again, expressed our readiness
and explained our preparations for a national political
dialogue. Had it not been for the bloodshed caused by
the TPLF, even the political future of that group would
have had a prospect of resolution through dialogue.
In line with our commitment, we entertained the
offers for support and undertook to work with all of our

16/16

08/11/2021

friends to learn from their experiences and draw the
available and relevant lessons and support. We accepted
the High Representative of the African Union to the
Horn of Africa and assisted him in his role. We believe
that the regional solution is best placed to support us in
getting out of the problem,
That being said, our route to dialogue and a political
solution will not be straightforward or easy. For now,
we are focused on halting the TPLF and rescuing and
reaching our public, which has suffered immensely
under the group’s cruel and deceptive methods. In that
regard, we remind everyone concerned that there are no
two parties here. There is a Government representing
the will of the Ethiopian people and representing the
Ethiopian State; and there is a group advancing its
greedy and criminal cause through atrocities. Any
attempt, including the media campaign we have been
witnessing in the past few days, to launder the TPLF
and diminish the horrors it has committed against the
Ethiopian people will only be counterproductive.
Out of our conviction in peaceful solutions to all
disputes, we will keep engaging all well-meaning actors,
the AU High Representative and regional leaders. In
the course of this process, we hope that we will have
the understanding of the Council and its membership. I
assure Council members that my country will prevail,
as it has in the past, in the face of all adversities.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 4.40 p.m.

21-32413
