S/PV.8395

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8395th meeting

Friday, 9 November 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ma Zhaoxu/Mr. Wu Haitao. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Cordova Soria
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Amde
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Alotaibi
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Tenya
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni
Ms. Pierce
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Strengthening multilateralism and the role of the United Nations
Letter dated 1 November 2018 from the Permanent Representative of China to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2018/982)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-36863 (E)
*1836863*

S/PV.8395

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Strengthening multilateralism and the role of
the United Nations
Letter dated 1 November 2018 from the
Permanent Representative of China
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2018/982)
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Argentina,
Algeria, Armenia, Australia, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh,
Belarus, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia, Georgia,
Germany, Guatemala, Hungary, India, Indonesia, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kenya,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mexico, Morocco, Myanmar, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Paraguay, the Philippines, Portugal, Qatar,
the Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Singapore, Slovenia,
South Africa, Spain, Switzerland, Tunisia, Turkey,
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Viet Nam and
Zambia to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Her Excellency
Ms. Alya Ahmed Saif Al-Thani, Permanent
Representative of Qatar, on behalf of the President of
the General Assembly; Her Excellency Ms. Inga Rhonda
King, President of the Economic and Social Council;
and Judge Abdulqawi Ahmed Yusuf, President of the
International Court of Justice.
Judge Yusuf is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from The Hague.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
to participate in this meeting: His Excellency Mr. João
Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations; Her Excellency Ms. Fatima
Kyari Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations; and Mr. Robert Mardini,
Head of Delegation and Permanent Observer of the
2/83

09/11/2018

International Committee of the Red Cross to the United
Nations.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
participate in this meeting, in accordance with the
provisional rules of procedure and the previous practice
in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/982, which contains the text of
a letter dated 1 November 2018 from the Permanent
Representative of China to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper
on the item under consideration.
I wish to warmly welcome His Excellency
Secretary-General António Guterres, to whom I now
give the floor.
The Secretary-General: I thank China for using
its presidency of the Security Council to highlight the
importance of strengthening multilateralism and the
role of the United Nations.
Today’s discussion takes place just days before
the one hundredth anniversary of the end of the First
World War. That conflict was a colossal tragedy and a
frightening harbinger of bloody decades to follow.
Europe was multipolar at that time, but that was not
enough to keep violence at bay. Without multilateral
mechanisms for international problem-solving, war
erupted and lasted for years. It took a second global
cataclysm to trigger the multilateral arrangements we
know today. They have a proven track record in saving
lives, generating economic and social progress and
avoiding a third descent into world war.
Recent years have seen inspiring achievements in
international diplomacy, above all the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the Paris Agreement
on Climate Change. The peace operations authorized
by the Council are also important expressions of
multilateralism in action. Peacekeeping has helped a
great many countries to recover from armed conflict.
Our missions are often critical bulwarks against chaos
and bloodshed. That is why I am so encouraged that
151 countries, along with 4 leading international and
regional organizations, have expressed support for
18-36863

09/11/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

the Action for Peacekeeping initiative, which aims to
strengthen these collective partnerships.
In other realms, however, multilateral efforts are
under immense stress. This is a time of multiplying
conflicts, advancing climate change, deepening
inequality and rising tensions over trade. It is a period
when people are moving across borders in unprecedented
numbers in search of safety or opportunity. We are still
wrestling with the risk of the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and only beginning to reckon with the
potential dangers of new technologies. There is anxiety,
uncertainty and unpredictability across the world. Trust
is on the decline, within and among nations. People
are losing faith in political establishments — national
and global. Key assumptions have been upended, key
endeavours undermined and key institutions undercut.
It often seems that the more global the threat, the less
able we are to cooperate. This is very dangerous in the
face of today’s challenges, for which global approaches
are essential.
In this difficult context, we need to inspire a return
to international cooperation. We need a reformed,
reinvigorated and strengthened multilateral system.
In the end, multilateralism is nothing more than
countries coming together, respecting one another and
establishing the forms of cooperation that guarantee
peace and prosperity for all in a healthy planet. Towards
that end, we need stronger commitment to a rules-based
order, with the United Nations at its centre and with the
different institutions and treaties that bring the Charter
to life.
But it is not enough to have laws and international
conventions, vital as they are. We need new forms
of cooperation with other international and regional
organizations — a networked multilateralism. And
we need closer links with civil society and other
stakeholders — an inclusive multilateralism. The
Security Council has a central role to play in showing
the value of international cooperation. Let us recall
that Charter of the United Nations endows the Council
with special stature, powers and responsibilities; and so
this body also bears the burden of not just its own but
the United Nations overall reputation. I think we can
all agree that crises in Syria, in the Middle East peace
process and elsewhere have shaken popular faith in
the potential of the international community to deliver
solutions.

S/PV. 8395

I encourage the members of the Council to do
more to overcome divisions, embrace the prevention
and peacebuilding agendas, and make greater use of
mediation and the other tools set out in Chapter VI
of the Charter for the resolution of disputes through
peaceful means. I remain convinced of the need for a
surge in diplomacy, and I draw strength from recent
examples of negotiated political solutions to problems
that previously seemed hopeless. In the same spirit,
I encourage all Member States to make greater
investments in building a fair globalization that works
for all, and in social cohesion that gives a stake in
society to all, in line with the 2030 Agenda. There
should be no room for demonizing minorities, migrants
and refugees, or for stifling the diversity that enriches
societies.
As we mark the centennial of the First World War,
we must draw on its lessons and buttress our practice
of multilateralism for the tests and threats of today
and tomorrow. And as twenty-first-century challenges
threaten to outpace twentieth-century institutions
and mindsets, let us reaffirm the ideals of collective
action while pursuing a new generation of approaches
and architecture capable of responding. Reform of the
United Nations has a crucial contribution to make, and
I look forward to continuing to press ahead across the
pillars of that effort.
But most of all, it is our resilient and still visionary
Charter of the United Nations that points the way with
its articulation of universal values, its grounding in
peace, development, human rights and the rule of law,
and its vision of countries living as good neighbours
and sharing a common fate and future. Strengthening
multilateralism means strengthening our commitment
to the Charter. Such a commitment is needed now more
than ever from all around this table and around our
world.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Al-Thani.
Ms. Al-Thani: I shall now read out a statement on
behalf of the President of the General Assembly.
“Allow me to congratulate China on assuming
the presidency of the Council. I thank you,
Mr. President, for the invitation to speak and for
organizing this very timely debate.

18-368633/83

S/PV.8395

Maintenance of international peace and security

“The headwinds against multilateralism are
present and clear. In a world of ever-increasing
interdependence and a close interrelationship
between human rights, development and peace
and security, we have no choice but to collectively
champion multilateralism.
“The conflicts in Yemen, Syria and other parts
of the world, as well as the tensions that continue
to simmer elsewhere, deprive the people of those
countries of the fruits of sustainable development.
But the rest of the world suffers alongside them
because, as the Chinese proverb goes, a rising tide
lifts all boats. We cannot achieve our ambitious
transformative sustainable development goals as
a world community when conflict and instability
limit the potential gain from cooperation. Simply,
we thrive as individual nations when all nations
thrive. That is the evidence of history and that is
the core value of our United Nations.
“The Security Council’s own history and
experience, both as witness and actor, shows
that the enduring outcomes of conflict resolution
require a multilateral approach. We must reinforce
the multilateral mechanisms that have consistently
allowed for frank dialogue, mutual support and
joint action, convinced that a fragmented and
go-it-alone approach to peace and security is not
sustainable.
“As we prepare to mark the 100th anniversary
of Armistice Day, a moment in our common
historical memory of the carnage of war, we face
a test of leadership. Are we committed, like the
global leaders who fashioned our own United
Nations system, to responding equally to the global
challenges that threaten today’s world? On this
note, I should like to make three brief points.
“First, I note that advancing multilateralism
is at the heart of my presidency. I remain deeply
convinced that dialogue and international
cooperation are the only tried and tested approaches
to addressing global challenges and, by extension,
to making the United Nations and other multilateral
institutions relevant to the peoples of the world.
That is particularly important around issues of
peace and security, which more frequently now
span borders and regions and cannot be addressed
or contained by any single country alone. This
sentiment was echoed by world leaders in the recent
4/83

09/11/2018

general debate of the General Assembly, at which
multilateralism and commitment to international
peace and security were among the most cited
issues. I therefore call on all Member States to
reaffirm their commitment to the principles and
pillars of the Charter of the United Nations, to
strengthen the international legal order, and to
maintain binding international cooperation.
“My second point refers to the need to
empower women and youth in pursuing and
sustaining peace. The commitment to the inclusion
of women and youth — one of the key objectives
of multilateralism — is critical both to the success
of the peace and security agenda and to the
realization of the Sustainable Development Goals.
Our common interest in sustaining peace and
responding effectively to global challenges means
that we should promote international cooperation
to address inequality, exclusion and alienation.
We must therefore collectively work towards
empowering women and youth, including through
greater economic opportunities, decent work,
political participation and social protection and in
peace processes.
“My final point relates to the need for a greater,
more coordinated approach within the United
Nations system to address international peace and
security issues. As mentioned, global challenges
require global solutions. There is no body or
entity more representative or emblematic of global
cooperation and multilateralism than the United
Nations. We must continue to foster mutually
reinforcing and coordinated efforts among the
main organs of the Organization to boost and
uphold multilateralism. The General Assembly, the
Security Council and other United Nations organs
and entities all play crucial, complementary roles,
within their respective mandates, in fostering
international peace and security.
“As President of the General Assembly, I
commit to facilitating greater synergy within the
United Nations system, while taking advantage of
the renewed interest in the revitalization of the work
of the General Assembly and the reform process
across the three main streams of development,
peace and security and management. I am also
continuing regular consultations and periodic
exchanges of information with the SecretaryGeneral, the President of the Economic and Social
18-36863

09/11/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

Council and the President of the Security Council
on important issues pertaining to international
peace and security.
“In conclusion, I must emphasize that
multilateralism does not represent, in any sense,
a threat to the sovereignty or national interests of
Member States. In fact, it offers the only way to
address the complex challenges that no country
could ever overcome on its own. My role as the
President of General Assembly is to serve as the de
facto guardian of multilateralism. I urge Member
States to stand together to uphold international
law and a system based on rules, dialogue and
cooperation. I also trust the Security Council to
successfully carry out its primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and
security.
“It has become clear that peace is not just about
the absence of war. To be sustainable, peace needs
to be nurtured before, during and after conflicts.
Development, peace and security and human rights
are all interlinked and mutually reinforcing. Only
by embracing multilateralism can we address the
many challenges to international peace, security
and prosperity. Let us work together to ensure
success on all counts.”
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ambassador Al-Thani for her statement on behalf of the
President of the General Assembly.
I now give the floor to the President of the Economic
and Social Council.
Ms. King: I first wish to thank the Chinese
presidency for convening today’s meeting and
inviting me to this open debate on multilateralism
and strengthening the role of the United Nations. This
debate demonstrates the importance that the Security
Council attaches to reaffirming the values of the rulesbased order created 73 years ago.
Three years ago we celebrated a big victory for
multilateralism — the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. The process was universal,
integrated and inclusive. It represented the rich and the
poor, Governments and non-governmental stakeholders
and those concerned with each of the three dimensions
of sustainable development, namely, economic
development, social development and the environment,
as well as peace and security. As we implement it,

S/PV. 8395

we cannot afford to forget that it was dialogue and a
painstaking, inclusive approach that got us to this point.
It is troubling that multilateralism is so frequently
being questioned today. Many are asking whether that
agreement would be at all possible in today’s political
reality. But are we asking the right question? Perhaps
the answer to our fears and concerns lies in the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda. This open debate is
an opportunity to remind ourselves that multilateralism
works. It was multilateralism that delivered conditions
for economic growth after the Second World War. It was
multilateralism that allowed us to reach the objective of
halving extreme poverty after 2000.
Climate change, technological disruption and the
threat of nuclear war are the defining issues of our
time. The issues of refugees, migration and trade need
to be addressed. All of those challenges need a global
solution. Only the United Nations allows everyone to
bring their viewpoint and find common approaches
and solutions. Now more than ever, we must keep the
channels for dialogue wide open. How can we therefore
enhance multilateralism?
We need to fulfil the commitments in the 2030
Agenda, which was the most ambitious and universal
agenda ever adopted by the United Nations. Upholding
the principles of the 2030 Agenda is paramount to
solving our most pressing challenges. The Highlevel Political Forum on Sustainable Development
creates a space for real dialogue and a platform for
knowledge-sharing. I am inspired by the strong
commitment we have seen from the 102 countries that
have already presented voluntary national reviews, with
an additional 41 scheduled to present theirs in 2019.
The High-level Political Forum to be held next year,
under the auspices of the Economic and Social Council,
will review Sustainable Development Goals on jobs
and growth, inequality, climate change, education and,
of course, global partnerships, as well as address the
theme on inclusiveness and equality — all relevant as
we grapple with the burning issues of our time.
The High-level Political Forum, which will also
meet under the auspices of the General Assembly at the
summit level in September next year, provides us with
a perfect opportunity to take stock, address solutions
and catalyse action towards the implementation of the
2030 Agenda. It will be an opportunity to reaffirm
our commitment to global cooperation and create the

18-368635/83

S/PV.8395

Maintenance of international peace and security

conditions for peace and sustainable development,
because we cannot have either unless we have both.
The Economic and Social Council and the Security
Council have cooperated in the past, when the Economic
and Social Council ad hoc advisory groups on African
countries emerging from conflict worked closely with
the Security Council ad hoc working group on conflict
in Africa, in Guinea-Bissau and Burundi, during the
period from 2002 to 2007. Another example of joint
efforts and integrated approaches was the request by
the Security Council for the Economic and Social
Council’s advice on a long-term programme of support
for Haiti in 1999. Members of the Security Council
may wish to consider whether the use of Article 65 of
the Charter of the United Nations, on the exchange of
information between the Economic and Social Council
and the Security Council, could be a way to strengthen
the dialogue between the two councils.
I am optimistic that we can bring about more
coherence across the three main pillars of the United
Nations. The working relationship between the
Economic and Social Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) is becoming stronger. For the
first time, the presidency of the Economic and Social
Council has been invited to address the annual session
of the Peacebuilding Commission, which will focus
on the Sahel. The following day, on 13 November,
the Economic and Social Council-PBC joint meeting
will address the linkages between climate change and
challenges to peacebuilding and sustaining peace in
the Sahel. The presidency was also invited this year for
the first time to brief the Human Rights Council on the
outcomes of this year’s High-level Political Forum, a
seizing of the opportunity created by resolution 37/25
to mainstream the 2030 Agenda into the human rights
agenda.
The Economic and Social Council provides the
space for non-governmental organizations to give
voice to their hopes and dreams for the future. Its
Commission on the Status of Women is also a space
for accountability on Security Council resolution 1325
(2000), on women and peace and security. I also offer
the Economic and Social Council Youth Forum as a
space for an integrated dialogue on youth and peace
and security to discuss the economic underpinnings of
the historic Security Council resolution 2250 (2015),
adopted in 2015.
6/83

09/11/2018

While we must continue to break down silos
between the main organs, it is also clear that they are in
need of reform. Indeed, the membership recognized the
wisdom of the Secretary-General’s reform efforts last
session. Still outstanding, however, is the much-needed
reform of the Security Council. Of critical importance
also is the ongoing work on the revitalization of the
General Assembly and the efforts to align the work of
the General Assembly and of the Economic and Social
Council in the light of the adoption of the 2030 Agenda.
As President of the Economic and Social Council, it
is my responsibility — and a priority — to facilitate
the implementation of the innovations mandated in the
outcomes of the review process aimed at strengthening
the Economic and Social Council, as articulated in
General Assembly 72/305.
With the 2030 Agenda, we pledged that no one
would be left behind, and we committed to endeavour
to first reach the furthest behind. We should be guided
by that principle in our pursuit of the world we want and
that should be the basis for reaffirming our commitment
to multilateralism.
In closing, I draw the Council’s attention to
the words of the late, great mathematician Stephen
Hawking. In his last book, entitled Brief Answers to the
Big Questions, Hawking explained that when we see
the Earth from space, we see ourselves as a whole. We
see the unity and not the divisions. It is such a simple
image with a compelling message: one planet, one
human race. Stephen Hawking died earlier this year,
but not before issuing his own call to action, which I
quote as follows:
“I hope that going forward ... people with
power can show creativity, courage and leadership.
Let them rise to the challenge of the Sustainable
Development Goals and act ... I am very aware of
the preciousness of time. Seize the moment, act
now.”
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank Ms. King
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Judge Yusuf.
Judge Yusuf: Allow me at the outset to congratulate
you, Mr. President, and the People’s Republic of China
on assuming the presidency of the Council for this
month. I also thank you, Sir, for taking the initiative
to convene this meeting and inviting me to participate
in it.
18-36863

09/11/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

Some would say that my participation in this debate
from The Hague is possible because of technology.
That is perhaps true, but it is not the entire story. They
are forgetting about multilateralism. Technology needs
multilateral rules to be able to cross borders. The
fibre-optic technology that carries digital data relies
on submarine cables in various maritime jurisdictions.
It is only through multilateral rules, such as those set
forth in the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea, that we can make this viable. Even for the
scheduling of this meeting, we all automatically rely on
time-zone rules that were established in a multilateral
framework as early as 1884, during the International
Meridian Conference.
Regulating global issues through a web of bilateral
agreements has been tried in the past. It has never
worked. That spider web simply collapses on itself.
It produces no silk. At best, it leads to a fragmented
legal order composed of contradictory international
obligations. The predictability, stability and certainty
of the rule of law disappear. That is why the Council’s
initiative is timely today as we celebrate the end of the
First World War 100 years ago, which gave new impetus
to the development of multilateralism.
Multilateralism is the result of human experience
and civilization. It is the only path forward in a world
in which we have all become neighbours. For the
International Court of Justice, multilateralism is a
condition not only of its existence; it is also that of
its proper functioning and effectiveness. Bilateral
agreements can create arbitral tribunals, but they cannot
create judicial institutions consisting of an independent
and impartial judiciary that represents the principal
legal systems of the world and decides cases on the
basis of law. The Court therefore owes its very existence
to multilateralism. To allow for the functioning of the
Court, multilateral conventions provide a large share
of the law applicable to disputes that are submitted to
the Court. On the other hand, the Court’s decisions
remove uncertainties from international conventions
by interpreting and applying the provisions of those
conventions.
In addition, some multilateral conventions of a
regional nature — such as the 1948 American Treaty on
Pacific Settlement, among Latin American countries,
and the 1957 European Convention for the Peaceful
Settlement of Disputes, among States parties — give
jurisdiction to our Court on disputes arising in those
regions of the world. Other conventions, such as those

S/PV. 8395

that are characterized by the Court as instruments of
a universal or quasi-universal character — such as
the case concerning Barcelona Traction, Light and
Power Company, Limited (Belgium v. Spain) — give
authority to the Court, through their compromissory
clauses, to protect the shared values of the international
community. That is the case of the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide of
1951 and other human rights instruments, as well as the
Vienna Conventions on Diplomatic Relations of 1961
and 1963. With regard to its effectiveness, the Court has
to rely on multilateral institutions, such as the United
Nations, to ensure compliance with its decisions. That
may be done by the Security Council under Article
94 of the Charter of the United Nations. It has been
done in the past by the Secretary-General, at his own
initiative, in the Land and Maritime Boundary between
Cameroon and Nigeria case (Cameroon v. Nigeria;
Equatorial Guinea intervening).
The decisions of the Court have made notable
contributions to multilateralism. Allow me to refer to
three of them very briefly.
First, the Court has developed and clarified the law
of treaties that makes multilateralism possible. It is the
Court that established the object and purpose test to
ascertain the permissibility and validity of reservations
to multilateral treaties, allowing a broad participation
in multilateral conventions without jeopardizing the
normative integrity of the Court’s provisions.
Secondly, the Court clarified in the advisory
opinion concerning reparation for injuries suffered
in the service of the United Nations that multilateral
organizations, such as the United Nations, enjoy an
international legal personality that is separate from
that of their member States. That decision of the Court
has strengthened the institutional pillars of multilateral
organizations, including the United Nations.
Thirdly and finally, the Court contributed to the
emergence of erga omnes obligations in international
law, whereby it distinguishes between legal obligations
owed to the international community as a whole and
those owed to individual States. In doing so, the Court
enabled all States parties to multilateral conventions to
serve as guardians of compliance with those rules.
To conclude, allow me to refer again to the advisory
opinion concerning reparation that I mentioned a moment
ago, in which the Court observed that throughout its
history, the development of international law has

18-368637/83

S/PV.8395

Maintenance of international peace and security

been influenced by the requirements of international
life and that the progressive increase in the collective
activities of States has already given rise to instances
of action at the international level. The requirements
of international life and the increase in the collective
activities of States, which the Court spoke of, reveal the
inadequacy of unilateral or bilateral actions to address
the challenges facing our increasingly interconnected
world. They also dictate the need for multilateral
cooperation in a diverse and complex range of areas
of common concern to humankind. It is that common
concern, recognized in many multilateral conventions,
together with the shared values we all hold dear, that
renders imperative the strengthening and consolidation
of the multilateral system and the rules and institutions
that underpin it.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank Judge
Yusuf for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of China.
I would like to begin by thanking Secretary-General
Guterres for participating in today’s meeting and for
his briefing. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Al-Thani, Ambassador King and Judge Yusuf for their
briefings.
Today, the heads of the main organs established
under the Charter of the United Nations are gathered
here in the Security Council Chamber. Together with
Member States, we are jointly sending a clarion call
in support of multilateralism, a stronger role for the
United Nations and the maintenance of international
peace and security. As such, this meeting carries an
important historical meaning.
As the President of the Security Council for this
month, China proposed the convening of today’s
open debate with a view to addressing the emerging
issues and challenges confronting international peace
and security in the current circumstances, as well as
exploring ways to strengthen multilateralism and the
role of the United Nations, uphold the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter, facilitate
the effective performance of the Council’s function
as a collective security mechanism, and advance the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The United Nations embodies humankind’s
aspirations for peace and development. More than 70
years ago, on the ruins of the Second World War, we built
8/83

09/11/2018

the international system, with the United Nations at its
centre. The world today is going through a new round of
profound development, as well as tectonic changes and
adjustments. The protracted and emerging geopolitical
flashpoints, the looming shadow of terrorism and armed
conflict, the proliferation of drivers of instability and
uncertainty, as well as increased risks and challenges
are all hallmarks of our times. As a result of the rise in
unilateralism and protectionism, the international order
and global governance system are under attack.
It is fitting to say that the world needs multilateralism
and a stronger United Nations more than ever. The need
to strengthen multilateralism and the role of the United
Nations is the consensus of the international community.
During the recent general debate of the seventy-third
session of the General Assembly, Member States took the
floor to call for supporting multilateralism, enhancing
the role of the United Nations and sustaining the rulesbased international order. During the general debate,
the President of the General Assembly, Ms. Espinosa
Garcés, stressed that multilateralism is the only viable
response to the global problems facing humankind,
and the Secretary-General stated that working together
multilaterally is not optional, but rather the only answer
(see A/73/PV.6). That shows that multilateralism is a
prevailing trend and the common aspiration of all
people, representing the right direction of history.
The most fundamental principle of multilateralism
is that international affairs should be handled on the
basis of consultation among States and in accordance
with agreed rules — a process in which the interests
and concerns of all States should be accommodated.
States should engage with one another in a spirit
of consultation, respect rules and order, and solve
problems collectively.
China is a founding Member of the United Nations
and was the first country to sign the Charter. China
has been steadfast in maintaining the purposes and
principles of the Charter and in safeguarding the central
role of the United Nations in international affairs.
When addressing the General Assembly during the
general debate in September 2015, Chinese President
Xi Jinping systematically elaborated the important
concept of building a community of shared future for
humankind, guiding the way to a brighter future for all
humankind (see A/70/PV.13).
Multilateralism is an effective way of maintaining
peace and promoting development. How can we uphold
18-36863

09/11/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

and champion multilateralism in the new era? China
wishes to offer the following proposals. We must abide
by the purposes and principles of the United Nations
Charter, honour our commitments, fulfil international
obligations, follow in good faith the rules collectively
defined by the international community, and comply
with international law and the basic norms governing
international relations. We must remain committed to
win-win cooperation.
We now live in a global village. Faced with
terrorism and other global challenges, no country can
cope with such phenomena on its own. We must deepen
multilateral cooperation in order to attain universal
and common security. Differences and disputes must
be resolved through peaceful and rational dialogue and
consultation. Dialogue and partnership should prevail
over confrontation and alliance. Solutions should
be found through diplomatic and political means.
We should advocate for a security concept featuring
common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable
security. We should insist that all countries, big and
small, are equal. We should respect the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and
increase the representation and voice of development
countries, as well as medium-sized and small States,
in international affairs. We should translate our
commitments to multilateralism into concrete actions,
solve practical problems, seek tangible results and bring
real benefits to the peoples of all countries.
The United Nations is the standard-bearer
of multilateralism. China staunchly supports
multilateralism and the maintenance of the authority
and role of the United Nations. We hope that the United
Nations will continue to uphold fairness and justice
and play a leading role in maintaining world peace,
promoting common development and, in particular,
bolstering global cooperation in addressing global
challenges, thereby making the United Nations relevant
to all people.
The Security Council, as the core of the international
collective security mechanism, bears the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Let us demonstrate unity, wisdom
and courage, effectively fulfil the solemn duty
entrusted to this organ by the United Nations Charter,
and give full play to the role of the Security Council.
We must redouble our efforts in political mediation and
good offices, scale up our cooperation with regional

S/PV. 8395

organizations, strengthen United Nations peacekeeping
operations, and give primacy to conflict prevention.
As a permanent member of the Security Council,
China maintains a consistent position of impartiality
with regard to international and regional hotspot issues,
and has put forward constructive proposals for the
political settlement of disputes. China is an important
troop-contributing country and the second-largest
financial contributor to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. At this very moment, more than 2,500
Chinese peacekeepers are vigilantly securing peace in
United Nations missions across the world.
Development is the basis for maintaining peace
and security. As the largest developing country, China
has been rigorously implementing the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and supporting and
stimulating the development of other countries while
pursuing its own growth. China’s plan to jointly develop
the Belt and Road Initiative with other countries is an
offering of public goods to the world. The Initiative is
underpinned by the principle of broad consultation,
joint contribution and shared benefits. It originated in
China and belongs to the world. Its developments will
benefit an increasing number of countries and peoples.
In conclusion, I would like to point out that China
remains committed to defending the international order
and to pursuing multilateralism. We stand ready to join
hands with all States to build a community of a shared
future for humankind and a more peaceful world, with
a better live and greater happiness for all people.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I now give the floor to those other members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): I align myself
with the statements to be delivered on behalf of the
European Union and the Nordic countries.
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this timely debate on a subject that engages
not only us at the United Nations but also communities
and people worldwide. As our world becomes
increasingly interconnected and interdependent, we
must constantly reflect on the fundamental purpose of
our cooperation here at the United Nations. Let me also
thank the Secretary-General and our other briefers this
morning.

18-368639/83

S/PV.8395

Maintenance of international peace and security

A rules-based international order and multilateral
cooperation, with the United Nations at its core,
are perhaps more important than ever. Those are
cornerstones of Swedish foreign policy, as well as the
Common Foreign and Security Policy of the European
Union. Multilateralism also represents an end in itself, as
it embodies humankind’s commitments to coexistence
and cooperation. Ultimately, multilateralism is how we
unite for peace and alleviate human suffering. However,
multilateralism and the United Nations are also
increasingly under pressure. Short-sighted and narrow
interests stand ready to exploit the Organization’s
shortcomings. Failure to deliver on our commitments
for peace, security and development risks turning them
into empty words, paving the way for cynicism and
polarization. The risks, challenges and threats of our
time require joint action. Climate change, weapons of
mass destruction, terrorism and violent extremism all
have consequences that go beyond the scope of any
single State. Multilateral cooperation is required. We
already have the norms and structures — we are now
living at a time for action and implementation.
Fortunately, the evidence is clear — we can do it if
we put our minds to it. The recent substantial multilateral
achievements — the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, the Paris Agreement and the sustaining
peace agenda — are all powerful illustrations of what
can be achieved through multilateral cooperation, as
are the rules-based multilateral world trade system
upheld by the World Trade Organization. Not least, we
have encouraging examples from all over the world,
where collaboration and cooperation on all issues,
from peacekeeping to climate action, have resulted in
a better life and hope for the future for so many. Such
achievements must never be degraded to mere ink on
paper. We owe it to the people to deliver results. Let me
highlight three key aspects that we believe need to be
the focus to strengthen multilateralism and the role of
the United Nations.
First, we must embrace prevention. For the Council
to be able to fulfil its task we need to act on the full
range of threats to international peace and security. We
need to be better at identifying risks and root causes
of conflicts, and we must ensure that our response
is comprehensive. Early warnings must also lead to
early action. A better understanding of climate-related
security risks is an obvious example.
The global norms against the use of weapons
of mass destruction are indispensable pillars of the
10/83

09/11/2018

global disarmament and non-proliferation regime that
protect us against the dangers of nuclear, biological and
chemical weapons and their horrific consequences for
humanity. The repeated use of chemical weapons and
worrying tendencies regarding nuclear capabilities and
doctrines paint an ominous picture. Safeguarding the
non-use norms must be an overarching priority and
remains a crucial component of prevention. To that
end, every effort must be made to ensure a successful
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons in 2020.
The Council should also stand behind the Securing
Our Common Future: An Agenda for Disarmament
initiative, launched earlier this year by the SecretaryGeneral, and increased high-level United Nations
engagement.
Secondly, we need to keep the Charter of the
United Nations and international law at the core of
our cooperation. The Charter of the United Nations
was drafted against the backdrop of a collapse of the
international order and a surge in nationalism, which
led to war and human suffering. Although the threats
look different today, the faith in humankind’s ability
to unite for peace and overcome differences remains
at the heart of multilateralism. We, the Members of
the United Nations, have already committed to the
principles of the Charter. It is contingent upon each
Member State to abide by and defend the rules-based
international order that it prescribes. In order to
effectively prevent and resolve threats to international
peace and security, cooperation continues to be the only
way forward. We must shoulder our joint responsibility
to uphold international law, including human rights.
It is no less vital today than 70 years ago. That is not
merely a question of political will but a legal obligation
to be fulfilled in good faith. Above all, it is a duty to
humanity.
The international legal system founded on human
rights, democracy and the principles of the rule of
law must be constantly defended. That has become
particularly clear in the light of the repressive and
reactionary trend that we see in several parts of the
world today, where in particular the protection and
promotion of human rights are increasingly being
called into question.
In the context of prevention, the provisions on
pacific settlement of disputes, as laid out in Chapter
VI of the Charter, also contain powerful instruments
to resolve disputes based on the rule of law and before
18-36863

09/11/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

they escalate into serious conflicts. The International
Court of Justice is fundamental to upholding and
clarifying the rules of international law, including its
role in maintaining and promoting the rule of law. As
a deterrent to international crimes and a force against
impunity, the International Criminal Court plays a key
role in preventing conflict.
Finally, we need a United Nations in tune with our
times that is relevant and legitimate to all. There is
no more effective way to build and maintain trust and
confidence in multilateralism and the United Nations
system than delivering concrete results in the areas of
peace, security and development where it matters the
most for the millions of women, men, boys and girls
who live in the shadow of war and poverty. The United
Nations system is a global public good, and it is in our
shared strategic interest to keep investing in it. The
long-term gains from doing so are far greater than any
short-term costs.
It is therefore imperative that we continue to
support the implementation of the Secretary-General’s
reforms of the United Nations system at a time when
they are needed more than ever. Those reforms offer
an unprecedented opportunity to make the United
Nations more flexible and effective and better equipped
to respond to current and emerging challenges. That
is the recipe for enhancing trust and confidence in
multilateralism. Not least, the ongoing reform process
is a key opportunity to ensure that a gender perspective
is integrated into all aspects of the work of the United
Nations system.
As members of the Security Council, we need to
do better in meeting our responsibilities under the
United Nations Charter to maintain international peace
and security. We need to work harder to overcome our
differences and come together in united responses to
effectively address the many difficult issues on our
agenda. Our working methods should be more resultsoriented and focus on taking meaningful decisions that
make a difference to people’s lives on the ground. That
is not only our responsibility under the Charter but also
to all members of the General Assembly. However,
first and foremost, we owe it to the people affected
by conflict, oppression, poverty and climate change
throughout the world.
To achieve that, all members of the Council must do
their utmost to ensure that it can fulfil its responsibility
as stipulated by the United Nations Charter. We call

S/PV. 8395

for a renewed discussion on limiting the use of the
veto, since its use is ultimately crippling the United
Nations. We also need a Council that better reflects the
realities of today’s world through enhanced African
representation, as well as Asian and Latin American
representation.
We also need a shift in narrative. We should not
only defend multilateralism but go on the offensive. Let
us enhance it so that it is utilized to its full potential.
We would like to encourage the Secretary-General to
continue his ambitious reform agenda and his focus
on bringing us together and truly work multilaterally
towards sustaining peace, the implementation of the
2030 Agenda and the Paris Agreement. Members can
count on Sweden’s continued firm commitment to
multilateralism and to the United Nations.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): I thank the Chinese
presidency for convening this timely open debate on
multilateralism, which represents one of the great
contributions of the United Nations to humankind. We
would like to express our appreciation to SecretaryGeneral António Guterres, Ms. Alya Ahmed Said
Al-Thani, Acting President of the General Assembly,
Ms. Inga Rhonda King, President of the Economic and
Social Council, and Judge Ahmed Yusuf, President of
the International Court of Justice, for their insightful
and frank briefings. My delegation would like to make
some comments on the following steps and measures
to strengthen multilateralism with a view to addressing
emerging threats.
We believe that we need to reinforce the principles
that govern international coexistence — global
leadership, shared responsibility and collective action.
Challenges such as protracted wars, unresolved
conflicts, terrorism, extremism, poverty, disease,
illicit migration, the instability of the humanitarian
space and climate change are beyond the scope of
any one nation. These problems are aggravated by
unpredictable regional and global insecurity, the
erosion of internationally legally binding norms,
external interference, proxy wars and the threat of the
use of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs). In that
regard, my country’s President, Nursultan Nazarbayev,
in his manifesto entitled “The World. The Twenty-First
Century”, called on world leaders to work jointly for a
just global economic and social order. He also urged
that we work to end all conflicts and terrorism, abolish
WMDs and eliminate other scourges by the time the
United Nations marks its centenary.

18-3686311/83

S/PV.8395

Maintenance of international peace and security

Kazakhstan is therefore committed to promoting
multilateralism and considers the United Nations to
be its core element. During its tenure on the Security
Council, my country has consistently sought to introduce
the best possible kind of multilateralism, transparency,
impartiality, honest brokerage, confidence-building
and partnerships — the hallmarks of our foreign
policy — into the Council’s day-to-day activities. We
have also prioritized the issues of nuclear energy and
water and food security in our work in the Council and
will do so beyond our term.
We also call on all to stand together for a rules-based
global order and safer world, adhering to the principles
and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations.
This is important in order to prevent international
norms from being torn apart by narrow, vested national
interests, distrust and geopolitical tensions. We stand
for a people-centred, egalitarian multilateralism that
leaves no one behind. We also advocate for empowering
women and young people, as well as expanding their
rights and opportunities, because we are confident that
they will lay the groundwork for conflict prevention
and sustainable development. Multilateralism must also
be invigorated by implementing the decisions taken in
Addis Ababa, Sendai, Paris and now Marrakech, as well
as in the framework of other global processes. That will
ensure not only early warnings of multifaceted threats
but also our ability to take early action to avert them.
Our outreach is particularly oriented towards building
capacities in least-developed and landlocked leastdeveloped countries and small island developing States.
In that context, we believe it is important to ensure
concerted international efforts to create just, resilient
and stable societies in vulnerable States, among other
things.
Multilateralism has to be innovative and
multidimensional. As far as possible, therefore, it must
include valuable forums that shape the rules of the
game, such as, for example, within the peacebuilding
architecture, across the areas of defence and security;
within the development system, through investments
by multilateral banks, trading and commerce; on the
humanitarian front; across the public health sector
and with non-State actors, such as religious leaders,
academics, the media and civil society, who can
exercise significant positive influence under each
and every United Nations pillar. We therefore need
people-to-people connectivity, not just across borders
but also transcending continents. This can lead us
12/83

09/11/2018

towards a community of a shared future for mankind,
as proposed by the Chinese presidency. Indeed, as the
Chinese proverb states,
“If you want one year of prosperity, grow grain.
If you want 10 years of prosperity, grow trees. If
you want 100 years of prosperity, grow people.”
We should also strive for close partnerships
of the United Nations with multilateral regional
arrangements, such as the Conference on Interaction and
Confidence-building Measures in Asia, the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization, the Collective Security
Treaty Organization, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe; the League of Arab States, the
African Union, the European Union, the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, the Organization of American
States, the Caribbean Community and other
international bodies. That is necessary to strengthen
these existing platforms for regional and subregional
dialogues on security. Through that, we must shape
harmonization in policymaking and dialogue for
development aid, as well as assistance in implementing
regional programmes. Such interaction is important,
because nowadays regional and subregional structures
play key roles in reforming the United Nations systems,
particularly its peacekeeping and peacebuilding
architecture.
The field visits of the Security Council and
its Committees to the Lake Chad basin, the Sahel,
the Horn of Africa, Afghanistan, Haiti, Colombia,
Bangladesh, Myanmar and, recently, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, have indicated the significance
of the three-pronged strategy that Kazakhstan
introduced. It consists in strengthening the securitydevelopment nexus, revamping and invigorating the
regional approach and utilizing the United Nations
principles of Delivering as One. This strategy, which
will complement the Secretary-General’s reforms, was
approved by the Council in its presidential statement
S/PRST/2018/1. In the future, we intend to continue
expanding and developing that strategy to incorporate
it into wider United Nations operations, among other
things. We also underline the importance of the
presidency’s Belt and Road Initiative in that regard.
International terrorism cannot be defeated without
a coordinated response and approach. That is why
Kazakhstan launched a code of conduct aimed at
helping to achieve a world free of terrorism with an
inaugural high-level event and signing ceremony held
18-36863

09/11/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

at United Nations Headquarters on 28 September. The
document coalesced like-minded Member States around
the call to honour their commitments to implementing
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
and other instruments. In Central Asia, working in
close collaboration with United Nations entities such
as the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia, the Office of CounterTerrorism and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, we have launched the third
phase of our regional joint action plan for implementing
the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, for which we
were the first country to become a donor, voluntarily
contributing 10 per cent of the plan’s overall budget and
sending it to the United Nations.
Kazakhstan has proven itself to be a moral leader
in nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation and as an
act of multilateralism with its neighbours, created the
nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central Asia. Our country,
which is among those that have been most affected by
the tragic consequences of nuclear tests, is making
enormous efforts to reach global zero and is enabling
cooperation among the nuclear-weapon-free zones. Our
story clearly tells the world that true protection comes
not from nuclear weapons but from mutual trust. It also
means that multilateralism will move forward if we can
break the impasse in the Conference on Disarmament
and the Disarmament Commission, as well as at the
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
It is evident that Kazakhstan has contributed to
multilateralism in innumerable ways, the most recent
being the deployment of 120 well-qualified peacekeepers
to the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, as
part of an Indian battalion. We are proud that this
innovative deployment occurred during Kazakhstan’s
non-permanent membership of the Security Council.
We express our gratitude to our Indian colleagues, as
well as to the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Department of Field Support.
To conclude, Kazakhstan intends to join
other Member States in rallying for the defence of
multilateralism. We reiterate that it is only through
our collective will and solidarity that we can turn this
world in crisis into a planet of hope and great promise.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank you, Mr. President,
and the Chinese presidency for organizing today’s

S/PV. 8395

discussion on issues related to strengthening the
principles of multilateralism. The proposed theme is
highly relevant, as it enables us to critically take stock
of the state of international relations and to discuss ways
to overcome the systemic problems it has accumulated.
We thank the Secretary-General, António Guterres, for
his assessment, and Ms. Inga Rhonda King, President
of the Economic and Social Council, Ms. Al-Thani,
Acting President of the General Assembly, and Judge
Abdulqawi Ahmed Yusuf for their briefings.
Our world today is undergoing a period of profound
changes that are leading to the creation of a polycentric
international system. Thanks to the global activation
of cross-border economic ties and the acceleration of
scientific and technological progress, new centres of
economic growth and political influence are gaining
traction. They are seeking broader participation in
international affairs and striving to create independent
domestic and foreign policies that correspond to their
national interests and to choose development models
that reflect their national, cultural and religious
identities. Those trends are only going to grow.
In the circumstances, the significance of
multilateral diplomacy mechanisms, the joint quest for
responses to common threats and challenges and the
provision of collective leadership is also growing. The
role of the United Nations and its Security Council as a
central organ for world policy, as well as that of flexible
global governance formats such as the Group of 20, is
increasing, as is the importance of integrated regional
and interregional associations. However, the desire of
most States to strengthen the polycentric foundations of
the global order is clashing with some players’ attempts
to preserve their global dominance in order to gain
unilateral advantages. They have no inhibitions about
circumventing the United Nations and the Security
Council and taking a selective approach to meeting
their international legal obligations. They declare
themselves to be multilateral but label those who do
not agree with their policies and methods revisionists
and opponents of multilateralism. In other words, they
recognize multilateralism only on their own conditions.
One need not look far for examples of breaches of
multilateralism. The basic principles of the settlement
in the Middle East, the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action on the Iranian nuclear programme, the
commitments under the World Trade Organization and
the multilateral Paris Agreement on Climate Change
and the key disarmament agreements for strategic

18-3686313/83

S/PV.8395

Maintenance of international peace and security

stability are all under attack, along with many others.
As a result, the international law that the post-war
world order was founded on is being devalued. We
hear statements trumpeted that not only call into
question the legal force of international treaties but
also prioritize narrow, unilateral approaches above
decisions taken within the United Nations framework,
among other things. Within the United Nations,
we have already drawn attention to the fact that our
Western colleagues are relentlessly trying to replace
the primacy of international law in world affairs with
some kind of rules-based order. Those very rules are
devised based on political expediency and are a clear
example of double standards.
A similar approach is being used to impose sanctions
on annoying States, declare trade wars and stoke
tensions in international relations, while the reasons
given for such measures are becoming increasingly farfetched, whether for alleged interference in elections
or unsubstantiated accusations of the use of chemical
weapons and other such sins. In order to accuse
somebody of something today, it seems to be considered
sufficient to add the phrase “highly likely”. No evidence
is necessary and the accused’s views are of no interest
to the accusers. While such methods are not new, they
are now front and centre. But we well remember how
many times false pretexts have been used to justify
interventions and unleash wars. We need only recall
the bombing of Yugoslavia in 1999, the occupation of
Iraq in 2003 under openly lying pretexts whose legacy
continues to be a heavy burden on Iraqis, and the crude
manipulation of the Security Council’s mandate in
Libya in 2011, which resulted in destruction and chaos
that still continue. The same methods continue to be
used against Syria today. These unilateral military
actions have plunged the Middle East and North Africa
into chaos and created a breeding ground for rampant
extremism and terrorism.
There are disturbing attempts to drag some countries
into military alliances against the will of their peoples,
while other States are threatened with punishment for
freely choosing their partners and allies. In the Balkans
in particular, the States of the region are being promised
future happiness and insistently dragged into NATO,
with invocations of the inadmissibility of meddling
in their internal affairs actually accompanied by
shameless interference. This kind of bloc mindset only
produces additional threats to international security
and is ruinous for the principles of multilateralism.
14/83

09/11/2018

We are seeing the space for constructive international
cooperation contracting, confrontations growing,
unpredictability generally increasing, nuclear doctrines
being revised and the threshold for the acceptability of
the use of nuclear weapons lowered, with a significant
rise in the risk of spontaneous conflicts, and of course
all of that affects the activities of the United Nations.
In the next few days we will be commemorating
the 100th anniversary of the end of the First World
War. That was a strange war, which seemed to begin
by itself. Its protagonists and participants could not
even imagine the horrific disaster that would follow or
the fact that the First World War would spawn an even
greater disaster, the Second World War. The situation
today compels us to examine those historical lessons
cautiously and to hope that such scenes of reckless,
unbridled spiralling, catastrophic confrontation will
not be repeated.
In the wake of the Second World War, we founded
this Organization. For the first time in history, the
principles of multilateralism were enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations, establishing a workable
mechanism for global governance through the
harmonization of States’ positions. The key elements
for a polycentric world order were outlined, along
with the basic principles and norms of international
relations, from the sovereign equality of States and the
prohibition of interference in their internal affairs to
the ban on the use of force in international relations
without the permission of the Security Council or
beyond the limits of self-defence.
We also want to point out that according to
the Charter, the use of sanctions mechanisms is
the exclusive prerogative of the Security Council.
Unilateral restrictions and attempts to apply national
legislation extraterritorially are illegitimate, lead only
to increased confrontations in international affairs and
make the collective quest for solutions to emerging
problems harder. Moreover, as practice has shown, such
measures are ineffective as well as illegal.
In order to avoid further complicating the
international situation, it is important to uphold
international law — the law proper, not some rule or
other — including the Charter, State sovereignty and
respect for one another’s cultural and civilizational
specificities — and to strive for cooperation, not
confrontation. We must all acknowledge that our
peoples have the right to independently determine their
18-36863

09/11/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

own future without outside interference in their internal
affairs. We will see positive results when States unite
their efforts in the interests of mutually beneficial
and respectful cooperation. That is the only approach
that can produce dividends for all the members of the
international community and a fair, democratic and
harmonious world order.
We hope that today’s discussions will develop into
a serious conversation about the role of the United
Nations, a crucial and key mechanism for regulating
modern international relations.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, and the SecretaryGeneral and all the briefers. In a short time I will be
leaving the Security Council and my post as United
States Ambassador to the United Nations. My service
here has been a great honour and I will miss it. I am
grateful to have the opportunity to discuss the purposes
of multilateralism and what we can do to make the
United Nations a more effective instrument for the
common good.
The American people believe deeply in the
principles of peace, security and human rights enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations. For that reason,
the United States is by far the largest contributor to the
United Nations budget. Our support for multilateralism
at the United Nations has not been limited to rhetoric.
It has been concrete, in both our words and our deeds.
Year in and year out, the United States contributes
20 per cent of the funding of the United Nations system.
United States taxpayers in places like Oklahoma, Idaho
and Minnesota provide 25 per cent of the $7-billion
budget for the United Nations peacekeeping operations
thousands of miles away in Kinshasa, Juba, Pristina
and elsewhere. Those same taxpayers contribute
more than 35 per cent of the funding for the World
Food Programme, the world’s largest multilateral
humanitarian organization. We contribute 13 per cent
of the funding that allows UNICEF to help children
worldwide. United States taxpayers shoulder 42 per cent
of the burden of paying for the work of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
The vast size of financial support that the
United States gives the United Nations illustrates the
seriousness with which we take that work and our
commitment. But I will be honest. There are times when
the American people question their generous support
to the United Nations. There are times when we are

S/PV. 8395

tempted to believe that multilateralism has been a bad
deal for the United States and that we could be more
effective by advancing our principles and interests on
our own. And there are times when that conclusion is
correct. It is not that the American people are cheap.
It is not that we are selfish — quite the contrary, we
are a blessed nation. A representative from an African
country recently lectured me and quoted a passage from
the Bible. He said that to whom much is given, much
is expected. That is certainly true, and the American
people have given much. But multilateralism requires
that we all contribute and that we all work together
for the common good. Everyone has skin in the game
and everyone should ultimately benefit. The American
people have no expectation of always getting our own
way, but we do have a legitimate expectation to get a
return on our investment in multilateralism.
We do not regard that work as charity. It is our
contribution to the advancement of peace, security and
human rights in every region of the world. When we
all contribute and work towards those goals, this body
can accomplish great things. North Korea is a good
example. The Security Council achieved remarkable
unity while taking real action. We sanctioned the
Pyongyang regime more completely than any country
in a generation. That is a credit to the Council and
its members. No other multilateral forum could have
achieved that kind of unity. Peacekeeping is another
good example. We are more effective when we work to
ensure peace as a global community. Together, we can
build the trust and impartiality necessary to mediate
conflict and protect innocent civilians.
But multilateralism is not good in and of itself. It
is a means to an end. It is neither good nor bad; only
its goals are good or bad. And multilateralism fails
when it fails to support the goals of peace, security and
human rights. When the General Assembly gives the
barbaric Cuban regime a pass for violating the rights of
the Cuban people just to poke the United States in the
eye, that is a failure of multilateralism. Action like that
does not seek to protect human rights; it seeks to shelter
authoritarian regimes from criticism on human rights.
It is not worthy of the time or the attention of the United
Nations, and it is certainly not worthy of the support of
the American people.
When the Human Rights Council hosts some of
the world’s most flagrant human rights offenders and
gives them cover for their abuses, that is a failure of
multilateralism. When countries invoke sovereignty

18-3686315/83

S/PV.8395

Maintenance of international peace and security

when it suits them but ignore it when it does not, that
is a failure of multilateralism. That is a failure to work
together toward the common good. One of my goals
as United States Ambassador has been to show the
American people value for their investment in the United
Nations. That has meant working to prove improve the
efficiency of our peacekeeping missions, mitigate the
North Korean nuclear threat and put human rights at the
centre of the work of the Council, among many other
things. It has also meant more practical things, such as
taking a hard look at where our foreign aid is serving
United States interests and values and where it is not.
Our aid dollars should not be on autopilot. They should
go to where they can do the most good and where we
can expect cooperation and friendship in return.
Showing value to the American people for their
support of multilateralism also means rebalancing how
we finance the United Nations and our peacekeeping
operations. Next month, we will have an important
decision to take on how we distribute the costs of
peacekeeping. The United States is currently assessed
a disproportionate share of those costs — even for us.
Our contribution of 25 per cent of the peacekeeping
budget is more than fair. Insisting on more, especially
when other nations’ assessments are so low, only erodes
support for the United Nations. I urge everyone to
support more equitable burden-sharing when it comes
to the financing of peacekeeping. That is not just a
question of fairness; it is a question of the ongoing
success of multilateralism itself. Support for collective
action falters when its burdens fail to match its benefits,
and no multilateral work, no matter how worthy its
goals are, can continue in the long term when it takes
its most generous donors for granted.
I know I have spoken some hard truths this morning,
but I have done so out of my obligation to reflect the
American people’s sincere belief in this institution’s
founding purpose. When we work in the true spirit of
multilateralism — the spirit of principled objectives,
shared burdens and respect — this institution is capable
of great things. The United States looks forward to
many more successful years of collaboration with the
United Nations in support of peace, security and human
rights for all people in the world.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We
would like at the outset to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this open debate on strengthening
multilateralism at a very important time in our
world today. We also thank the Chinese delegation
16/83

09/11/2018

for preparing the concept paper for this meeting
(S/2018/982, annex).
We thank Secretary-General António Guterres for
his valuable statement. We also thank the Representative
of the State of Qatar, Ms. Alya Al-Thani, who delivered
a statement on behalf of the President of the General
Assembly; Ms. Inga Rhonda King, the President of the
Economic and Social Council; and Judge Abdulqawi
Ahmed Yousef, the President of the International Court
of Justice, for their briefings today. This has been a rare
and important opportunity to listen to all the Presidents
of those organs of the United Nations.
Our world today is facing conventional and
contemporary challenges. The threats we face are
transnational and more complicated and interlinked
than ever before, as a result of the information
technology revolution and significant advances in
technology, communications and transportation.
Threats to international peace and security are ongoing
and have unfortunately been on the rise in recent years.
We see that especially in the Middle East, where a
number of countries are enduring security and political
instability. The threat of terrorism is a daily reality,
and no region around the world is safe from its evils.
The consequences of armed conflict in one region are
now capable of having political, security, economic and
humanitarian implications for other, safe countries in the
world. All those consequences may come to be if we do
not address them with radical solutions. Humanitarian
disasters and the migrant and refugee crises arising
from armed conflicts at the intra-State and inter-State
levels are a case in point. All those challenges and more
that are confronting our world today require collective
action. International challenges require international
solutions. No one country, regardless of its size, military
or economic strength, can address those challenges
alone.
Multilateralism is at the core of the global system
that we all accepted when we established the United
Nations, over seven decades ago. The cornerstone of
that multilateral global system is the Charter of the
United Nations, which is considered an instrument of
international law and establishes a clear framework to
govern relations between countries. All Member States
must commit to the Charter and its noble purposes and
principles, in words and deeds.
The Charter of the United Nations is as relevant as
ever today. It is the basis of our collective security system
18-36863

09/11/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

and provides different tools to deal with challenges
in a collective and efficient manner. Much has been
accomplished pursuant to the provisions of the Charter.
However, we must recognize that the aspirations as set
out in the purposes and principles — such as living in
peace and security without violence — continue to be
elusive.
We must work in a collective and unified manner
to contain violence and aggression, build friendly
relations between countries, respect the principles of
sovereignty and non-interference in the internal affairs
of others, promote equal rights, uphold the right of
peoples to self-determination and encourage respect
for human rights.
The State of Kuwait is strongly committed to the
Charter. During our presidency of the Security Council
in February, we held a high-level meeting on the Charter
of the United Nations and its role in maintaining
international peace and security. The meeting was an
opportunity to build on what was discussed in previous
meetings on this topic, including the meeting held by
China during its presidency of the Council in February
2015 (see S/PV.7389).
As we talk about multilateralism and the role of
the United Nations, allow me to recall the process of
liberating the State of Kuwait in 1991. That is considered
an example that shows what can be accomplished when
the international community works together under the
auspices of the United Nations and through legitimate
resolutions adopted by the Security Council to support
the rule of law, righteousness and justice. The process
of liberating the State of Kuwait is a historic model
of the concept of collective security and a successful
embodiment of multilateralism and the role of the
United Nations in stopping aggression that was a blatant
and clear violation of international law and the Charter.
In this month back in 1990, the Security Council
adopted resolution 678 (1990), which granted the
previous regime in Iraq until 15 January 1991 to
withdraw from the State of Kuwait; otherwise all
the necessary means were to be used to restore
international peace and security. After that bitter
invasion, it has been proven that the first line of
defence of small countries such as the State of Kuwait
is a global multilateral system based on law and justice
that guarantees the rights, safety and security of small
countries. We believe that it is necessary to enhance
their representation in United Nations organs, given

S/PV. 8395

that the majority of United Nations Members are small
countries.
We are concerned about the increasing trend of
questioning the value of multilateralism and about
measures taken by certain countries through their
unilateral policies that place their narrow national
interests above the public interest. That is undermining
the international order that we have known since the
end of the Second World War.
The State of Kuwait truly believes in the importance
of multilateralism at the regional and international
levels. We also believe in the importance of promoting
collective action among countries and partnerships
with regional organizations to reach solutions to the
challenges in our region and in the wider world.
In that regard, the United Nations plays an important
role in leading global action to confront such challenges,
including international humanitarian action to alleviate
the suffering of people from armed conflicts and natural
disasters, while effectively contributing to regional
and international efforts to resolve conflicts through
peaceful means, including preventive diplomacy and
mediation; ensuring the non-proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction; achieving the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development; as well as confronting the
consequences of climate change and enhancing human
rights and the rule of law. We cannot achieve any
progress in those matters, or others if we do not engage
in collective action and constructive dialogue.
I would like to renew our support to the vision of the
Secretary-General on reforming the peace and security
pillars at the Secretariat. We support his annual report
on the work of the Organization (A/73/1) where he
stressed the importance of multilateralism. I also want
to quote from the statement of the Secretary-General
before world leaders, during the general debate of the
General Assembly in September, where he summarized
the state of our world today:
(spoke in English)
“The world is more connected, yet societies are
becoming more fragmented. Challenges are
growing outward, while many people are turning
inward. And multilateralism is under fire precisely
when we need it most.” (A/73/PV.6, p. 1)

18-3686317/83

S/PV.8395

Maintenance of international peace and security

(spoke in Arabic)
In conclusion, we call on the international
community, especially the Security Council, to make
more effort and enhance constructive partnerships and
collective action to confront the political, security,
economic and humanitarian challenges facing our
world, and we also underscore that we cannot do that
effectively unless we do it together in the context of
multilateralism.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I want to thank SecretaryGeneral António Guterres for his informative and
timely briefing. I would also like to acknowledge
China’s initiative in convening today’s open debate
on strengthening multilateralism and the role of the
United Nations. Allow me to congratulate Ambassador
Al-Thani, Ambassador King and Judge Yusuf for their
contributions to our discussion.
I would also like to align myself with the statement
to be delivered later by the observer of the European
Union
Let me concentrate on three issues that Poland
finds as particularly vital for strengthening
multilateralism — the global rules-based order, the
role of regional organizations and adjusting the current
challenges to the global system by addressing new
threats to peace and security.
Poland seeks partnerships with all actors interested
in building a multipolar world. Strengthening effective
multilateralism and promoting a global rules-based
order have been and remain our priorities. Our input
to supporting multilateralism is embodied in our
membership of the Security Council.
This year for the third time, Poland will host
the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP). We
will host the COP24 in Katowice, where we will gather
to ensure the effective implementation of the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change. The full and effective
implementation of the Paris Agreement is inextricably
linked to the implementation of the United Nations
Sustainable Development Goals. For that reason, global
climate action should comprise the economic, social
and ecological dimensions.
Cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations is critical in ensuring that the multilateral
world order works and can be beneficial for all. From
our perspective, the European Union remains as one of
18/83

09/11/2018

the best examples of a successful multilateral project.
After centuries of with bloody conflicts, the European
community enjoys a peaceful and most prosperous
period in its history. Year after year, generations of
young people from the 28 countries of the European
Union can now study abroad and learn about new
cultures, thereby fostering understanding and respect.
Poland is a strong supporter of the strategic
partnership between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations, in particular in Africa.
Therefore, we welcome the progress made in the United
Nations-African Union partnership over the past couple
of years. During that time, the African Union has taken
on important responsibilities and its role in promoting
peace and security has only expanded. We appreciate
the ownership that it has constantly showed not only in
tackling crises, but also in bringing together subregional
organizations in a joint effort to ensure peace, stability
and the development of the African continent.
Words of support for multilateralism are welcomed
and much-needed, but it is through our collective action
that we can really make a difference. A world order
based on law is a pillar of effective multilateralism.
The same rules must apply equally everywhere and
to everyone. Everyone should have equal rights and
equally proportional duties. The reform of the Security
Council, which we support and in which we want to
participate, should be about increasing the area of equal
rights and competencies of all members of the Council.
It is important that multilateralism serve a certain
system of values and not be only a part of political
technology and the game of interests. That system of
values is enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.
Multilateralism should be a commitment to the
observance of values, such as respect for dignity and
human life. It is about values that go beyond the political
order and are not subject to a political definition, because
they are the foundation of the political order in the
world. Wherever basic human rights and fundamental
freedoms are being systematically and widely violated
and abuse, and whenever international crimes are
being committed or weapons of mass destruction are
used, the Security Council cannot remain idle. It is
our responsibility to respond quickly and decisively.
We should never forget about the triad constituting the
foundation of the United Nations, which are interlinked
and equally important — peace and security, human
rights and development.
18-36863

09/11/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

There are significant new threats and challenges to
international peace and security that were unknown to,
or underestimated by, the founders of the United Nations
in 1945. Terrorism, foreign fighters, violent extremism,
cyberattacks, refugees flows, uncontrolled migration
and information warfare, as well as transnational
organized crime, have all undermined global stability.
Moreover, we see powerful and determined non-State
actors who have no respect for the norms of international
law and human rights. The world has become more
interrelated in terms of communication, trade and
economic interdependence. There is no way to tackle
all of those issues in an effective way unilaterally and
achieve a sustainable outcome. No single State can go it
alone. Only together can we make a difference.
We continue to strongly support the SecretaryGeneral’s initiatives to make the United Nations
delivery more effective and efficient on the ground,
as well as his constant push to promote prevention and
mediation. Conflict prevention and crisis management
through mediation are one of the founding principles of
the United Nations, and we cannot overemphasize its
significance to multilateral diplomacy.

S/PV. 8395

The foundation of multilateralism is international
law. The rule of law is in its DNA, as opposed to the
law of the strongest and the law of the jungle. Respect
for the law is at the heart of the Charter of the United
Nations, together with, first and foremost, human
rights — in one month, we will celebrate the seventieth
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights — international humanitarian law and, more
generally, all obligations arising from treaties and
under international law, in particular Security Council
resolutions. The practice of multilateralism consists
in the collective approach to crises with major global
repercussions. As the concept paper (S/2018/982, annex)
circulated by the presidency points out, a collective
and cooperative approach to the peaceful settlement of
disputes is the very essence of the United Nations. Our
commitment is based on the conviction that collective
responses to our shared problems is more effective
than a set of disparate unilateral responses, or, to put it
another way, in the face of today’s global challenges, the
juxtaposition of nationalisms can lead only to disaster
for everyone. Based on experience, France believes that
the precept of the whole being greater than the sum of
its parts resides at the heart of multilateralism.

Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by expressing France’s heartfelt thanks to
the Chinese presidency. Your initiative, Sir, to convene
the members of Security Council, as well as all Member
States, to meet on the issue of multilateralism in defence
of the United Nations is particularly welcome given
the threats facing the multilateral system. I also thank
all those who are speaking today and, above all, the
Secretary-General for his unwavering commitment and
the important perspectives that he just provided, which
must inspire our work.

The advantage of multilateralism lies in its
effectiveness to provide concrete responses to crises
and major world issues, which holds truer than ever in
an increasingly multipolar world, which by definition is
more complex to deal with. A multipolar world therefore
makes multilateralism even more imperative at a moment
when a rationale based on power is weakening its very
principles. Let us make no mistake: the only alternative
to multilateralism in a multipolar world is a return to
one consisting of spheres of influence, of which history
has taught us the great dangers. Multilateralism and the
United Nations are at a crossroads today.

The international order that was built on the resolve
to leave the horrors of the first half of the twentieth
century behind us and that has been consolidated over
the course of more than 70 years must not be taken for
granted. That would be a big mistake. As the SecretaryGeneral alluded to, opposing currents undeniably have
never been as strong as they are now since the end of
the Second World War. This fragile edifice, with the
United Nations at its core, is needed more than ever
in facing today’s challenges. But it must evolve and be
comprehensively reformed if it is to be able to meet
them and stand up to the criticism and even attacks
levelled against it.

My second point is the fact that the threats facing
the international order, which we have inherited, must
be taken extremely seriously. In some cases, they feed
on our failures, but they result far less from the system’s
failure than from that of its members — their inability to
unite in the Security Council and their failure to act on
issues such as human rights violations, including women
and children’s rights, impunity for the most serious
crimes and the absence of women’s representation and
participation in political processes, as well as climate
change and famine, which are closely linked to issues
relating to peace and security and will lead to future
crises. Similarly, the world sees the attitude of every

18-3686319/83

S/PV.8395

Maintenance of international peace and security

Council member with regard to the issue of Syria, and
the obstacles or support that they provide in dealing with
that country’s conflict within the framework that we set
up for ourselves through resolution 2254 (2015) and the
Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex). However,
such threats are also fuelled by a more fundamental
challenge. It is the challenge posed to the legal and
political principles of multilateralism in the name of
national sovereignty; to the institutions and functioning
of the United Nations, including negotiation and
compromise; and to agreements that have been signed,
such as the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and
the 2015 Iranian nuclear deal. With regard to the risks
posed to multilateralism, a collective surge is needed at
a few major levels. And that is the third point I would
like to raise.
First of all, as President Macron reminded the
General Assembly, the principle of State sovereignty
is not at odds with the universality of our principles,
the requirements of the rule of law or with effective
multilateralism. That point is crucial and is a core
principle of the Charter of the United Nations. The
sovereign equality of States is the foundation on which
the United Nations is built. It is the first principle
listed in the Charter. Before that, the Charter outlines
the purposes of the United Nations: the maintenance
of international peace and security, the promotion of
peace, cooperation and respect for human rights. That
means that there is no contradiction between respect
for sovereignty and the effective implementation of
our principles. To make that point even clearer: respect
for State sovereignty does not mean handing over the
Syrian people to the regime’s goodwill or ignoring the
fate of the Rohingyas in Burma.
Secondly, promoting and strengthening regional
cooperation is an essential part of multilateralism, and
Chapter VIII of the Charter provides for complementary
United Nations action. The strengthening of relations
between the United Nations and the European Union
and between the United Nations and the African Union,
action in support of African peace operations or the
deployment of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for
the Sahel force and its coordination with the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali consistently reflects the vital regional
and subregional dimension. In that regard, I would like
to highlight the Secretary-Generals’ commitment to
those various areas.
20/83

09/11/2018

Thirdly, with regard to the major challenges we
will all face in the future, it is the United Nations
system, together with each one of us, that must provide
the right responses. Whether it is economic and social
inequalities, equality between women and men,
sustainable development, environmental protection and
the fight against climate change or issues related to
education, health or migration, artificial intelligence,
social networks and cybersecurity, we must continue
to create regulation and cooperation methods and rules
of law that will ensure a better future for our societies.
To succeed, now more than ever, the multilateralism
we value must be creative, open to civil society actors,
plugged into the technological revolution under way
and constantly in the process of reinventing itself. We
achieved it through the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the silent revolution to reach the
Sustainable Development Goals. France will pursue
that goal by focusing its 2019 presidency of the Group
of Seven on combating inequality. On the other hand,
we realize that reverting to the notion of every man for
himself would mean simply giving up and preparing for
future crises.
Fourthly, the system’s ability to evolve will
determine its effectiveness in meeting the challenges
of this century. Multilateral institutions must undergo
reform and, in many cases, are doing so. However, we
cannot accept their legitimacy or funding being called
into question in the name of an ideological approach.
The Human Rights Council, the International Criminal
Court, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and UNESCO
play an indispensable role that we must protect and
strengthen. If our framework for action is to retain
its legitimacy over time, we must develop and adapt
it. I would therefore like to reiterate France’s support
for the reform the Secretary-General has initiated
in three areas: the peace and security architecture,
the development system and the management of
the United Nations. We will defend expanding both
member categories of the Security Council so that its
composition reflects today’s balances of power, remains
legitimate in everyone’s eyes and is strengthened as a
forum for consultation rather than obstruction. In the
same spirit, France, along with Mexico, is taking the
initiative — now supported by 101 Member States and
could be implemented without delay — to suspend the
use of the veto in cases of mass atrocities. We call on all
States Members of the United Nations, in particular the
18-36863

09/11/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

other four permanent members of the Security Council,
to join our initiative.
Given the considerable increase in the number
of crises and global challenges, we do not have the
right to simply yield to the temptation to withdraw
and opt for unilateralism. Future generations will not
forgive us, and they would be quite right not to do so.
Multilateralism is a common good, whose positive
effects are not always properly perceived or explained.
Criticizing the United Nations — otherwise referred
to here as UN-bashing — often guarantees a hollow
victory. It is so much easier to do that than to work to
strengthen the United Nations, but it is at odds with
France’s demanding and humanist approach. France
calls on all of its partners to recommit to the United
Nations within a framework of renewed and exacting
multilateralism, while working together and employing
what our Foreign Minister, Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian,
refers to as goodwill powers. Such commitment is at
the heart of France’s identity and action. That is why
President Macron will host the Paris Peace Forum in two
days’ time in Paris, which will bring together all global
governance stakeholders — Governments, institutions,
civil society actors and citizens — to discuss major
global issues and develop collective responses together.
That is the challenge for our generation.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): On
behalf of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, let me
express our sincere thanks to China for organizing
today’s debate on such a timely and important topic,
which is very relevant for building a safe, just and
prosperous future for all. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General and the briefers for setting the stage
for today’s important debate.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself
with the statement to be made by the observer of the
European Union.
On 11 November, we will commemorate the end
of First World War. The horrors of that war and of the
Second World War still reverberate today. The lessons
we have drawn from them have become part of our
shared history and are at the basis of our common
endeavour to prevent global conflict at all costs.
I will focus my intervention on three issues:
multilateralism, United Nations reform and the
importance of upholding international principles and
rules.

S/PV. 8395

Multilateralism is the only credible answer to
the challenges we face today, such as climate change,
migration, transnational crime and terrorism. We cannot
address those challenges unilaterally or bilaterally; we
need to tackle them together by using the international
organizations and forums we created for that purpose
and by finding common ground. However, we are
witnessing a trend, including in the Security Council,
where the multilateral approach is being challenged
and undermined. It is a worrisome trend. When the
multilateral system becomes paralysed, especially in
the context of international peace and security, it is
innocent people who suffer.
Too often, the Security Council fails to act.
Examples of such failure can be found in Syria, Yemen
and Myanmar. In the absence of action, ordinary
citizens become victims, and impunity reigns.
The situation in Syria has been a stark reminder of a
crisis of respect for the hard-won gains in international
law — from the Geneva Conventions to the Charter
of the United Nations and to the Chemical Weapons
Convention. All of those norms have been trampled
upon in Syria. In such a case, the primary responsibility
rests with the Security Council. In the event of mass
atrocities, a Council paralysed by the use of the veto
will lead to its being circumvented, thereby weakening
its position and undermining the multilateral order. It
is for that reason that we support the French-Mexican
initiative. It is our obligation as States Members of the
United Nations to make sure the multilateral system
works, which brings me to my second point: United
Nations reform.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands strongly supports
the efforts of the Secretary-General to reform the
United Nations in order to make the Organization fit
to meet the challenges of today’s rapidly changing
world throughout the three pillars of the United
Nations — peace and security, development and human
rights. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
is an important guide in that regard.
The overall aim is to strengthen the role of the
United Nations where possible and to continuously
renew our commitment to the United Nations Charter,
in particular in the Security Council. In order to deal
effectively with peace and security challenges, all
members should shoulder their responsibilities. We are
convinced that the world stands to gain from a Security
Council that is more agile and effective in its operations

18-3686321/83

S/PV.8395

Maintenance of international peace and security

and whose composition is a better reflection of today’s
world.
On peacekeeping reform, we strongly support the
Secretary-General’s initiatives to make the United
Nations delivery on the ground more effective and
efficient, such as through the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative, with its emphasis on performance.
Constructive multilateralism can also entail supporting
new initiatives and forms of cooperation, for example, by
working more closely with such regional organizations
as the European Union and the African Union. Building
on their resources, expertise and legitimacy, the United
Nations can strengthen its role in dealing with crises
throughout the conflict cycle, from prevention before
conflict to sustaining peace after conflict.
I come now to my third point, namely, upholding
international principles and rules. The Kingdom of
the Netherlands has always championed, and will
continue to champion, the rules-based international
order and multilateral cooperation, especially on
security matters and other issues of shared concern.
Upholding the rule of law, ensuring accountability,
promoting and protecting international humanitarian
law and international human rights law, including the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights that binds us
all, are vital to the legitimacy of the United Nations
and multilateralism. There can be no lasting peace
without justice. Multilateral cooperation on peace and
security requires cooperation across the board in the
whole United Nations, including on human rights and
the Human Rights Council, on fighting poverty and
climate change and on international law and courts.
I would like to end by referring to a line from the
statement made by my Prime Minister, Mr. Mark Rutte,
at the general debate of the seventy-third session of the
General Assembly: we should believe in the power of
principle, not the principle of power (see A/73/PV.9).
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation fully aligns itself with the
statement to be made by Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed
on behalf of the African Union.
First of all, our delegation congratulates the
People’s Republic of China on having included this
very important topical issue for an open debate in its
programme of work.
We followed with great interest the important
statement made by Secretary-General António
22/83

09/11/2018

Guterres, as well as those made by Ambassador Alya
Ahmed Saif Al-Thani, Ms. Inga Rhonda King and
Judge Abdulqawi Ahmed Yusuf.
I would like to begin this statement on behalf of the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea by stressing that modern
international relations must make the effort to track the
transformations of the contemporary world, adopting
strategies that allow us to assimilate the daily changes
in the international community that are occurring. The
bilateral system that previously dominated the world,
although it has not entirely vanished, feels irremediably
incapable of addressing today’s global problems.
Therefore, coming to its aid and as a new edifice in
the global architecture, multilateralism has appeared
as an international political system that, in addition
to showing its capacity to coordinate national policies
among more than two countries, is required to preserve
dialogue, non-interference in the internal affairs of
others, international equality of States, mutual respect,
fair distribution of the benefits brought by joint tasks
and respect for biodiversity, inter alia.
The goal of multilateral organizations should
therefore be the achievement of global agreements in
relation to issues of interest that affect the majority
in different aspects of international affairs, such as
climate change, trade, peace and security, biodiversity,
the Sustainable Development Goals and so on.
Accordingly, we must strive to allow the entire United
Nations system, the International Monetary Fund,
the World Bank, the World Trade Organization and
regional and subregional governmental organizations,
inter alia, to function in a democratic and transparent
manner, each within its sphere of competence.
With this reform and shift in outlook with
respect to multilateral institutions, many of the
challenges posed in today’s international system,
which itself is facing significant changes that in turn
have structural consequences, will be responded to
and made effective. Some of the changes include the
reconfiguration of military forces and their vital
missions, the rearrangement of the world economy, and
the respective weights that the different nations have
in various institutions, including the United Nations,
where the power of the veto continues to have an impact
on all the important decisions that are necessarily
taken within the Organization, which, among other
things, allows for a growing body of evidence that the
United Nations and its agencies and programmes have
a limited role, with the decisions taken being relegated
18-36863

09/11/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

to a status subordinate to the underlying interests of
some countries that have special privileges within the
Organization.
Accordingly, reform is urgently needed if the United
Nations is truly going to fulfil objectively and effectively
its role as the core of the system of international relations
based on a principle of multipolarity. A similar exercise
should be carried out in all the other international
organizations I mentioned, in order to adapt them and
make them more transparent, thereby guaranteeing the
equality of all their members — in short, to work to
democratize multilateral institutions.
In that regard, a plan for profound modifications
and reforms to multilateralism is recommended, taking
as points of reference the serious problems that currently
plague the international community, thereby allowing
for the creation of a strong multilateral international
system. We note with much regret that, in recent times,
we have been seeing not a true multilateralism, but
rather a disguised unilateralism in a number of major
Powers that have always tried to manage matters of
international interest on the basis of their own national
interests and through a process of coalition-building,
consequently provoking more regional conflicts and
armed struggles, to the point of leaving world peace to
hang on a very slender thread.
It has been suggested that those countries, aware of
their military and technological capacity, should opt for
peace and base their international coexistence on the
friendly, objective, egalitarian and peaceful character
that should be the foundation of the multipolar system
that we support in the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
and in the United Nations. Such an approach would
undoubtedly benefit the international community,
because with that mere gesture alone many conflicts
would be resolved, either as a result of a lack of arms
supply or through achieving justice.
Another challenge facing multilateralism is the
great divergence of interests and positions within the
international system. Defining the terms of action
within the organizations that are dedicated to the topic
under discussion has proved to be a rather difficult
task, especially when we consider what is at stake. That
strong contrast of interests has meant that the success
of those organizations is measured by their ability
to reach an agreement, and not by the true impact of
their decisions.

S/PV. 8395

For the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, the world
of the twenty-first century is too interdependent and
complex, to the extent that modern multilateralism
requires a new framework of cooperation that, in
addition to the inevitable balance of power, takes into
account the diversity of the challenges and the need
to reaffirm a normative model on a democratic basis.
As a firm believer in multilateralism and international
cooperation within the framework of the United Nations
and other international, regional and subregional
organizations, His Excellency the President of the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea, Mr. Teodoro Obiang
Nguema Mbasogo, has always focused his actions on
solidarity within a multipolar spirit, as evidenced by
the UNESCO-Equatorial Guinea International Prize for
Research in the Life Sciences, our support for countries
that have suffered natural disasters, assistance in the
area of food security, support for countries that have
fallen victim to pandemics and the fact that Equatorial
Guinea has hosted, on several occasions, international
and regional forums and international and regional
sports competitions.
It is within that same vision and approach that
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, as an elected
non-permanent member of the Security Council,
consistently advocates for consensus, the peaceful
negotiation of conflicts, the total eradication of weapons
of mass destruction, respect for the sovereignty of
States and respect for humanitarian and human rights,
and strongly supports the ongoing multilateral efforts
towards peace on the Korean peninsula among the
States that are directly involved — the United States,
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the
Republic of Korea — with the support of the People’s
Republic of China.
To conclude, allow me to quote the Ecuadorian
political analyst Camilo Zambrano Jáuregui, who stated,
“Definitively, the focal point for strengthening
multilateralism is to generate greater legitimacy
of the decision-making processes, be they by
procedures or mainly by those institutions called
upon to safeguard international peace and security.”
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Côte
d’Ivoire welcomes the convening of this debate on
strengthening multilateralism and the role of the United
Nations. We are grateful to Mr. António Guterres,
Secretary-General of the United Nations, for the
quality of his briefing and the relevance of his analysis.

18-3686323/83

S/PV.8395

Maintenance of international peace and security

We also express our gratitude to Ms. Alya Ahmed Saif
Al-Thani, representing the President of the General
Assembly, Ms. Inga Rhonda King, President of the
Economic and Social Council, and Judge Abdulqawi
Ahmed Yusuf, President of the International Court of
Justice, for their insightful briefings.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
made on behalf of the African Union.
This debate comes at a time when humankind is
undergoing remarkable sociopolitical, economic and
scientific transformations, which are sources of hope for
our societies and the drivers of our common aspiration
for a world of shared peace, stability and prosperity.
However, my country also expresses its concern about
the gradual erosion of the multilateral order, which
is jeopardizing international peace and security. The
multilateral order that was born of the lessons of the
Second World War is today far from reflecting the
enthusiasm and hope generated by the prospective vision
of those who drafted the Charter of the United Nations.
In that context, it is up to Member States to rekindle the
spirit of the Charter, which enshrines multilateralism
as an approach par excellence in our common quest for
solutions to contemporary challenges.
It is through concerted action that we will together
find lasting responses to current challenges, including
poverty, youth unemployment, climate change, violent
extremism and terrorism. The founding text of the
Organization establishes the United Nations a centre
for harmonizing the efforts of nations in order to
safeguard international peace and stability and, in our
day, to enable the implementation of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and Agenda 2063 of the
African Union. My country therefore calls on Member
States to give priority to concerted and coordinated
cooperation frameworks, in which consensual
strategies are being developed to meet current and
future challenges.
The multiplicity and complexity of the current
challenges to peace, security and sustainable
development require the pooling of efforts and
synergy of the actions of Member States, as well as
regional and subregional organizations, in accordance
with Chapter VIII of the Charter. In that regard, the
Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for
Enhancing Partnership on Peace and Security, which
was signed on 19 April 2017 by the United Nations
Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African
24/83

09/11/2018

Union Commission, emerged as a positive example
of multilateralism between the United Nations and a
regional organization, in accordance with the purposes
and principles of the Charter.
That model of cooperation has even shifted the
partnership between the United Nations and the African
Union from an ad hoc approach to a more structured
and predictable joint approach. Côte d’Ivoire therefore
expresses its satisfaction at the outstanding progress
made in the operationalization of the Joint Framework,
in particular in strengthening the cooperation between
the United Nations Secretariat and the African Union
Commission, as well as regular consultations between
the United Nations Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union. My country
hopes that that cooperation, based on mutual respect and
the comparative advantages of the two organizations,
will be further materialized in the specific areas of​​
conflict prevention and peacebuilding.
Côte d’Ivoire would like to take this opportunity
to reaffirm its strong support for the SecretaryGeneral’s initiatives aimed at reforming the peace and
security pillars of the United Nations and peacekeeping
operations. We remain convinced that those ambitious
reforms will help to strengthen the role and centrality of
our common institution in finding lasting solutions to
current problems. In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire wishes
to reaffirm its faith in the virtues of multilateralism
and constant and constructive dialogue as a means of
preventing and peaceably resolving conflicts.
Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful to the
Secretary-General, the Acting President of the General
Assembly, the President of the Economic and Social
Council and the President of the International Court
of Justice for the pertinent information that they have
presented to us today. We commend their commitment
to multilateralism and the United Nations system.
Likewise, we express our appreciation to the delegation
of China for convening such an important open debate
on a matter of vital importance to all States Members
of our Organization.
The consolidation of the multilateral system
through the establishment and strengthening of the
United Nations was one of the great achievements of
the international community during the twentieth
century, and safeguarding that achievement is one of
the great challenges that we face in the twenty-first
18-36863

09/11/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

century. The multilateral system and multilateralism
are indispensable for the realization of the three pillars
of the United Nations: human rights, peace and security
and development, which make up the backbone of our
Organization and are interconnected and mutually
reinforcing of one another. The multilateral approach,
and in particular the various parts of the United Nations,
offers the best means to tackle the major common
challenges faced by humankind today, namely, climate
change, refugee and migrant crises, the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and,
in the scope of peace and security, the nuclear threat,
the use of weapons of mass destruction, by both State
and non-State actors, terrorism, transnational organized
crime and extremist rhetoric, among others.
In that regard, the main strength of multilateralism
derives from the degree of attachment to, and respect
for, the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. By contrast, the main threat derives
from a lack of attachment to, and respect for, the
Charter. The international community must renew its
commitment to the implementation of the Charter, while
condemning à la carte multilateralism, by which some
countries choose — as if from a menu — the aspects of
the international system to which they wish to adhere.
One cannot advocate for human rights and denounce
the main organ of our Organization on the issue. One
cannot refer to refugees and migrants as a problem and
not participate in the greatest collective effort in our
history to ensure orderly, safe and regular migration.
Climate change cannot be tackled if the main pollutant
is removed from the most relevant agreement on the
matter in history.
Turning now to the issue of peace and security, we
recognize that there are many complex challenges that
the Security Council faces in fulfilling its mandate.
However, we believe that the threats that truly jeopardize
the efforts of the Council and of our Organization to
maintain international peace and security are linked
to the insufficient implementation of the mechanisms
provided for in the Charter of the United Nations and
to the use of unilateral actions, particularly by the
major Powers.
As I have underscored, those unilateral actions
have led to Government vacuums and weakened
the forces of law and order and security. Moreover,
humanitarian crises have been unleashed and terrorist
groups and irregular combatants have proliferated,
finding new spaces to commit destabilizing acts and

S/PV. 8395

crimes against humanity. These situations, in turn,
now take up the lion’s share of the Council’s agenda of
work. Any measure adopted unilaterally by one State to
the detriment of another, with the use of force or other
coercive measures, is outside the framework of the
Security Council and is therefore illegal and contrary
to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.
In that regard, I would like to highlight what former
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon said on 3 September
2013 on the situation in Syria:
(spoke in English)
“As I have repeatedly said, the Security Council
has primary responsibility for international peace
and security ... That’s my appeal, that everything
should be handled within the framework of the
United Nations Charter. The use of force is lawful
only when in exercise of self-defence in accordance
with Article 51 of the United Nations Charter and
or when the Security Council approves such action.
That is the firm principle of the United Nations.”
(spoke in Spanish)
Bolivia categorically rejects the imposition of
unilateral measures, since they are a flagrant violation
of multilateralism and a serious threat to international
order, as they constitute illegal measures that extend
the jurisdiction and domestic legislation of one State
over another, thereby violating the principles of the
equality, sovereignty and territorial integrity of States.
Another threat to multilateralism that is also linked
to the lack of implementation of the purposes and
principles of the Charter is the instrumentalization of
the system and the blurred lines between the mandates
and prerogatives of United Nations organs. In order
to confront the great challenges to humankind, the
various organs and agencies of the Organization must
base their actions on the principles of complementarity
and coordination, not interference or the duplication of
tasks. The Organization is only as strong as the weakest
of its organs.
Likewise, with a view to improving its work,
the Council should encourage decision-making by
consensus, while strengthening dialogue and the
effective use of mediation, prevention, conciliation and
good offices for the peaceful settlement of disputes.

18-3686325/83

S/PV.8395

Maintenance of international peace and security

Bolivia believes that, in order to strengthen
multilateralism, it is also imperative to work on the
reform of the United Nations, including the Security
Council. The Council must be more effective, efficient,
inclusive and, above all, democratic, while ensuring that
its procedures and working methods are transparent and
that both its composition and the number of its members
are a legitimate expression of the 193 countries it
represents — avoiding the regional overrepresentation
that perpetuates a kind of institutional neocolonialism
and eliminating the prerogative of the veto, which
is anachronistic and unacceptable in the twentyfirst century.
In conclusion, we believe it is essential to create
spaces for dialogue, like the one we have today and
hope to see again in the future, in order to debate and
share positions with countries that may be questioning
the benefits of the multilateral system.
Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): We join others in expressing
our appreciation to you, Mr. President, for organizing
this timely and important high-level debate. We thank
the Secretary-General, the Acting President of the
General Assembly and the Presidents of the Economic
and Social Council and the International Court of
Justice for their briefings.
We also support the statement to be delivered by the
Permanent Observer of the African Union, Ms. Fatima
Kyari Mohammed.
We face today unprecedented challenges and
threats to global peace and security. The need for
multilateralism has never been more indispensable to
ensuring a collective response. Of course, at the core
of international multilateralism is the United Nations.
It has always been an essential platform for advancing
collective security and promoting multilateral
cooperation among Member States in line with the
spirit of its Charter. It has also been an Organization
that has faced many challenges. It has had its successes
and failures. We can certainly draw lessons from some
of its achievements. We should also have the courage
to admit its shortcomings and make every effort to
redress them.
At the same time, we would all agree that the
United Nations is the only indispensable universal
Organization we have. Despite all of its faults, it is
an Organization that we cannot live without. The
question is how we make it more effective, functional
and relevant in addressing the challenges and threats
26/83

09/11/2018

humankind faces in the twenty-first century. There is
no doubt that the United Nations collective security
system has helped reduce the danger of war. It has made
enormous contributions to peacekeeping for more than
70 years.
Nevertheless, the global geopolitical landscape
has changed tremendously since the United Nations
was established. The increasing number of intra-State
conflicts, the threats of terrorism and violent extremism,
as well as other transnational crimes by non-State
actors, are posing increasingly greater risks to world
peace and security. The prevalence of poverty and
inequality, the spread of pandemic diseases, the impact
of climate change and other socioeconomic challenges
all have major implications on the security and survival
of humankind.
At this juncture in human history, we need the
United Nations more than ever before. That is why we
need an Organization capable of addressing its own
weaknesses. It must have the capacity to make a real
difference not only in security, but also in economic,
social, human rights and humanitarian areas. That is
why the reform of the United Nations is so critical.
The Organization must be true to the Preamble of the
Charter — that it is the Organization of the peoples of
the United Nations. We fully support the reform agenda
of the Secretary-General to make the United Nations
better able to respond to the needs and aspirations of
“we the peoples” that generated the Organization.
The Charter provides for a number of possible tools
for the Security Council to address the world problems,
Chapter VI of the Charter is clear about the primacy
of pacific settlement of disputes and emphasizes the
need to take measures to prevent conflicts before they
erupt. Chapter VII provides for parameters for action
with regard to any threat to peace, breach of peace or
act of aggression. Chapter VIII provides for regional
arrangements to buttress peace. It is deeply regrettable
that we remain unable to take full advantage of what
the Charter provides to help overcome the challenges
that we face. In effect, that undermines the credibility
of the Security Council itself. We hardly need to
remind representatives that it is the body that has
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. There is every reason
to emphasize the need for reform to start at the top,
with the membership of the Security Council. Here, as
elsewhere in our efforts to make the Organization fit
for the problems of this century, we must also remain
18-36863

09/11/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

faithful to the principles of the Charter — sovereign
equality, territorial integrity, political independence,
non-intervention and peaceful settlement of disputes.
The global concerns and realities of today require
us to reaffirm our full commitment to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and to
multilateralism. They also demand that we muster the
courage and determination to rise to that challenge.
Allow me to conclude by underlining Ethiopia’s
own commitment, as a founding Member of the United
Nations and as the largest troop-contributing country,
to fully playing its part, as it has done for more than 60
years.
Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We would
like to welcome the initiative of the People’s Republic
of China to hold this open debate. We wish to thank the
Secretary-General for his important briefing, as well
as the representative of the President of the General
Assembly and the Presidents of the Economic and
Social Council and the International Court of Justice.
A country committed to multilateralism,
international law and the principle of the peaceful
settlement of disputes, Peru underlines the importance
and the need to strengthen and renew the United Nations
system in order to deal with the serious challenges that
today’s world poses for the international community.
We see with deep concern the proliferation
of conflicts and the emergence of new threats to
international peace and security, the root causes of
which are in many cases global phenomena such as
the growing inequality, the effects of climate change,
armament and transnational organized crime.
Today we have an interconnected and
interdependent world. It is therefore clear that the
poverty and vulnerability of large sectors of the
world population have an increasingly direct impact
on the security and well-being of all and undermine
the pledge to liberate future generations from the
scourge of war. Since the end of the Second World War,
humanity has significantly evolved and progressed.
This Organization has without a doubt served to build
a better world. However, in many cases, the progress
has been uneven and the international order has shown
its limitations in responding effectively to the new and
changing realities. Far from weakening multilateralism,
the inability of the international community to address
such realities should lead us to strengthening the

S/PV. 8395

international cooperation required to achieve the
purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations. We wish to emphasize the relevance of
those purposes and principles and of the Organization
in resolving the serious problems facing us and in
upholding and developing the collective security
system and a rules-based international order, thereby
preventing the emergence of greater threats to peace
and security.
To that end, we believe it necessary to continue to
build on the political, legal and institutional acquis of
the Organization. Among other measures, that means
moving ahead with the reform of the Security Council
in order to adapt it to the current realities and, in
accordance with the proposal of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency Group, to make it more
coherent, transparent and accountable. It also means
renewing our commitment to international law and its
continuing development, complying with its provisions,
including those issued by the Council, and constructively
participating in the respective negotiation and followup processes.
The primary responsibility of the Security Council
for the maintenance of international peace and security
must be exercised with full respect for law and justice.
In that regard, we would like to point out the need
to promote a more systematic interaction between
that organ and the International Court of Justice and
the International Criminal Court. We underline the
responsibility of the Council to preserve the regimes for
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and counter-terrorism and the need for its members to
remain united in the face of such threats.
We also underscore the need to implement the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
Paris Agreement and to commit to the global compact
for safe, orderly and regular migration. We believe
that those instruments are fundamental to preventing
conflicts and addressing their root causes.
We believe that the Organization should be reformed
in order to support Member States in a more coherent
and effective way in line to their priorities, needs and
national circumstances. In that regard, we would like
to express our support for the reforms promoted by the
Secretary-General and the emphasis on gender equality.
Multilateralism also means working proactively
and inclusively with specialized agencies and entities
such as the World Trade Organization, the international

18-3686327/83

S/PV.8395

Maintenance of international peace and security

financial institutions and regional and subregional
organizations, as well as with civil society, women’s
and youth groups, the sector private and academia.
Our task is to redouble our efforts to strengthen the
United Nations in fulfilling the purposes and principles
enshrined in its Charter and as a catalyst for cooperation
and alliances at all levels, with a view to ensuring that
peace and prosperity are available to all.
In that order of ideas, I conclude by recalling
former Secretary-General Javier Pérez de Cuellar when
he pointed out that the role of a political institution
such as the United Nations is to draw the line between
efforts to build a better future and conflict and to make
it possible for nations to stay on the right side of that
line.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to
start by apologizing for my absence at the beginning
of this open debate, since I left the Chamber to go to a
remembrance service for the 100th anniversary of the
end of the First World War. It is very good — and I
thank China — that we are having this debate today
so close to that anniversary, which started the march
towards multilateralism in earnest even though some
foundations had been laid in the previous century.
Of course, the end of the Second World War saw
the establishment of the United Nations and the
Organization as the apex of a system that has, on the
whole, kept us all safe and prosperous since 1945.
At the outset, I would also like to say how
grateful we are to the United States for giving the
United Nations its home here in New York and for its
contribution, without which many of the gains of the
preceding almost 70 years could not be made. I would
like to speak on three themes today: the collective
challenges; the special role of the Security Council;
and what, in our view, we now need to do to strengthen
multilateralism. Public debate on foreign policy issues
in my own country nearly always features a reference to
the need for a solution to be pursued through the United
Nations, no matter where on the political spectrum the
comment is made from. Post-Brexit, members will find
the United Kingdom an even more active participant in
the affairs of the United Nations, and in global affairs
more generally.
Seventy years ago, no one could accuse the founding
fathers of the United Nations of a lack of ambition. But
since its foundation, the United Nations has faced an
almost unbridgeable gap between its ambition and our
28/83

09/11/2018

ability to help it deliver. Important gains have been
made. Kofi Annan spoke of pushing heavy rocks to the
top of the hill, even though some have eluded our grasp,
and that we need to keep going. What I want to stress
is that, regardless of a country’s economic or security
model, all the evidence shows that countries thrive best
if they have open societies and pursue open trade, open
speech, open association and open information. A rulesbased international system that preserves stability is in
the interests of the vast majority of the States Members
of the Organization.
But as many have pointed out today, we face the
proliferation of threats from many quarters. We have
heard a lot of references to those today: some of them
have been the cause of great dispute in the Council,
but they are all relevant to the entire membership,
whether a Member State is a member on the Council, an
elected member of the Council or standing for election
themselves. No nation can protect its people without
engaging positively in the crises that affect the world.
I cannot see a single major threat that can be solved by
one nation alone. Whether it be migration, cybercrime,
modern-day slavery, terrorist threats, disease or
climate change, all those threats challenge security and
prosperity at home and challenge collective security on
the world stage. They can be resolved only by collective
action.
But effective collective action cannot mean only
action by consensus. Threats to international peace
and security, by their nature, often involve a challenge
to international law and norms. It logically cannot be
the case that action to uphold international peace and
security must always be by consensus: that will not
be sufficient. You, Mr. President, spoke of the need
for the Security Council to act with unity, wisdom
and courage. Our collective wisdom tells us that
inaction in the face of gross abuses of human rights
and violations of international law, acts of genocide and
acts of using prohibited weapons leads to disastrous
outcomes. Hence, we fail to uphold international peace
and security. Because we lack the courage to act on the
wisdom we display, we end up being disunited.
From Rwanda and Srebrenica to current conflicts
in Myanmar and Syria, we are failing the cause of
multilateralism by failing to act in line with the Charter
of the United Nations. The Security Council was
invested with powers under Chapter VII of the Charter
in order to fulfil its duties to maintain international
peace and security. But if we are blocked by one or
18-36863

09/11/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

two members from using those powers, that is not a
legitimate expression of the Charter but an abuse of the
power of the veto.
We completely share the views of those Security
Council members who spoke about the importance of
Chapter VI and Chapter VIII of the Charter, relating to
the Security Council. To that I would also add Article
99, which we believe is underused: the ability of the
Secretary-General to draw matters to the Security
Council’s attention. But I want to stress that, under
Chapter VI, the Security Council may investigate any
dispute or any situation that may give rise to a dispute,
and may determine whether or not it constitutes
international friction and endangers the maintenance
of international peace and security. The Charter does
not require the Security Council to already agree that
such a threat exists. It is our view that some countries
try to stop and stifle Security Council discussion of
such situations under Chapter VI — for example, when
a Government is attacking its own people or abusing
its neighbours. The more that Chapter VI is stifled, the
more likely it is that dramatic action will eventually be
needed under Chapter VII. That is an irony that I think
the Security Council would do well to reflect on.
A rules-based international system must of course
adapt to thrive. It must also adapt if it wants to survive.
A number of speakers today have called attention to the
importance of supporting reform. I would like to add
the United Kingdom’s voice to that as well. I would say
that includes Security Council reform. But I think we
must also redouble our efforts to defend the rules-based
international order. We need multilateral organizations
that are fit for purpose, and we need to reform outdated
and bureaucratic structures. That is the best way to make
sure that the institutions they serve do not collapse. We
need reform of the World Trade Organization, so that
we succeed in warding off the dangerous temptations
of protectionism. And we need World Bank reform so
that its governance reflects the changing balance of the
global economy. We need to strengthen the invisible
chain that links democracies. We must also ensure, at
the same time, that we are better at acting in concert
when we face real and present threats.
We would therefore attach the highest importance to
a renewed and stronger commitment from all members
of the Council, as well as all members of the General
Assembly, to responsibility and partnership among
both State and non-State actors, civil society and the
private sector. It is all about what we can do together as

S/PV. 8395

we move towards the seventy-fifth anniversary of the
United Nations in 2020. The Sustainable Development
Goals are the most supreme manifestation of that
objective. And it is all the more important as we grapple
with new and disruptive technologies, such artificial
intelligence or cybertechnology, which will change the
way Governments interact with each other and with
their own citizens.
While the United Kingdom strongly agrees with
the premise of this debate, we know that we must be
vigilant against the tendency of this subject to become
an exercise in mutual adoration. In conflicts, atrocities
are committed and international laws are breached. An
increase in the use of multilateralism should never be
coded language for negotiating agreements with those
who have violated the rules of our international system.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I wish to remind
all speakers to limit their statements to no more than
four minutes in order to enable the Council to carry
out its work expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy
statements are kindly requested to circulate the texts
in writing and to deliver a condensed version when
speaking in the Chamber.
I wish to inform all concerned that we will be
carrying on this open debate right through the lunch
hour, as we have a large number of speakers.
I now give the floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Akbaruddin (India): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate on an
issue that is germane for all of us. I also thank the
Secretary-General, the representative of the President
of the General Assembly and the Presidents of the
Economic and Social Council and the International
Court of Justice for their briefings.
As many speakers before me have said, this month
we commemorate the one hundredth anniversary of the
end of what was then known as the war to end all wars.
India lost 1 million of its population during that war.
As we all now know, the war to end all wars turned out
to be anything but that. More wars followed, resulting
in more devastation and leading to more geopolitical
changes.
Multilateralism, as an organizing principle for
international cooperation, survived the collapse of the
League of Nations, which was established following the
end of the so-called war to end all wars. The international
adjustments made, in the form of the arrangement

18-3686329/83

S/PV.8395

Maintenance of international peace and security

we now have with the Security Council playing a
controlling role in efforts to multilaterally address
matters relating to global peace, were set more than 70
years ago and have stayed the course. One can say that
the experiment of States with multilateralism has grown,
as have the interdependencies and interconnectedness
of our world, but if we dig deeper, it is obvious that
the Security Council is facing manifold crises with
regard to performance, credibility, legitimacy and
relevance. However, to blame multilateralism for the
dismal situation of the Council is, to use a New York
sporting analogy, like blaming Madison Square Garden
for the failure of the New York Knicks in the National
Basketball Association year after year.
Nimble organizations seek to replace routinized
procedures with initiatives, continuity with flexibility
and rules with results. However, the Council has
remained rooted in the historical events that gave birth
to it. The Council’s path dependence is reflected in
its aversion to reforming its membership and working
methods. The Council’s membership today diverges
from the distribution of global power and is unable
to accommodate contemporary realities. Also, large
sections of global populations are left disenchanted and
are nursing a sense of historical grievance owing to the
Council’s anachronistic composition.
In terms of working methods, even as the
Council has spawned an entire range of subordinate
bodies, the functioning of that subterranean universe
of subordinate bodies has become Byzantine. For
example, in place of five members having a veto in
formal meetings, all 15 members have been bestowed
with a veto in the subterranean universe of the
sanctions committees. Furthermore, in an age where
informed publics increasingly demand transparency
from public institutions, the sanctions committees are
the most egregious examples of opacity and the lack
of accountability. Those bodies of the subterranean
universe are ostensibly acting on behalf of the entire
membership of the United Nations. Yet, they do not
inform us that, owing to a negative vote cast by one of
their 15 members, they have decided not to sanction an
entity or individual proposed by a Member State.
Even as the task of promoting and maintaining
international peace and security has grown more
daunting, the Council has been found wanting. It has
failed to provide leadership on issues that are contested
in spaces that no State controls but that all rely on for
their security and prosperity — the global commons.
30/83

09/11/2018

The domains of maritime space, outer space and
cyberspace are the principal channels for the flow of
goods, capital, data, people and ideas — all of which
are key factors in our interconnectedness. They all cry
for multilateral solutions. The Council, alas, is missing
in action. Therefore, a patchwork of “plurilaterals”,
“minilaterals” and other regional forums are becoming
the venues of convenience, stitching together codes of
conduct, ad hoc coalitions of the willing and partnership
agreements on issues of global peace and security.
It is time that we renovate, reinvigorate and reform
the multilateralism practised by the Security Council.
Otherwise, instead of a world at peace, we are likely
to see a world order in pieces, even as the welter of
piecemeal arrangements extends its sprawl to deliver
partial measures of international cooperation and the
Council courts obsolescence.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): For the Security
Council to discuss the importance of multilateralism
in the maintenance of international peace and security
can seem like discussing a truism. After all, the
United Nations is the embodiment of the very idea
of multilateralism. But this is, indeed, an important
moment to recommit, and this is an important debate,
as we have heard this morning, so we are grateful to
you, Mr. President, for convening it.
My statement will focus on the question of the
legality of the use of force, but I also want to echo the
speakers who have spoken about the importance of
discussing the role of the veto and the effectiveness of
the work of the Council. I want to reference the code
of conduct on mass atrocity crimes in that connection.
The United Nations is the ultimate expression of
the rule of law at the international level. A key aspect
of the Charter, and therefore a fundamental task for the
Security Council, is to enforce the rules governing the
use of force. Born out of the desire to “save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war”, the Charter has
made the use of force illegal, with only two exceptions:
self-defence in accordance with Article 51 and the
authorization of the use of force by the Council.
In recent years, we have witnessed a widening
interpretation by some of which actions qualify as
self-defence, without much discussion or consequence.
Unfortunately, we have also witnessed the unilateral use
18-36863

09/11/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

of force without the prior authorization of the Council,
and the attempt to expand the rules enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations. Those discussions have
been rather opaque and limited to a small number of
States, but there was also a process aimed at codifying
the laws and norms on the use of force, a process that
was open ended, inclusive and transparent, a process in
the framework of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) aimed at developing a legally
binding definition of an act of aggression, as well as that
of a crime of aggression. Stretching over several years,
that process was open to all Member States, including
those that had not ratified the Rome Statute. The decision
to have a process open to the entire membership was
made owing to the overall significance of the effort, not
least the work of the Council. Various States, including
some assembled at this table today, contributed actively
to that effort and supported the consensual agreement
on both definitions before the Review Conference of
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court,
held in Kampala in 2010.
Grounded firmly in existing international law,
that definition has a number of important features. It
establishes a high threshold for a determination that an
act of aggression has been committed. Such an act has
to constitute a manifest violation of the Charter of the
United Nations by its character, gravity and scale. In
other words, being in violation of the rules governing
the use of force under the Charter of the United Nations
does not automatically constitute an act of aggression,
and therefore would not lead to individual criminal
responsibility. The crime of aggression, on the other
hand, is defined as a leadership crime. Only individuals
in leadership positions — military or political, for
example — can be held criminally responsible.
After the agreement on the complex definitional
issues, States parties also forged a consensus on the
conditions for the exercise of the ICC’s jurisdiction
over the crime of aggression. The role of the Council
was a crucial aspect in that discussion, owing to the
Council’s competence under Article 39 of the Charter
of the United Nations to make a determination that an
act of aggression has been committed. The primacy of
the Council’s role in that respect was never challenged
and is fully safeguarded in the Rome Statute of the ICC.
After a successful ratification process and
consensual activation decision last December, the
Council has had, since 17 July, an additional tool at
its disposal to enforce the rules of the Charter of the

S/PV. 8395

United Nations on the use of force through its ability to
seize the ICC with situations in which those rules have
manifestly been violated. We are aware, of course, of
the difficult political dynamic in the Council and of its
chequered relationship with the ICC in particular, but
if the Council is serious about its role as the guardian
of the Charter of the United Nations, it now has an
additional tool available to enforce a decision on the
legality of the use of force.
The importance of that development does not lie in
the likelihood of a large number of cases before the ICC.
It rests in the ability of every State individually and the
Council collectively to benefit from an internationally
agreed definition of an act of aggression when engaging
in complex decision-making processes on the use of
force. Recent trends indicate very clearly that armed
conflict between States, in violation of the Charter of
the United Nations, is an ever more present threat. And,
as we heard this morning, the nature of modern warfare
is changing rapidly.
The risks of cyberwarfare cast an ever-darker
shadow, which makes it a truly burning challenge to
thoroughly discuss the international law aspects of
those trends. The definitions laid out in the Rome
Statute offer the best framework for a discussion on
regulating the threats of cyberwarfare. There is no
doubt that the global order rooted in international
law and multilateralism is under attack today. The
Organization is the ultimate expression of the belief in
the power of the law. Its continued relevance depends
on our ability to further strengthen the rules enshrined
in the Charter, to meet the challenges of tomorrow, and
to stand up for that belief.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now call on the
observer of the European Union.
Mr. Vale de Almeida (European Union): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union
and its 28 member States. The candidate countries the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia and Albania; the country of the Stabilisation and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and
Herzegovina; and Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova
align themselves with this statement.
Let me begin by commending China for holding
today’s open debate on strengthening multilateralism
and the role of the United Nations. We live in an
interconnected and rapidly changing world. As such,
we need collectively agreed upon rules and effective

18-3686331/83

S/PV.8395

Maintenance of international peace and security

global institutions in order to ensure stability, security,
respect for human rights, prosperity and development.
A rules-based international order provides a safeguard
for everyone, not a constraint. It acts as an enabler for
both large and small nations to benefit from a safer,
fairer and more sustainable world. Protectionism and
unilateralism are not the answer.
The emergence of new multi-level relations means
that diplomacy has to be global, regional and local at
the same time. The only way to try to manage such
complexity is through multilateral frameworks. In a
multipolar world, multilateralism is not only a more
equal and democratic way to deal with international
affairs, but also the only realistic way to address
national interests. We Europeans have advanced our
national interests over the past 60 years, not in spite
of multilateralism, but through it. The European Union
is an example of the fact that that approach works as
a force multiplier. No State alone is big and powerful
enough to address the great challenges of our times.
We need an effective multilateral system with a strong
United Nations at its core. The alternative would not be
the rule of nation States, it would be complete chaos.
The alternative to a rules-based order is disorder.
The alternative to a rules-based global order is
global disorder.
Globalization makes it impossible to tackle
challenges in isolation. Our own peace, security and
human development inevitably depend on the prospects
for peace, security and human development in the rest of
the world. For its part, the European Union has learned
throughout its history that the only way to be safe,
prosperous and strong is to invest in safety, security
and prosperity for all. We know that the strength of our
neighbours does not represent a threat or a challenge,
but rather a guarantee of stability, provided that we all
work within the framework of a cooperative and rulesbased international order.
We also know that in order for security to be
sustainable, it has to be based on human rights, good
governance, social inclusion and an understanding of
the worldwide impact and negative effects of global
challenges like climate change. And we have learnt
that sustainable peace always requires a negotiated
political solution rooted in some kind of multilateral
framework, which will be different from case to case.
It also requires the rule of law and accountability.
International criminal justice is not only a powerful
deterrent against future violations of international
32/83

09/11/2018

humanitarian and human rights law, but is, most of all,
instrumental in our efforts to achieve accountability
and sustainable peace. The European Union expresses
its unwavering support for the International Criminal
Court and its strong belief in the legitimacy of the
Court. We also know that power lies not only in national
Governments, but also in continuous discussion with
opposition groups in democratically framed dialogues
rooted in norms and principles that are shared by all.
There are a number of contexts where multilateral
diplomacy is needed in order to tackle the rise of new
threats and benefit citizens around the world, such as
free and fair trade, digitization, climate change, the
Sustainable Development Goals, ocean governance
and the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action — also
known as the Iran nuclear deal — just to name a few.
Today, we also see growing threats and challenges
to the multilateral system, but we do not see them as
representing the demise of multilateralism. On the
contrary, they should be interpreted as a call for a better
multilateral system with a stronger United Nations at
its core. The United Nations is not perfect, but without
the United Nations the world would be a worse place.
What we need is a stronger United Nations that delivers
more effectively in support of our efforts to achieve
our common objectives. In that regard, we must work
together to improve multilateral mechanisms and
support the efficient implementation of the SecretaryGeneral’s ambitious reform package, which will make
the United Nations better equipped to tackle current
and emerging challenges. We believe that today the
only way to safeguard multilateralism is to reform it and
make it more effective in building peace and security,
economic and social development and human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all.
Multilateral cooperation is the backbone of
the foreign policy of the European Union, and the
promotion of the rules-based global order with the
United Nations at its core is at the heart of our interests.
In our times, a super-Power for peace must also be a
super-Power for multilateralism. The European Union
is a reliable, rational and effective global actor that
provides the stability and predictability necessary for
the international community to move forward. The
European Union is a promoter of multilateralism and
has become a global player, not least by strengthening
its autonomy in areas such as defence and economic
sovereignty, but also by observing the rules agreed
upon by all and by considering the interests and
18-36863

09/11/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

concerns of everyone. While words of support for
multilateralism are welcome, it is through our actions
that we really make a difference. Those who claim
to defend multilateralism have a responsibility to do
so consistently and not selectively, recognizing that
upholding the United Nations-centred multilateral
system and abiding by international law are two sides
of the same coin.
The global strategy of the common foreign and
security policy of the European Union sets out our
common strategic vision. We support the multilateral
system, and we are willing to join forces with partners
who believe that international cooperation can create
a better world. The European way is also the United
Nations way. That is why we aim to forge partnerships
based on an equal footing, thereby strengthening a
global network of engagements for multilateralism
that reaches beyond traditional bilateral diplomacy and
identifies common ground with other international and
regional organizations, such as the African Union. The
innovative African Union-United Nations-European
Union trilateral cooperation is an illustration of
that approach.
In conclusion, the European Union strongly
supports the United Nations efforts in the areas of
conflict prevention, mediation and political processes,
both politically and in concrete terms. We are also
engaged side by side with the United Nations to make
peacekeeping operations more effective and deliver
lasting peace and development to the populations where
those missions are deployed, thereby contributing to
sustainable development. We support the efforts of the
Council to put more focus on women’s participation in
peace negotiations and peacebuilding. The European
Union and its member States strongly support the
Secretary-General’s initiatives to make the United
Nations delivery more effective and efficient on
the ground, especially the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative, highlighting the need for a stronger focus on
protecting civilians, performance and accountability,
and improving the safety and security of peacekeepers.
We remain a key partner in that endeavour, not only
by supporting United Nations peacekeeping operations,
but also by deploying our own missions within the
framework of our common security and defence policy.
We continue to advocate for a better definition of the
role of regional organizations within United Nations-led
interventions, facilitating — when appropriate — rapid
deployment, in complementarity with United Nations

S/PV. 8395

operations, as is the case with the European Union
training and capacity-building missions and operations
within the framework of security sector reform or when
our missions are deployed in a bridging capacity. In that
regard, we will continue to support the development of
African peace capacities, which increasingly contribute
to peace and security on the continent.
To conclude, we believe that an extended arm with
an open hand, and not an iron fist imposing the will of
the strongest, is the best way to find common solutions
to common problems and challenges. The European
Union is and will continue to be a cooperative global
force, one that sticks to its commitments and upholds
international norms and a principled partner that
puts human rights and sustainable development at the
core of its agenda and never ceases to pursue peace,
security and economic prosperity for all. And it is in
that spirit that we will continue to work within, as well
as with, the United Nations and beyond so as to ensure
that the future of the international system is based on
cooperation rather than confrontation.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank the Chinese presidency
for convening this very important meeting.
The twenty-first century has presented us
with formidable challenges, such as regional and
ethnic conflict, poverty, climate change, terrorism,
cybersecurity and the abuse of human rights. All of
those challenges have something in common — they
cannot be solved by any of us alone. Globalization,
trade and technological innovation have offered us
a prosperous and interconnected world, but one that
depends on peace and stability.
Faced with those challenges, we must not be
passive. Japan wishes to be proactive in its international
cooperation with a view to overcoming obstacles in our
way. As a proactive contributor to peace, Japan plays
its part. Japan believes that we cannot achieve our
nation’s own security and prosperity without peace,
security and stability in our region and around the
world. We are making every effort to promote human
security, peacebuilding and sustaining peace, as well
as the Sustainable Development Goals that underlie
those situations.
Japan will continue our support for United Nations
peacekeeping operations, including by providing

18-3686333/83

S/PV.8395

Maintenance of international peace and security

training for enablers, such as engineers and medical
personnel from troop-contributing countries, through
triangular partnership projects. We will also continue
our work in the Peacebuilding Commission to help
enhance stability and prevent any relapses into conflict.
As a leading trading and maritime nation, Japan
seeks peace and stability on the high seas and in the
airspace above. It is on and over those waters that the
world’s commerce travels. We underscore the importance
of open seas and the rule of law as the bases for peace
and prosperity. We embrace the international law of the
sea, which is based primarily on the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea, as indispensable for
securing our maritime rights and interests, as well as
for undertaking maritime activities smoothly. We will
continue to make every effort to promote and maintain
a free and open Indo-Pacific ocean region.
As a forum for collective problem-solving,
the importance of the United Nations cannot be
overemphasized. Japan strongly supports the reform
efforts initiated by Secretary-General António Guterres.
The Secretary-General seeks to improve United
Nations management, its development apparatus, and
its peace and security architecture, and Japan will be a
constructive participant in those efforts.
Of course, reform of the United Nations will not be
complete without the reform of the Security Council.
The world has seen enormous changes since 1945,
but the Council’s composition has not kept pace. The
Council must be reformed to reflect the twenty-first
century’s realities so that it can tackle twenty-first
century problems. As Prime Minister Abe said at the
General Assembly’s general debate in September,
“[i]n light of the lack of progress in reforming the
Security Council, the significance of the United
Nations in the twenty-first century world is already
being severely questioned” (A/73/PV.7, p.43).
In closing, let me reiterate Japan’s commitment
to multilateral engagement, the rule of law and the
peaceful settlement of disputes. Today’s problems can
be resolved as long as we are ready to work together to
resolve them.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank China for convening this debate on
34/83

09/11/2018

a topic of great relevance to the Organization and to the
international community.
In the twenty-first century, it is an illusion to
think that States can solve problems of a global nature
on their own or in isolation, or even undertake major
regional or national transformations. That is so because
of the economic, cultural and even technological
interdependence in which we live. It is not correct to
argue that international organizations function only
when external conditions and international relations
are propitious. Multilateral forums were created so
that nations could develop relations of friendship
and cooperation, discuss problems and find common
solutions to shared problems on the basis of the legal
equality of States and mutual respect.
Multilateral forums, and especially the United
Nations, give or withhold legitimacy to the behaviour
of States as subjects of international law. They create
customs, consolidate norms and forge principles. They
do not do away with power relations between States,
but they transform those relations by establishing the
line that divides civilization from the law of the jungle
and chaos.
Those States that, like Mexico, defend
multilateralism do so as a matter of principle. Mexico
is a State that loves peace and international law, but
we also do so because effective and robust global
governance is at the heart of our national interests.
That is why the confrontation between sovereignty
or the primacy of nationalism and multilateralism is
a false dilemma. We nations exercise and assert our
sovereignty through multilateralism.
The multilateral architecture of the twentyfirst century covers almost every aspect of human
activities and delivers results on the ground. Like any
human construct, multilateralism is perfectible. It
could be more efficient, it could produce results more
effectively, and it could work in a more coherent and
coordinated way. However, the multilateral machinery
is the best arrangement that we States have. Attacks on
multilateralism, and especially on the United Nations,
should not be considered as true or as omens of the
disappearance of the Organization. We must not let
them breed mistrust.
The United Nations has very clear purposes and
principles that seek the good of humankind. Defending
the United Nations should be simple. In the face of
criticism and attacks, we must analyse their deep
18-36863

09/11/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

motivation; whether they are driven by the best interests
of humankind or seek to harm it; whether they seek to
build for the benefit of all or to destroy. Once that is done,
we will have some clarity, because, as has been pointed
out, the United Nations is perfectible in its operations
but not in its ends or its purposes, as they are based
on universal and immanent values. We commend the
progress being made in United Nations reforms aimed
at making the Organization more efficient, effective
and coherent in its work in operational, institutional and
financial areas. We therefore welcomed the briefing by
Secretary-General António Guterres and reaffirm our
support for the reform process headed by him.
The Security Council bears the supreme
responsibility for preserving both multilateralism and
multilaterally agreed norms on the preservation of
international security. We need to strengthen that body
through a comprehensive reform process in line with
the values of the twenty-first century, thereby making it
truly representative, democratic, transparent, efficient
and effective, and providing the greatest benefit
for all, not just for a handful of countries seeking
permanent membership. In that regard, we reiterate
that the Uniting for Consensus proposal is the most
democratic, achievable, realistic and comprehensive
proposal available to us for strengthening genuine
multilateralism. Similarly, we must continue our work
in addressing the working methods of the Organization,
especially those of the Security Council. Using the
right to veto to block Security Council measures
against atrocity crimes runs counter to multilateralism.
It is an expression of unilateralism that contravenes
the purposes and principles of the United Nations.
The French-Mexican initiative to limit the use of
the veto in cases of mass atrocities is a step towards
promoting multilateralism.
We live in a world shaped by multilateralism,
and Mexico therefore reiterates its concern regarding
the excessive use of the so-called consensus rule, as
it is misleading to contend that that rule equates with
unanimity or a form of veto rather than a genuine
aspiration. A putative consensus undermines the ability
of multilateral forums to function effectively and slows
progress to a minimal speed, thereby perpetuating the
status quo and occasionally making the progress that
humankind needs much harder to achieve. Sustainable
peace — the new paradigmatic concept of the
Organization — has made linking the pillar of peace
and security with the pillar of sustainable development

S/PV. 8395

into a reality. That effective linkage, which enables us
to focus on prevention and to build communities with a
healthy social fabric, constitutes a new avenue of work
for the United Nations that requires a new and more
robust and purposeful architecture, which we must
promote and perfect in line with the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
Contemporary multilateralism has the best
interests of the individual — not simply the avoidance
of military hostilities, as was our main concern in
1945 — at its core. The new face of multilateralism is
inclusive, with women and girls at its centre, as they
must enjoy equal opportunities. The effectiveness of
multilateral action will be measured by our ability
to improve the lives of our communities by working
towards the universal fulfilment of the 169 targets of
the Sustainable Development Goals. The new face of
multilateralism has been enriched by the participation
of civil-society organizations, the private sector,
academia and the media, which have found ways to
promote issues of interest that have an impact at the
local level and to ensure citizens’ participation within
multilateral spaces,
In conclusion, multilateralism is cannot be called
into question just because one or more countries violate
the Charter of the United Nations with the threat of the
use of force, contravene majority decisions or decide
to break international agreements and decide that it
is better to act in isolation. Multilateralism would be
a dead letter if all other members of the international
community were to abandon the purposes and principles
that humankind has agreed upon over the past several
centuries for the common good and prosperity, or if we
were to decide to give up the search for joint solutions
to shared challenges, or if we were to consider as
normal the selective and conditional compliance with
agreements forged by the collective community for the
benefit of individual interests.
We reaffirm our unwavering multilateral
vocation and commitment to and confidence in the
United Nations.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovenia.
Ms. Bavdaž Kuret (Slovenia): I wish to also convey
my thanks to the Chinese presidency for organizing
this open debate and to align myself with the statement
by the observer of the European Union.

18-3686335/83

S/PV.8395

Maintenance of international peace and security

Let me start by expressing our support for SecretaryGeneral Guterres and his call at this year’s general
debate for a “commitment to a rules-based order, with
the United Nations at its centre” (A/73/PV.6, p. 2).
Slovenia’s commitment to the multilateral system,
based on shared values, the rule of law, respect for
international law and human rights, remains as strong
as ever. Today, we are witnessing rapid changes that
are substantial and fundamental. The international
community has spent the past 70 years building the
system of a rules-based order, which is intended to
ensure equal treatment for all and create a better world
for nations and individuals. Unfortunately, today’s
trends seem to be going in the direction of the erosion
of that order. We face many new challenges and threats
that are more complex and multidimensional and are
quickly multiplying, from threats to international peace
and security by non-State actors to environmental
degradation, as well as possible economic and financial
instability. Owing to unprecedented interdependence,
no single nation can hold the answers to everything for
everyone. Slovenia firmly believes that only through
international cooperation that benefits all can solutions
be found and progress achieved. One person’s gain
should not mean a loss to another.
With regard to how we can promote the United
Nations role, that should, first of all, be done by
insisting on a democratic, international system based
on rules, by respecting the Charter of the United
Nations, by supporting good governance, sustainable
development and gender equality, by respecting the
rule of law at all levels, including judicial decisions,
and by respecting international law and human rights
in every situation. We stand firm in our belief that
the protection and promotion of human rights and
fundamental freedoms should be the highest priority
for every State and organization.
Secondly, the United Nations is uniquely equipped
to discharge its mission both globally and on the
ground. That is where the United Nations is the most
relevant and closest to the people. To that end, the
United Nations should work with reliable partners
in regional and subregional organizations. They are
present in the environment concerned and are therefore
the best partners when addressing situations.
With regard to your third question in the concept
paper (S/2018/982, annex), Mr. President, Slovenia fully
agrees with the Secretary-General regarding the need
36/83

09/11/2018

for collective answers to existential threats to people
and the planet. As we all know, this body bears the
greatest responsibility with regard to the maintenance
of international peace and security, and we want it to be
efficient and effective and to address all situations that
pose a grave concern or threat. Members of the Council
have assumed this responsibility and are the ones that
need to safeguard this collective mechanism the most.
The complexity of today’s challenges requires us to
work more closely together, be pre-emptive and address
issues early on. We believe that conflict prevention is
the greatest priority and should be attempted before the
international community finds itself having to manage
or solve a crisis. Through efficient preventive diplomacy,
including mediation, the management and solving
of crises could be avoided altogether. Accordingly,
Slovenia adds its voice to those who call for the full
implementation of the reforms proposed, including
reform of the management of the Organization. Only a
financially stable and properly managed Organization
can be strong, reliable and effective in discharging all
the mandates conferred upon it.
Finally, the threats that we are facing today will
not be solved by weakening multilateralism. Quite the
opposite is true. Those threats are a wake-up call for
stronger international cooperation with a strong United
Nations at the centre. We simply do not see any other
way to do the job that would take into account the needs
of all. That is why Slovenia wants once again to express
its support for strong multilateralism. We do not think
that it is the only choice, but we are sure that it is the
best one.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.
Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
has the honour to speak on behalf of the 120 States
members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Allow us to express our gratitude to the delegation
of the People’s Republic of China for having convened
this debate on such an important subject, especially
in the light of the current international situation and
the crossroads at which multilateralism seems to find
itself. Similarly, we recognize the professionalism
with which the delegation of the Plurinational State of
Bolivia, a State member of our Movement, conducted
the activities of this body last month.
18-36863

09/11/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

The Movement is committed to the promotion of
multilateralism and reaffirms that the United Nations,
the Charter of the United Nations and the norms of
international law continue to be indispensable tools
in the preservation and maintenance of international
peace and security. Moreover, the Movement views the
United Nations, the only global body with universal
membership and indisputable legitimacy, as the central
multilateral forum for addressing global issues and
the most pressing challenges facing States today,
including those relating to international cooperation
for economic development, social progress, peace,
security, the peaceful settlement of disputes, human
rights, the rule of law, cooperation and consensusbuilding among States.
In that context, the member States of the Movement
reiterate their concern at the growing tendency of some
States to resort to the imposition of unilateral measures
that undermine the Charter of the United Nations
and international law as a whole, and reiterate their
opposition to the use and threat of use of force and to
the use pressure and coercive measures as a means of
achieving national policy objectives.
The promotion and advocacy of multilateral
organizations, including the United Nations, as the
appropriate areas for solving problems affecting
humankind through dialogue and cooperation form
part of the guiding principles of the Movement. And,
as stated in the concept paper (S/2018/982, annex)
prepared for this open debate, we are of the opinion that
all of the challenges we face today in an increasingly
interconnected world must be collectively addressed in
a fair and equitable manner by the entire international
community and on an equal footing. Such is our
commitment to those efforts that we are currently
promoting the adoption of a General Assembly
draft resolution to establish the international day of
multilateralism and diplomacy for peace.
On the other hand, we express our concern for the
victims of and innocent civilians caught in situations
involving the use of force or the imposition of sanctions,
including those authorized by the Security Council. In
the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations, we call
upon all States to promote the principle of the non-use
of force and the peaceful settlement of disputes as the
means of achieving collective security, and not the threat
of force or the use of force, bearing in mind that armed
force is not to be used save in the common interest, as
stipulated in the Charter of our Organization.

S/PV. 8395

In that regard, we urge the Security Council to make
greater use of the International Court of Justice — the
principal judicial organ of the United Nations — which
has played an important role precisely in promoting
the peaceful settlement of disputes and as a source of
advisory opinions and interpretations on the relevant
norms of international law and on controversial issues,
with a view to ensuring the adherence of States in
their actions to the Charter of the United Nations and
international law.
In conclusion, the Movement, faithful to its
commitment to strengthening its role as an anti-war and
peace-loving force, today reaffirms its determination to
work for the establishment of a peaceful and prosperous
world and a just and equitable world order. We also
renew our determination to work for a multipolar
world, through the strengthening of the United Nations
and multilateral processes, which are indispensable to
our efforts to promote the interests of our nations and
humankind as a whole.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mrs. Zappia (Italy): I thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this debate, which is very opportune.
Italy aligns itself with the statement made by the
observer of the European Union.
The need for multilateralism has never been greater.
Yet, the multilateral order is under strong criticism, and
its effectiveness is increasingly being questioned, not
only by Governments but more and more by the people.
The aggravation of social and economic inequalities
has undermined public agreement with common rules
and shared principles. Multilateralism is seen as unable
to find solutions to the world’s most pressing problems
and, as such, is remote from people’s everyday lives.
As a consequence, multilateral institutions are often
perceived as distant, ineffective and therefore irrelevant.
Ineffectiveness and irrelevance — whether
perceived or real — can drive an ever deeper wedge
between multilateral institutions and the people they
serve. Together, those problems pose an unprecedented
challenge to the existing multilateral order. There
is clearly an issue of trust, as the Secretary-General
underlined this morning — trust of the people in what
we do here, but also trust among us. The response
should be reform and recommitment.

18-3686337/83

S/PV.8395

Maintenance of international peace and security

We must reform the way our multilateral system
works in order to make it more effective and relevant
to the lives of people across the world. We must
recommit unwaveringly to renewed multilateralism
as the only way in which the international community
can come together to find effective solutions to
common problems and global challenges that cannot
be tackled by a group of States, let alone by one State
alone. They require a common set of rules and a global
network of engagements and partnerships based on an
equal footing.
Italy firmly believes in a rule-based international
legal order. At its core, the United Nations is the
primary forum in which we, the peoples, can come
together to develop a shared normative framework.
Only a strengthened United Nations can be the pillar
of an international system that ensures peace, justice,
equality and prosperity. The ongoing reform processes
are crucial to efforts to improve the United Nations
effectiveness and its capacity to reach the goals I have
mentioned. Italy reaffirms its steadfast support for the
Secretary-General’s endeavours, particularly his efforts
in conflict prevention, mediation and peacebuilding.
We strongly support the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative. Each of us has a role to play, as does Italy in
its capacity as a top troop-contributing country among
the Western countries in peacekeeping missions. Italy
stands ready to do its part to make United Nations
peacekeeping operations more effective and efficient.
A reformed United Nations must continue to
operate in the logic of shared responsibility among its
Member States and regional organizations. The essence
of effective multilateralism is the capacity to reach the
widest possible consensus — even on the thorniest
of issues — through genuine, inclusive and open
dialogue. The Secretary-General spoke this morning of
a network of multilateralism. Italy strongly believes in
that concept.
I wish to mention three recent examples of our
commitment to open dialogue and encouragement for a
multilateral approach.
At the end of October, we hosted in Rome, for the
second time, the Italy-Africa Ministerial Conference.
One of the main outcomes of the Conference was our
renewed commitment to a strategic engagement and
an all-encompassing partnership with Africa in the
context of a strengthened multilateral cooperation
framework that includes regional organizations, such
38/83

09/11/2018

as the African Union and the European Union, as well
as the United Nations, of course.
Next Monday and Tuesday, Italy will host in Palermo
an international conference on Libya, in which all of the
relevant stakeholders will come together with Libyan
representatives in order to renew the international
community’s full support for United Nations leadership
in the political process. The conference in Palermo is
an event for Libya and with Libya.
At the end of this month, we will host in Rome, for
the fourth time, the Mediterranean Dialogues, which
will consist of three days of high-level discussions
on all of the political, economic, scientific, cultural
and people-to-people issues of shared interest in the
Mediterranean region, with the aim of strengthening
multilateral cooperation in such a crucial area for peace
and stability in the world.
The Council has a crucial role and a responsibility
in strengthening multilateralism. The Council
also needs reforms to become truly representative,
accountable, democratic, transparent and effective. It
is high time to give a concrete chance to all Member
States to sit on the Security Council, particularly to
those groups of States and regions of the world that are
nowadays underrepresented. To achieve that result, we
must redouble our efforts to find a consensual solution
that can garner the widest possible political acceptance.
The key concept here is not to enlarge the small circle
of the privileged, but to give everyone more chances
to contribute to finding solutions to maintain peace
and security.
Finally, let me conclude by calling on us, the
diplomats — the actors of multilateralism, the women
and men behind the scene — to be even more committed
to dialogue and to understanding the other’s point of
view, and in the end, to recommit very strongly to
diplomacy itself.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Skinner-Kleé Arenales (Guatemala) (spoke
in Spanish): Guatemala thanks your delegation,
Mr. President, for organizing this critical debate, as well
as for the concept paper (S/2018/982, annex) that you
have provided. We also thank the Secretary-General for
his statement and briefing this morning.
It is necessary to recall that the Organization
was created to save succeeding generations from the
18-36863

09/11/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

scourge of war and that those who forget their history
are condemned to repeat it. Neglecting multilateralism
is tantamount to returning to the era before the
Congress of Vienna in 1815. Exactly a century ago,
the armistice of 11 November 1918 was signed, which,
as the Ambassador of India mentioned, ended the
war that was supposed to end all wars. Although the
League of Nations was not able to avoid war, that was
not an excuse, after the ensuing world war, for nations
to obviate the option of maintaining peace through
multilateralism, in the belief that the solution to all
wars necessarily depends on the collective action of the
international community.
Not only is the contemporary landscape complex,
but today’s world is facing the polarization of ideas, the
clash of geopolitical interests, the imposition of interests
and the consequent breakdown of trust among Powers
and cultures. Peaceful coexistence often fails and human
rights are violated due to an incessant struggle to impose
spheres of influence or abject domination. When, in
recent history, we were able to reach basic consensuses
that sustained fruitful alliances and institutions that
promoted collective security, it was on the basis of
good faith and known truth. Today, on the other hand,
the major determinants of international relations that
threaten peace are characterized by mistrust, unilateral
action and a relative or an alternative reality, as it were,
that is built on the basis of post-factual revisionism.
Despite the challenges facing global governance,
people organized in States are called by international
law to attain international peace and security, and
the Security Council cannot abdicate its essential
responsibility or be a passive spectator when entire
populations are at risk or suffer the violence of war.
That is why we must reverse the negative tendencies that
separate us and instead foster mutual trust on the basis
of an international order based on respect for common
rules built on reason, justice and mutual benefit, with
the supreme goal of ensuring the common good and the
sustainability of the planet.
The defence of multilateralism as an option for
addressing and resolving global problems must be
preached according to the principle of good faith
in the fulfilment of international obligations, since
the imposition of unilateral criteria contradicts an
international order based on rules that aspire to enjoy
sustainable peace, not only from the point of view of
the absence of conflict, but also as an expression of the
political will to achieve peaceful and useful coexistence.

S/PV. 8395

The international order based on a system of
generally recognized rules and practices requires
Powers to work together, instead of antagonizing one
another or competing for influence. It is therefore
necessary to re-establish mutual trust among them,
as well as the international community’s trust in
the Security Council. Our common destiny and the
survival of the human species require a basic consensus
on intrinsic principles, as well as the due observance
of human rights, mutual respect among nations and
economic progress in freedom, all of which fertilize
the progress of nations. To that end, international
cooperation is a sine qua non condition and requires
scrupulous observance of the tenets of the Charter of
the United Nations, which is entered into freely but
must be complied with once agreed to.
Beyond theory, multilateralism is praxis and action,
and has an evident impact on every inhabitant of the
planet. One of the noblest tasks of the Organization has
been peacekeeping, which my country is honoured to
support. Peacekeeping is a positive strategic partnership
among States that, even with large asymmetries, share
a common goal. Similarly, conflict prevention through
the concept of sustainable peace is another concept
that promotes a better world. That is why, despite the
imperfections of multilateral initiatives, the United
Nations remains the only universal forum where the
world converges and the most cherished hope of peoples,
not only those afflicted by conflict but particularly
those of us that yearn to achieve the fulfilment of the
Sustainable Development Goals prevails.
Allow me to conclude by saying that Guatemala
deeply values multilateralism and treasures peace.
We are witnesses to the fact that in difficult periods
of our history, the friendly hand of the international
community has enabled us to advance along the path
of democratization with social inclusion. That is
why we believe that it is not through hostile actions
or impositions that we will achieve a more just and
secure world, but through cooperation and collective
action to prevent the outbreak of conflicts and entrench
international security. That public good, as it was
called by the Ambassador of the United Kingdom said,
which goes by the name of the United Nations, must
be at the service of humankind, and that is why it is
called on to discharge its duties through solidarity and
collective consultations, upon the basis of the greatest
possible consensus.

18-3686339/83

S/PV.8395

Maintenance of international peace and security

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
sincerely thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting. I also thank you and the Secretary-General for
your valuable input and align myself with the statement
made on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM).
Multilateralism is an approach to addressing global
challenges collectively, pursuing international common
goals and goods cooperatively, upholding international
law solemnly and applying it to all nations equally.
True multilateralism is founded on inclusion instead
of exclusion; cooperation in place of confrontation;
equality rather than inequality; the rule of law instead
of the rule of power; pursuing the common good and
long-term objectives of all States, not the short-sighted
goals of only one State; and resolving differences
peacefully and justly, not violently and unfairly.
To solve global problems, multilateralism is not only
one option; it is the only option. It is an option, but not
optional. When multilateralism is challenged by bold
illegal unilateral actions, we must preserve it, address
its threats and promote its relevance and effectiveness.
That is essential for a rules-based international order.
International law and effective international institutions
with universal membership, such as the United Nations,
are the core elements of multilateralism. Therefore, in
order to preserve and strengthen multilateralism, the
United Nations should act decisively. That is how we
can make the United Nations relevant to all people.
We fully support the NAM proposal to designate
an international day of multilateralism and diplomacy
for peace. We need such an annual forum to discuss
emerging challenges to multilateralism, the latest of
which is the doctrine of withdrawal from international
instruments and institutions by a member of the
Council. That, among others, has resulted in its
withdrawal from the Human Rights Council, UNESCO,
the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA).
The JCPOA is the result of intensive negotiations
to peacefully resolve a manufactured crisis. It was
endorsed unanimously by resolution 2231 (2015), which
was drafted by the United States. The United States
withdrawal from the JCPOA and the reimposition of
unilateral sanctions four days ago appallingly violate
resolution 2231 (2015) and only defy international law.
40/83

09/11/2018

For the first time in the history of the United Nations, the
United States — a permanent member of the Council,
with veto power — is penalizing nations across the
globe not for violating resolution 2231 (2015), but rather
for abiding by it. The world should not allow the United
States to pursue its unilateral, arrogant and self-centred
policy, which focuses on continuing to reorder the
world order to be founded on power, not law.
Additionally, the United States shamefully avoids
implementing the recent International Court of Justice
order issued, unanimously asking for the immediate
removal of United States sanctions. The JCPOA’s
conclusion and Iran’s compliance with its commitments,
as confirmed by 12 International Atomic Energy
Agency reports, is our contribution to multilateralism.
That was commended globally. Iran will continue
implementing its commitments proportionate to the
benefits it receives.
The world community should strongly condemn
and reject the United States sanctions, not only in word
but also in deed. That would be an action of pragmatic
support for international law and multilateralism
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Ms. Brink (Australia): I thank China for convening
this debate today.
This is a challenging period for global cooperation.
Geopolitical competition, propelled by rapid and
accelerating change, as well as rising nationalism, pose
powerful challenges to the core tenets of multilateralism.
Australia recognizes the reality that great States have
a significant role to play in shaping the international
system. Australia considers that the world is safer and
more prosperous when differences are managed and
challenges met by agreed rules, and not by the exercise
of power alone.
Australia’s 2017 Foreign Policy White Paper
contends that there are few issues of greater significance
than the continued success of a rules-based international
order. By extension, the role of the United Nations is
paramount. A rules-based order provides the foundation
for our common security and prosperity, including for
our region, the Indo-Pacific. It benefits all of us, from
the smallest States to the largest States. It plays an
important role in managing security challenges, such
as the proliferation of weapons and terrorism.
18-36863

09/11/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8395

Australia believes firmly that global security and
prosperity are best served when countries behave in
accordance with international rules and norms; when
open markets facilitate the free flow of trade, capital
and ideas; when rights of freedom of navigation and
overflight are upheld; and when disputes are resolved
peacefully, without the threat or use of force.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.

As an island nation located at the confluence of
the Indian and Pacific Oceans, we place particular
importance on the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea (UNCLOS). The maritime boundary
treaty agreed between Australia and Timor-Leste in 2018
is a testament to the way in which UNCLOS reinforces
stability and allows countries to resolve disputes
peacefully and without coercion. It is an example of
the rules-based order in action. Other examples are the
rules-based trading system centred on the World Trade
Organization, which strongly advances the prosperity
of all members, as well as rules and institutions that
promote responses to global challenges like climate
change or health security.

In 1945, as the world emerged from the most
devastating war in recorded history, it was evident
that if the horrors of the past were to be put to rest,
international behaviour had to be governed, not by
the whims of a few powerful States but instead by a
set of universally applicable rules rooted in the firm
conviction that no matter how great our strength, we
should deny ourselves the license to do as we please and
work collaboratively so that our efforts would become
more than the sum of their constituent parts.

The rules-based order also provides the framework
for our efforts to support universal human rights. Just
as peace and development are mutually reinforcing,
respect for human rights is the foundation for peace and
security. Indeed, one of the greatest challenges to the
rules-based order is posed by States that question the
universality of human rights. Australia is committed
to a strong multilateral human rights system. We are
committed to reforms that strengthen the United Nations
Human Rights Council’s credibility and effectiveness.
We need stronger processes to ensure that Human
Rights Council members uphold the highest human
rights standards.
Australia
also
supports
Secretary-General
Guterres’s reform agenda. We see it as a key means to
increase and strengthen United Nations effectiveness,
and with it multilateralism, to promote sustaining
peace and achieve the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. We welcome the General Assembly’s
adoption of resolutions on the mutually reinforcing
pillars of reform, including on the United Nations
development system. But there is more to do.
In conclusion, protecting and strengthening the
rules-based order benefits all of us and is a shared
responsibility. We must work together to ensure that
multilateral institutions are best equipped to engage
effectively in the contemporary world.

Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let me start by
congratulating China on assuming the presidency of
the Council for this month and for convening this very
important debate.

That essence of multilateralism was encapsulated
in the creation of the United Nations. During the past
seven decades, the United Nations has remained an
indispensable instrument for the promotion of our
shared goals of peace, security and development. From
the crystallization of the inalienable right of peoples
to self-determination, to its application in the struggle
against colonialism and foreign occupation; from the
ideal of the dignity and worth of an individual to the
progressive development of instruments to promote
and protect fundamental human rights, the United
Nations has left an indelible mark in virtually all walks
of international life. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, the Paris Agreement on Climate Change
and the sustaining peace agenda are recent affirmations
of that collective approach for the common good and
our shared destiny.
Today, as we all know, multilateralism is
under assault. Driven by forces of illiberalism and
protectionism, jingoism is gaining ascendency over
reason, intolerance over acceptance and bigotry over
humanity. Consensus-building and compromise are
being viewed by some not as virtues of strength but
as signs of weakness. The exclusive pursuit of narrow
national aims is being promoted as the sole determinant
of world affairs. Long-standing legal norms are being
eroded; United Nations resolutions and its binding
decisions are flouted with impunity; and force is
threatened all too frequently. Those trends are not just
regressive; they expose the rules-based international
order to new dangers.

18-3686341/83

S/PV.8395

Maintenance of international peace and security

At a time of increasingly complex and mutually
reinforcing challenges, we must be thoughtful and
constructive in evolving our response to those new
dangers. After all, when seismic shifts triggered
by globalization, human mobility, technological
advances, terrorism and organized crime and climate
change acknowledge neither physical boundaries
nor geographical barriers, how can the international
community remain divided into silos of narrow interests
and divergent priorities, and yet hope to prevail over
common challenges?
In our interconnected world, we are all vulnerable
if some are insecure. International cooperation is
therefore imperative, and it was gratifying to hear
the ringing endorsement of multilateralism from
world leaders during the general debate of the current
session. We must now build on that momentum. The
best measure of our commitment to multilateralism
is to strengthen the role of the United Nations, for the
United Nations will be no less and can be no better than
what the membership wants the Organization to be.
A rules-based order, with the United Nations at
its core, remains an abiding and fundamental element
of my country’s foreign policy. Pakistan believes that
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
which are based on the sovereign equality of States,
non-interference in internal affairs and the pacific
settlement of disputes, provide the requisite framework
to promote peaceful relations among Member States.
The provisions of Chapter VI of the Charter remain
equally critical to that end.
True multilateralism entails not only decisions
that reflect the diverse array of views and positions
on any issue, but also decision-making bodies that are
fully imbued with the democratic spirit of our times
and representative of the aspirations of all Member
States — small, medium and large. Those ideals have
served as the foundation stone of Pakistan’s perspective
for a comprehensive reform of the Security Council and
will continue to guide our efforts.
The framers of the Charter of the United Nations
were no vain idealists in seeking to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war. While swords
have not been turned into ploughshares, there is no
better vehicle than the United Nations to achieve the
goals of advancing modern civilization to a new and
higher level, assuring a life of dignity for all people and
helping to create a more just and peaceful world order.
42/83

09/11/2018

Allow me to close with the words of my country’s
founding father, Quaid-e-Azam Muhammad Ali
Jinnah, who famously said that “Pakistan will never be
found lacking in upholding the principles of the United
Nations Charter”.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Spain.
Mr. Santos Maraver (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
There are no viable alternatives to multilateralism.
Defending and promoting it, as President of the
Government of Spain Mr. Sánchez Pérez-Castejón
declared before the General Assembly (see A/73/
PV.11), is a clear purpose of our country and our
partners in the European Union, with whose statement
we align ourselves.
A renewed collective commitment to multilateralism
and international law is needed now more than ever.
In my statement, I will address three key aspects:
first, the responsibility of States; secondly, the value
of international norms; and thirdly, the unity of the
pillars that underpin multilateralism and the vitality of
the Organization.
First, every State has an unavoidable responsibility
in facing the common challenges that determine
our agenda. Climate change, growing economic
inequality, remaining gender inequality, migratory
flows, geopolitical friction, terrorism and other forms
of violence are, among others, widely shared concerns.
No State can or should evade its obligations under the
Charter of the United Nations or to the international
community. There are no partial or unilateral solutions.
The only suitable tools for facing global challenges are
global agreements.
Secondly, respect for treaties and the values of
international norms are the basic foundations of legal
security and stable international relations. In that
regard, Spain once again reaffirms its commitment to
protection systems for the legal order, in particular for
international judicial bodies. The fight against impunity
remains paramount. The International Criminal Court is
a key institution of the international community, and its
founding treaty, the Rome Statute, is now celebrating its
twentieth anniversary. With full legitimacy, the Court
investigates, establishes responsibilities and punishes
the most atrocious crimes. We call once again for its
universality and strongly believe that, in carrying out
its duties, its full independence must be respected.
18-36863

09/11/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

I would like to conclude by thanking the People’s
Republic of China for convening this debate and
recalling a third point that we believe to be essential.
Security, prosperity and the values that underpin
human rights cannot be strengthened separately. As
the President of the Spanish Government pointed out in
the General Assembly Hall on 27 September, without
peace and security there can be no social development
or respect for human dignity.
Flagrant and mass violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law constitute in
and of themselves a threat to international peace and
security and must therefore be taken into consideration
by the organs to which the Charter attributes that
responsibility, in particular the Security Council.
Indeed, strengthening multilateralism in the twentyfirst century requires reform of the Security Council,
with openness to consensus and a broad political
vision. Spain, together with numerous other groups of
countries, continues to advocate a more democratic,
representative and transparent Council.
Everything I have said can be condensed into
one single idea — today the international situation
requires, more than it did 73 years ago, a strong United
Nations. Its role is essential as a forum for dialogue, a
broad framework for cooperation and a decisive actor
in the global order. In that regard, we express our
full support for the reform undertaken by SecretaryGeneral Guterres.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Algeria.
Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): Let me thank China for
the initiative to hold an open debate on multilateralism.
The time is always ripe to take stock of an issue that
deserves the fullest attention. Indeed, we should
ask ourselves how we can uphold multilateralism
when it seems to be challenged. Do we believe in
multilateralism? More precisely, do we have a common
understanding of what multilateralism is? The answers
to those questions are not easy to define, but there
is common ground that cannot be contested. We, the
Member States and beyond, have to take a closer look
at the frameworks that we have at hand, of which the
United Nations is a strong pillar, a beacon and a cradle
for multilateral action.
As indicated in the Preamble of the Charter of the
United Nations, it cost humankind two world wars to
bring about an instrument aimed at preventing another

S/PV. 8395

cataclysm that would annihilate it. There is no better
success and faith in multilateralism than the very name
of our Organization, the United Nations, which means
just that — nations that are clearly united beyond
mere membership, acting together for the sake of the
whole world.
The United Nations Charter is a precious instrument,
but do we really implement its full power? Do we respect
the full meaning of its principles and goals? It is clear
that after more than 70 years of existence, the United
Nations needs to adjust its structures and become more
relevant, more efficient and more respected.
There are steps that ought to be taken. In that regard,
reform of the United Nations would be an integral part
of strengthening multilateralism. Many important
issues have lingered for too long. The revitalization of
the General Assembly, reform of the Security Council,
an increase of the Council’s membership and a review of
its methods of work would all lead to better efficiency,
relevance and credibility and, at the end of the day,
to multilateralism.
One of the major tracks to be reinforced is closer
work with regional organizations. In that vein, we salute
the cooperation and coordination that exist between the
United Nations and the African Union, and we strongly
urge its strengthening.
Addressing the issues still at stake also lies in
perceiving the United Nations through a lens of
efficiency in resolving regional conflicts. For every
tremendous success of the United Nations, as in
Namibia and Timor-Leste, how many failures are
unjustifiably placed on the United Nations shoulders.
Clearly some issues, such as the question of Palestine,
have haunted the agenda of the United Nations since
its founding, but that failure cannot be seen but as a
failure of multilateralism. Regional conflicts old and
new are constant litmus tests that hover over the United
Nations and multilateralism. But are we not all equally
responsible for those failures? If we stick to the letter
and spirit of the Charter, some Members, especially
here in the Council, have specific duties that they
cannot ignore.
Multilateralism also means protecting the lives of
every human being on Earth and the necessity to promote
their well-being. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and what it encompasses — namely, our
common responsibility and solidarity and the very

18-3686343/83

S/PV.8395

Maintenance of international peace and security

idea of no one being left behind and the eradication of
poverty — are also tests of and for multilateralism.
No one can secure their own well-being if they
ignore the well-being of others. No one can be safe
if all are not safe. The questions of climate change,
migration and terrorism are global and require global
and coordinated action. This is therefore a strident call
for multilateral action and solutions, in which big and
small and the powerful and not so powerful must think
together, work together and act together with mutual
respect and shared responsibilities.
I wish that we could draw some optimism from
those who inspired the United Nations Charter while
the Second World War was not yet finished. All their
values, principles, goals and mechanisms created
an inspiring momentum that, unfortunately, narrow
visions later impeded.
To us, multilateralism and patriotism are not
contradictory and should not be opposed to one another.
Our world, this global village, cannot sustain being
disenfranchised or excluded. If we are to be forced
to accept that, then we will end up with beleaguered
citadels where the besieged and besiegers live not in
tranquillity but in dubious confrontation. Hurricanes
know no borders; neither does sunlight. There is one
way to alleviate hurricane damage, rebuild what is
destroyed and have sunlight shine on everyone — that
is precisely through multilateralism.
Let me conclude by appealing to you, Mr. President,
to achieve an outcome of this open debate that is in the
best interests of our records and history.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): I would like to
congratulate your country, Mr. President, on assuming
the presidency this month and convening this open
debate. The theme of the debate is indeed timely
and crucial in the light of the growing geopolitical
challenges with which we are faced.
The current multilateral system was imposed
on us as a consequence of war. Seventy-seven years
ago, on 9 June 1941, the allied representatives of
Australia, Belgium, Canada, Czechoslovakia, France,
Greece, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Poland, South Africa, the United Kingdom
and Yugoslavia met in St. James Palace, London. They
declared that
44/83

09/11/2018

“[t]he only true basis of enduring peace is the
willing cooperation of free peoples in a world in
which, relieved of the menace of aggression, all
may enjoy economic and social security. It is our
intention to work together, and with other free
peoples, both in war and peace, to that end”.
In 1945, 50 nations, including South Africa,
formed the United Nations and collectively agreed
to the Charter of the United Nations. The aspirations
set out in the Charter are more important today than
ever before. The increased threats to multilateralism
undermine the principles to which we subscribed over
70 years ago, when the Organization was established.
The complexities of conflict have evolved, and we
are increasingly more interdependent as nations. That
means that we are all affected in some way by conflicts
that we might have thought were far away from us. The
world is a significantly different place to what it was
when the United Nations was founded, and the need
for multilateral approaches to address our common
challenges is even more necessary and pertinent today.
South Africa, like many other countries, has
benefited from the support of the States Members of
the United Nations, which, through the Organization,
were able to mobilize the international community
to help isolate and defeat the apartheid system. The
United Nations was a beacon of hope that contributed
to the transformation of our country. For that, we
remain grateful.
Two months ago, during the Nelson Mandela
Peace Summit of the General Assembly, our leaders
reaffirmed their commitment to global peace, in
honour of and to revive the values that leaders like
Nelson Mandela stood for, by placing human dignity
at the centre of our actions. They made a strong call
to safeguard multilateralism, in recognition of the new
challenges and threats that our nations face. Emerging
threats to peace and security can threaten any nation,
no matter how stable and prosperous it may be, and a
coordinated and global response is needed to overcome
those threats. Through the political declaration
adopted at the Summit (resolution 73/1), our leaders
committed to redoubling their efforts to build a just,
peaceful, prosperous and inclusive world. It is critical
that we respect, safeguard, enhance and implement the
multilateral agreements constructed around the pillars
of development, human rights, peace and security.
18-36863

09/11/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

We recognize that the Security Council remains
the primary multilateral body charged with the
maintenance of international peace and security.
However, the Council has been confronted with
challenges where it has been prevented from acting due
to structural impediments that, at times, undermine
its ability to promote conflict prevention and protect
the most vulnerable. It is therefore imperative that
the Council continue to be united and steadfast in
realizing its multilateral commitment to achieving
peace and tangible dividends for vulnerable people on
the ground. The Council’s central mandate should not
be undermined by narrow self-interest, which is the
antithesis of multilateralism. Rather, it should draw
on its strength of unity and diversity of perspective in
finding real, proactive and viable solutions to threats to
international peace and security.
It is vital that the Security Council continue to work
closely with regional organizations, in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter. That is fundamental in the
light of the significant strides that have been registered in
the continuously growing relationship with the African
Union (AU) and the United Nations — particularly
between the African Union Peace and Security Council
and the United Nations Security Council — in support
of a home-grown peace initiative. In that regard, we
should ensure that the relationship is enhanced and
becomes mutually beneficial to the aspirations of
collective security, as well as to silence the guns on the
African continent, as stated in the AU Agenda 2063:
The Africa We Want.
Furthermore, we should act with determination in
reforming the Council to ensure that it reflects current
geographical realities and is fully representative of the
peoples of the world today. In that context, we should
redress the historical injustice against the 1.2 billion
people of Africa. Similarly, improving the working
methods of the Council would enhance the effectiveness
of the work of this important body.
Efforts aimed at creating an enabling environment
through the prioritization of conflict prevention cannot
be overstated. Consequently, addressing the root causes
of conflict will enable us to better address issues related
to terrorism and migration, among others. The absence
of overt conflict, however, is not an end in itself, and
peacebuilding and post-conflict reconstruction and
development are essential. The implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development is therefore

S/PV. 8395

key, as it aims to address poverty and development and
lays the foundations for achieving sustainable peace.
In closing, we would like to reiterate the sentiment
of the political declaration adopted at the Nelson
Mandela Peace Summit, which captures the essence
of multilateralism.
“It is clear that lasting peace is not realized just
by the absence of armed conflict, but is achieved
through a continuing positive, dynamic, inclusive
participatory process of dialogue and engagement
that resolves all outstanding issues in a spirit of
mutual respect and understanding, cooperation and
long-term vision”. (resolution 73/1, para. 20)
It therefore supports what South Africa firmly
believes — that the only route to a just and lasting
peace is through multilateralism, which is exemplified
by the achievements of the United Nations. Like many
others, the African way is a multilateral way.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Khiari (Tunisia) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank China for convening this
open debate of the Security Council on the theme of
strengthening multilateralism and the role of the United
Nations. It is indeed an issue that concerns international
peace and security.
This debate could not be more timely. It is
taking place in an increasingly complex and difficult
international and regional context, at least for our
region, with the resurgence of conflicts that we thought
we had laid to rest; new dimensions of terrorism and
extremism; cybercrime; extreme poverty in a globalized
world; ethnic division in a world experiencing an
exponential growth of information technologies and
communications; climate change, certain aspects of
which represent an existential threat for many countries;
a weakening of the disarmament and non-proliferation
regime; rising nationalism, and so on.
With all of those challenges, it is clear that we are
truly at a crossroads of our destiny, where all options,
even the most extreme, stand out in stark relief. More
than ever before, we need the multilateralism that is
embodied by the United Nations, which is neither an
option nor an alternative but our only path to salvation.
As is clearly emphasized in the concept paper
before us (S/2018/982, annex), the path to peace and

18-3686345/83

S/PV.8395

Maintenance of international peace and security

stability is long and arduous. We are aware of that. Let
us translate into reality the common aspiration and
firm will expressed today in this forum to safeguard
the gains we have fought long and bitterly to achieve,
strengthen multilateralism and ensure that the United
Nations voice rings louder than that of nations. How
can we better safeguard multilateralism in the light of
current challenges? That question is legitimately posed
in the concept paper and raises questions on three levels.
First, the central role of the United Nations is
constantly underlined as a reminder that the system,
which was built by the ancestors of some among us,
and which we subsequently joined, remains at the
heart of global governance. Its scope for action, based
on consultation, dialogue and negotiation, fosters a
perspective that seeks to capitalize on consensus in
order to achieve collective, sustainable and realistic
partnerships. It is in the interests of us all to safeguard
and build on those achievements, because we have
enjoyed successes and will enjoy more.
Secondly, the three pillars of the SecretaryGeneral’s reform, particularly that of peace and
security, rightly respond to the need for a holistic
review of the functioning of the Organization. Tunisia
has strongly supported that necessary reform process.
Our Organization must resolutely rethink its working
culture and methods. We believe that we are heading in
the right direction to achieve our ambitions.
Thirdly, it is generally accepted that the viability
of a collective security system is intimately linked to
the development of peoples — economically, socially,
culturally and so on. It must be remembered that one
of the purposes of our Organization, according to
the Charter of the United Nations, is the recourse to
international institutions to promote the economic
and social progress of all peoples. The Sustainable
Development Goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development are, without doubt, the main catalyst
for lasting peace. Development cannot, in fact, be
conceived sustainably without multilateralism, which
is also true for lasting peace.
It is clear that the collective actions of the
international community must be rooted in regional
responses. If necessary, the dynamics of medium- and
small-scale negotiations must be deepened, reinvented
and institutionalized. The United Nations must be the
champion in that regard. We welcome the fact that, at
the African level, there has been an annual dialogue
46/83

09/11/2018

between the United Nations and the African Union
since 2017. The existence of the United Nations-African
Union Joint Task Force on Peace and Security reflects
the revitalization of the instruments of cooperation
between the two organizations. Such action is timely as
the African Union is beginning its own reform process
to refocus our regional organization on key priorities
that affect the entire continent and its institutions.
In that regard, I would like to express Tunisia’s
appreciation for the holding of the second annual
African Union-United Nations conference and the recent
meeting in September of the United Nations-African
Union Joint Task Force on Peace and Security. Those
actions can only further strengthen multilateralism and
the role of the United Nations in conflict prevention and
management, of course based on its three pillars.
The dividing line between regional peace
and international peace and regional security and
international security is no longer relevant, as they are
all intrinsically linked to each other. That is why we
continue to believe that peace in the Near East and the
Middle East is a decisive factor in international peace.
The achievements and efforts of the United Nations in
the region must be capitalized on, because they reflect
and express international legality.
Tunisia continues to believe that the only viable
and sustainable way to address challenges of peace
and security is inclusive dialogue. We have made that
our rallying cry at the international level, especially
following our accession to the United Nations, when
we advocated that approach to the resolution of
conflicts, including the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
and we continue to advocate it today as the only way to
peacefully resolve conflicts, including the Libyan crisis.
Tunisia is an emerging democracy, recognized for
its consensus-based approach, which has enabled it to
strengthen its capacity to overcome difficulties and
meet challenges. As Africa’s candidate for the Security
Council for the 2020-2021 term, Tunisia will act on
behalf of the international community and honour
its commitments by incorporating the objectives and
principles of the Charter and the close correlation
among peace, security and sustainable development.
Our success, however, depends on the extent to which
our collective influence and its mechanisms for action
can be multilateralized.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland.
18-36863

09/11/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Favre (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
open debate.
At a time when many items on our agenda may
divide us, we should remember what unites us. The
central institution of our multilateral system, the
United Nations, was built on the conviction that future
generations must be saved from the scourge of war. The
Charter of the United Nations remains the common
denominator and the starting point for our ongoing
dialogue. It envisages friendly relations among nations
and international cooperation to solve international
problems. It commits all Member States to settling their
international disputes peacefully.
We have achieved important milestones during the
past seven decades. That is illustrated, for example,
by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change. However, the
challenges facing the international community have not
decreased over the years. A strong multilateral system
therefore remains as important as ever.
Like every good relationship, multilateralism needs
the continued engagement of all States. As a federal
State, Switzerland is accustomed to building bridges
across different political perspectives, cultures and
languages. It is therefore second nature to us strive
actively for a strong, rules-based multilateral system.
Geneva hosts the second United Nations Headquarters,
which is the operational heart of the multilateral
system. Furthermore, Switzerland has a tradition
of providing good offices to conflicting parties and
platforms for international peace talks. The launch of
the Secretary-General’s agenda for disarmament in
Geneva is therefore no coincidence.

S/PV. 8395

development, and human rights. These reforms will
enable the United Nations to address current challenges
and act more effectively, particularly with regard to the
sustainability of peace.
This brings me to my last point — the role of
the Security Council. The Council has the primarily
responsibility for maintaining international peace
and security. In particular, Chapter VI of the Charter
provides it with important tools to ensure the peaceful
settlement of disputes and to contribute as well to
conflict prevention. As Coordinator of the interregional
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group
and one of the Chairs of the Human Rights and Conflict
Prevention Caucus, based in New York and Geneva,
Switzerland is committed to continuing to support the
Council in the effective use of these tools.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic of Korea): Let me
too begin by commending the Chinese delegation for
its initiative to convene today’s open debate on this
important topic and by thanking the Secretary-General
and the other briefers for their enlightening presentations.

Houses are built on columns, while multilateral
systems are built on institutions. It is vital that we do
not turn our backs on the multilateral institutions that
we have built together, from the Human Rights Council
to the World Trade Organization and the International
Criminal Court. Supporting strong institutions also
means ensuring a strong United Nations that is fit for
purpose and able to respond to current crises.

Seventy-three years ago, the founders of the United
Nations came together to sign the Charter of the United
Nations, which enshrines their strong commitment
to save future generations from the scourge of war,
protect human rights and dignity, respect international
law, and promote social progress and better standards
of life. Yet today’s reality is a far cry from what the
founders of the United Nations envisioned. Protracted
armed conflicts, large-scale human rights abuses, and
complex cross-border problems such as terrorism and
human trafficking are just a few of the challenges
we face today. And amid the slow progress in the
international community’s efforts to address these
challenges, multilateralism and the United Nations are
viewed with increased scepticism and suspicion. Critics
are asking whether the complexity of today’s challenges,
along with polarization and inequality among and
within nations, have outduelled the Organization and
our collective will to realize the goals set forth in
its Charter.

It is necessary for the United Nations to be able
to create better conditions on the ground. We are
convinced that the Secretary-General’s reforms will
help the United Nations to work in a more integrated
manner across the three pillars — peace and security,

Indeed, multilateralism is under fire. However,
none of these criticisms means that we should go back
to the days when the United Nations did not exist.
On the contrary, the United Nations must stand up
to the challenges. What is called for is not a perfect,

18-3686347/83

S/PV.8395

Maintenance of international peace and security

but more relevant United Nations. That is why for the
past two years we have dedicated ourselves to pooling
our wisdom with a view to creating a reformed and
reinvigorated United Nations. While reaffirming
our full support for the Secretary-General’s reform
initiatives, I would like to highlight a couple of points
that I believe are important in our collective efforts
aimed at strengthening multilateralism and making the
United Nations more relevant.
First, the United Nations must make better use of
its convening power. The United Nations is the only
organization with both the legitimacy and capacity to
bring knowledge and resources of the international
community together to tackle global challenges. The
convening power of the United Nations is all the more
relevant today with the increased role and visibility of
non-State actors. From mobilizing financial resources
to seeking collective solutions to complex challenges,
the United Nations should leverage its convening
power to bring relevant actors together. The reason
why the Action for Peacekeeping initiative is so widely
supported is because its key goal is to bring together all
partners and stakeholders in supporting United Nations
peacekeeping operations. As Secretary-General
Guterres rightly pointed out, the resources are already
out there. The question is how to connect the dots.
Secondly, we must identify and magnify the
successes of multilateralism and build upon what has
proven to be effective. From the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, and to the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change, multilateralism has time and again proved its
ability to achieve ground-breaking successes. And,
most recently, multilateralism helped to bring the
Korean peninsula back on the road towards peace. The
unity of the Security Council in particular has played
a critical role in this regard. As we continue to work
towards the complete denuclearization and permanent
peace on the Korean peninsula, we count on the
Council remaining united in supporting the ongoing
process of negotiations towards a diplomatic solution,
while faithfully implementing the relevant resolutions
in place.
In our collective efforts to strengthen
multilateralism and the role of the United Nations, we
must benefit from the wisdom of Winston Churchill,
who is reputed to have said, “A pessimist sees the
difficulty in every opportunity; an optimist sees the
opportunity in every difficulty”.
48/83

09/11/2018

The Republic of Korea is a country whose very
existence is a living testament to the relevance and
competence of the United Nations. Had there been
no help from the United Nations from the time of its
foundation to the Korean War and in the post-war
reconstruction, the Republic of Korea as it stands
today would not exist. We are therefore committed
to playing a greater role in rebuilding confidence in
multilateralism and the United Nations, drawing upon
our unique experience of simultaneously achieving
industrialization and democratization. To this end, we
will focus mainly on the following three roles.
The first role we can play is that of facilitator.
In the process of transforming itself from a warstricken agrarian society to an industrial powerhouse
with a vibrant democracy in a span of half a century,
the Republic of Korea has earned a good reputation
and the trust of the international community. It is
therefore uniquely positioned to play a role as a bridge
in facilitating communication and cooperation among
relevant actors, including developed and developing
countries. A case in point is our role as one of the Chairs
of the Group of Friends on Peace Operations, together
with Norway and Ethiopia. We are committed to playing
a role as a facilitator or interlocutor in other areas as
well, wherever we deem it necessary or appropriate, in
order to help move the multilateral process forward.
The second role we can play is that of supporter.
Having overcome all the challenges and constraints
associated with being an aid recipient to then join the
ranks of full-fledged donor countries, the Republic
of Korea, more than anyone else, appreciates and
understands the difficulties that developing countries
face in their journey towards socioeconomic and
political development. We will use our experience as
a valuable asset in supporting developing countries,
especially those in transition, as well as fragile
States, in their efforts to achieve sustainable peace
and development. Such efforts will not be confined to
sharing our experiences on a bilateral basis, but extends
to multilateral arenas, as we did in our contribution to
reinvigorating the role of the Peacebuilding Commission
as its Chair last year.
The third role we can play is that of initiator. With
so many successes and failures in its quest for economic
prosperity and political stability, the Republic of Korea
has learned a number of precious lessons. It is therefore
better poised to have a balanced perspective on many
of today’s emerging issues and global challenges. From
18-36863

09/11/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

the implementation of the Sustainable Development
Goals, to peacebuilding and sustaining peace, and to
new technologies, the Republic of Korea will continue
to seek a constructive and more proactive role, initiating
and advancing new agendas for promoting global peace
and security.
As former Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjöld
once reminded us, the United Nations was created
not to take humankind to heaven, but to save us from
hell. Undoubtedly, the greater the challenge is, the
bigger the need is for a strengthened role of the United
Nations and multilateralism. The Republic of Korea
will remain firmly committed to working closely with
all stakeholders within and outside the United Nations
towards this end, playing a role befitting a country of
its stature.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Estonia.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I would like to thank the
Chinese presidency for convening today’s open debate
on strengthening multilateralism and the role of the
United Nations as an issue that is ever important and
topical against the backdrop of current global challenges.
Estonia aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
Head of the Delegation of the European Union.
The international challenges of the twenty-first
century have become more complex, transnational and
multidimensional. To overcome these intertwined and
interrelated issues, a coherent and holistic response
by the international community is needed. We must
demonstrate not only that collective international
action works but that it is also in all of our best interests.
Estonia is committed to promoting the respect for
international law and a rules-based international order.
For us, international law is an existential matter. It is
of utmost importance that we make full use of all the
instruments and that we act with full responsibility in
preventing and ending conflicts. In order to make the
whole system work, every country has to play its role.
In that regard, we strongly support the SecretaryGeneral’s reform efforts to make the United Nations
more responsive, effective and modernized in order
to be more capable of dealing with today’s challenges.
Making an effort to increase the transparency and
accountability of the United Nations system should be
part of our ambitions. Helping to make good progress
on all three main strands of the Secretary-General’s
reform agenda is by far the best way in which all of

S/PV. 8395

us can make a tangible contribution to strengthening a
multilateral, rules-based international system.
Although in recent times we have been witnessing
growing disunity and disagreements on a number of
topics, it is clear that the international community
needs the Security Council to uphold and promote
international law by responding decisively to grave
violations of international law, including that of
humanitarian law and human rights law. We need to
keep up our efforts to strengthen the legitimacy of the
Security Council resolutions and their implementation.
If we want the Council to fulfil its purpose of maintaining
international peace and security, its practices need to
be updated so that it is not hamstrung by the use of the
veto, especially in the case of atrocity crimes.
Modern conflicts threatening international peace
and security are characterized by the ever-broader
use of new technologies. Being ready to adequately
respond to those kinds of new challenges is important
if we want to ensure that the United Nations peace
and security architecture stays relevant in times of
a dynamically evolving international environment.
Estonia is firmly of the position that crimes have to be
prevented, investigated and prosecuted, irrespective of
the way they are committed, be it by using kinetic force
or cyber means. International law is applicable when
cyber means are used to threaten international peace
and security. It is our view that the Security Council can
and should use all powers deriving from the Charter of
the United Nations to take action in such cases.
To conclude, as the saying goes, listening well is
as powerful as talking well and is as essential to true
conversation. We should learn from those wise words in
order to strive for deeper cooperation and empathy, both
within the Security Council as well as with the wider
United Nations membership and other actors. Estonia
stands ready to engage in that partnership to better
uphold international law and maintain international
peace and security.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank the Chinese
presidency of the Council for taking the initiative to
convene this debate, as well as for the special emphasis
placed on the question of strengthening multilateralism
and the role of the United Nations in maintaining
international peace and security in the face of the

18-3686349/83

S/PV.8395

Maintenance of international peace and security

emergence of new challenges and threats. We are also
grateful for the briefings by the Secretary-General;
Ambassador Al-Thani on behalf of the President of the
General Assembly; Ms. Inga Rhonda King, President of
the Economic and Social Council; and the President of
the International Court of Justice.
Argentina firmly believes in the value of
multilateralism and the fundamental role that the
United Nations can and should play in the maintenance
of international peace and security in order to generate
and maintain a stable and inclusive global order based
on the pillars of peace, sustainable development and
human rights. The global order we aspire to build begins
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, which gave rise to the Organization
more than 70 years ago and are now more applicable
than ever before.
Protecting the rules-based international order was
and is a shared responsibility, and the maintenance
of international peace and security is increasingly
threatened by serious new challenges such as organized
crime, cybercrime and terrorism, which require
effective and efficient responses based on dialogue,
consensus, cooperation and multilateralism, which
no individual State in the international community
is able to provide on its own. In that regard, today
more than ever the role of leadership is fundamental
to protecting and maintaining the international order
that we have been able to build over the past decades,
in order to achieve peaceful, inclusive, equitable and
sustainable societies.
One pillar of multilateralism in the international
order is conflict prevention and the peaceful settlement
of disputes. In that regard, the support of the United
Nations in seeking peaceful solutions, in accordance
with international law and the parameters established
by the Organization, represents a valuable contribution
to a more just world. In that context, we emphasize the
power of the General Assembly, the most democratic
and representative organ of the United Nations, to make
recommendations for the maintenance of international
peace and security, including by granting a mandate to
the Secretary-General to mediate or exercise his good
offices with the parties to any dispute.
In that regard, my country deems it relevant to
stress that the ability of any mediation effort, mission
of good offices or other means of peaceful settlement to
achieve its goal and purpose depends on compliance in
50/83

09/11/2018

good faith with the obligations incumbent on the parties
to those procedures. When called on to negotiate by
the organs of the United Nations, the parties involved
must do so in good faith, refraining from acts that could
hinder their obligation to settle the dispute by peaceful
means. Likewise, States that are not parties to a dispute
must contribute to its peaceful resolution and abstain
from any conduct that could frustrate the settlement
of the dispute. All of that is also part of a genuine
commitment to multilateralism.
Likewise, we would like to highlight the value
of regional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security. The development of
multilateralism at the regional level has also proven
to be highly effective in the prevention and peaceful
resolution of conflicts.
In the framework of the Charter, the International
Court of Justice plays a central role as the principal
judicial organ of the United Nations. In that regard,
at the international level the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court is one of the most
significant achievements of multilateralism and plays a
central role in the fight against impunity. Consequently,
it constitutes an essential element of the rule of law at
the international level, and we therefore advocate for
its universality, reaffirming the prevalence of law and
justice over force in international relations.
Similarly, Argentina commends the efforts of the
Organization to develop capacities and provide support
to Member States in order to strengthen multilateralism
based on the rule of law. My country values the
​​ use
of South-South cooperation as an effective and
efficient tool for capacity-building and the exchange
of experiences acquired in ​​the peaceful settlement of
disputes and the promotion of justice.
Finally, we believe that the implementation of the
shared responsibility to strengthen multilateralism
should include the reform of the Security Council in
order to make it more democratic, representative,
transparent and effective, which would undoubtedly
contribute to the strengthening of the multilateral
system and the role of the Organization in the
maintenance of international peace and security. To
that end, we believe that we must redouble our efforts
to reach a solution based on consensus with the highest
possible degree of political support.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Singapore.
18-36863

09/11/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Gafoor (Singapore): I have the honour to
address the Council on behalf of the 10 States members
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
in today’s open debate.
I wish to begin by thanking China for convening
this open debate on the very important topic of
strengthening multilateralism. The United Nations
is the ultimate global institution for multilateralism,
where nations large and small interact with each
other on the basis of sovereign equality. It is therefore
appropriate and timely that we are discussing the topic
of multilateralism in the Security Council. The Security
Council has a special responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security. Accordingly, the
members of the Council have the special responsibility
to be custodians of multilateralism and guardians of
the multilateral rules-based system. In particular, the
permanent members of the Security Council have a
duty to strengthen multilateralism, and to not weaken
it, through their words and actions.
In the past seven decades, the United Nations has
been an important pillar of the multilateral architecture
by providing a forum for dialogue and cooperation.
More importantly, it provides a framework of rules
and norms that governs the behaviour of countries.
That rules-based framework, which we have built
painstakingly, has brought peace, security and
sustainable development to all our peoples.
However, there is no doubt that today, multilateralism
is at a crossroads. In fact, there is a clear sense that
multilateralism is under siege, as evidenced by the large
number of speakers we have today. In his remarks to the
General Assembly at the opening session of the highlevel week, the Secretary-General spoke of a crisis of
confidence in multilateralism (see A/73/PV.6). As he
put it, there is a “trust deficit disorder”, especially
among the major players. The lack of trust and the
polarization that we are witnessing among members
of the Council are not new. However, they come at a
time when the world expects members of the Council
to work closely together to resolve global issues and
transnational problems.
The lack of trust among the major players has also
affected the rules-based multilateral trading system,
of which the Word Trade Organization is an important
component. In ASEAN, we are deeply concerned about
the spectre of a prolonged trade war that could seriously
damage global economic prospects. While we must

S/PV. 8395

adapt and reform the global trading system, unilateral
actions cannot be the solution. Unilateral actions only
serve to undermine the multilateral trading system
that has underpinned global prosperity for decades.
Ultimately, all of us will be worse off if the current
rules-based multilateral trading system is damaged
or destroyed.
ASEAN has been actively promoting political
security dialogue, economic integration and people-topeople links. Regional organizations like ASEAN
complement and reinforce the work of the United
Nations in areas such as peace, security and sustainable
development. However, if regional organizations are
to be successful, they must operate in a world that is
governed by a rules-based multilateral system. When
the multilateral system and the United Nations are
vibrant and healthy, regional organizations like ASEAN
can thrive and prosper.
For over 50 years, ASEAN has put in practice the
principles of a rules-based multilateral system. Through
dialogue and consensus, ASEAN has established a
framework to manage our differences and helped to
build peace and mutual trust in our region. ASEAN’s
success is testament to the fact that we need more
multilateralism, not less, to overcome the challenges
that confront us today.
If multilateralism is to be effective, we need to
reform and strengthen the United Nations. To that
end, ASEAN members have been strong supporters
of efforts to reform the United Nations and make it
more fit for purpose. ASEAN countries have played
an active and constructive role in the three pillars
of the United Nations reform process. We were the
first region to universally endorse the SecretaryGeneral’s Action for Peacekeeping initiative. ASEAN
members now rank among the largest troop- and
police-contributing countries.
The United Nations remains the torchbearer
of multilateralism. All of us here have a duty and
responsibility to defend what we have built together.
More importantly, we have a duty to adapt and reform
the multilateral system to build a better future for all.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the observer of the African Union.
Ms. Mohammed: On behalf of the African Union
(AU) Commission, allow me to warmly congratulate
you, Mr. President, and your delegation on assuming

18-3686351/83

S/PV.8395

Maintenance of international peace and security

the presidency of the Security Council for this month
and to thank you for convening this very important
debate on strengthening multilateralism and the role of
the United Nations.
It is indeed a very commendable initiative of your
delegation to convene this discussion at a time of
unprecedented and serious threats to the international
multilateral order. In that regard, the rising tide of
nationalism and exclusionist tendencies, the emerging
pattern of unilateral actions, as well as the deepening
rifts in international relations, have already had serious
implications for the fulfilment of existing norms and
established practices of international law. Furthermore,
the declining commitment towards the United Nations
and its different agencies, including when it comes
to fulfilling incumbent financial obligations, is very
indicative of the current turmoil that the international
multilateral order is going through.
In the face of that crisis, the international community
must voice its concerns and reiterate its commitment
to a rules-based system, which remains the best and
safest way to enhance cooperation and address global
issues of peace and security. It is only through strong
multilateral institutions that we can collectively tackle
the global challenges we are currently facing, transcend
all sorts of differences among our respective societies
and achieve the greatest possible benefits for all.
The African Union, which is deeply committed
to multilateralism and respect for international law,
will spare no effort to overcome the current crisis and
preserve the multilateral system. Africa has always
supported existing international norms and the genuine
process of the codification and progressive development
of international law to promote friendly relations
between Member States and the peaceful settlement
of disputes and conflicts. On that note, permit me to
underline the following key points.
First, the importance of strengthening the
Organization’s leading role in coordinating international
responses to the world’s most pressing challenges cannot
be overemphasized. The past 70 years since the creation
of the United Nations have witnessed substantial gains
that should be recognized and defended. We need to
reaffirm the validity of the Charter of the United
Nations and strengthen our collective commitment to
observing its provisions, in particular when it comes to
the use of force in international relations.
52/83

09/11/2018

Secondly, we ought to acknowledge the pressing
need for reforms. In that context, the African Union
welcomes the ongoing reforms that have been initiated
by the Secretary-General to enhance the performance
of the United Nations in the most visible areas of
action. In addition to that, every effort should be made
to conclude the long-stalled Security Council reform
process to better reflect the geopolitical realities of
our present world and correct the historical injustice
done to the African continent. We strongly believe that
adequate representation of an entire continent, to which
the Council devotes approximately 70 per cent of its
work, is fundamental to ensuring the legitimacy of the
Council’s decisions.
Thirdly, The African Union’s commitment to
multilateralism is also illustrated by its growing
strategic partnership with the United Nations. I
welcome the progress achieved so far, including the
conclusion of two landmark frameworks for enhanced
AU-United Nations partnerships in peace and security
and sustainable development, respectively. We have
also embarked on the work to amplify that partnership
through broader arrangements comprising other
actors, including the European Union, the League
of Arab States, the International Organization of
la Francophonie and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation. Undoubtedly, multilateralism is also
about building strategic partnerships based on mutual
respect, solidarity and adherence to the principle of
comparative advantage.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate the African
Union’s commitment to advancing multilateral
cooperation and to working constructively with its
partners towards addressing the current threats to
peace and security in line with its long-standing
policy of conflict prevention, mediation and enhanced
peace support operations. The ongoing reform process
of our Union will hopefully chart the path that will
enable us to transcend our weaknesses and promote
efficient and effective mechanisms and tools to carry
out the ambitious agenda of achieving a peaceful and
prosperous Africa.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Hungary.
Mrs. Bogyay (Hungary): Hungary aligns itself
with the position expressed by the observer of the
European Union. Allow me to add some further
remarks in my national capacity. We would first like to
18-36863

09/11/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

thank the Chinese presidency of the Security Council
for organizing this open debate.
According to an old saying in Hungary, those
whose death is falsely claimed will live long. The
multilateral system and the rules-based international
order established after the Second World War endure,
and our work here at the United Nations is a testament
to that. Nevertheless, one cannot hide the fact that the
multilateral order and the United Nations itself are
under pressure from emerging or recurring challenges
and need to adapt. Reform of the United Nations is
inevitable. Hungary shares the view that the current
transformational changes that the Organization is
undergoing have the potential to make it more able
to deliver on its mandate, thereby contributing to
enhancing multilateralism.
We are pleased to see that some parts of the
Secretary-General’s ambitious reform agenda have
already entered into the implementation phase, and
we hope that the remaining elements will soon follow.
Since we are in the Security Council, we must not forget
that the reform of this principal organ of the United
Nations is also long overdue. The modernization of the
United Nations cannot be complete without adapting
the main executive body of the United Nations to the
challenges of the twenty-first century. Besides the
commitment of the new leadership of the Organization,
Member States themselves must also be ready for the
change at the United Nations. Stronger cooperation
among the General Assembly, the Security Council
and the Economic and Social Council, as well as with
the Chairs of the subsidiary bodies, could play a truly
important role in strengthening multilateralism. As
United Nations Ambassadors, we like to talk about
multilateralism and multilateral diplomacy but we
must also be better at practising it, at dialogue and at
really listening to each other. We should also break the
silos in our mindset and learn to better trust and better
cooperate with each other.
We must address the multidimensional root causes
of conflict through prevention, mediation, the protection
of human rights and sustainable development. Hungary
remains committed to preventive diplomacy, as well
as building trust and reconciliation. I believe that
multilateralism is in fact about inclusion, providing
everyone with a seat at the table to participate, follow
and resolve our disputes together and to learn from
each other on the way. The contribution of women to
establishing and strengthening multilateralism must be

S/PV. 8395

recognized. Some pioneering women representatives
were present at the foundation of the United Nations
itself. However, still today gender equality and parity
need to be achieved here at the United Nations and
beyond. We acknowledge the Secretary-General for his
leadership in achieving gender equality in senior-level
positions at the United Nations.
Hungary is a committed supporter of the effective
functioning of the Human Rights Council. However, due
to the overpoliticization, selectivity, polarized nature
of positions and unmanageable workload, the Human
Rights Council is increasingly less able to fulfil its
tasks. In speaking about strengthening multilateralism,
we must mention the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the Paris Agreement. Hungary has
been committed to the 2030 Agenda from the very
beginning. Our first voluntary national review on the
implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals
focused on the Goals on water and sanitation, energy
provision, sustainable cities, responsible consumption
and production and the balance of ecosystems. The
Hungarian Government is strongly committed to
addressing climate change, and we supported the early
entry into force of the Paris Agreement by being one of
the first countries to ratify it.
Hungary strongly supports the fight against
terrorism. We believe that the role of the United
Nations and multilateralism should also be better used
and strengthened in that regard. We believe in the
need for universal adherence to and implementation of
the rule of law at both the national and international
levels and its commitment to an international order
based on the rule of law and international law, which,
together with the principles of justice, is essential for
peaceful coexistence and cooperation among States.
The international community therefore observed the
twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Rome
Statute earlier this year. The Statute has stood the test
of time, having established the International Criminal
Court, which has contributed not only to holding the
perpetrators of the most serious crimes accountable but
also to assisting the victims of such crimes.
In today’s interconnected and globalized world,
multilateral solutions have no real alternatives.
Multilateralism will survive, but perhaps with new,
renewed or reinvented international multilateral
institutions, pushing us out of our comfortable situations.
That could be beneficial if, by standing firmly by

18-3686353/83

S/PV.8395

Maintenance of international peace and security

our principles, we are sufficiently flexible to use the
opportunities presented by the shifting landscape.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I thank
the Chinese presidency for convening this important
open debate with the timely and topical theme of
strengthening multilateralism and the role of the
United Nations. Azerbaijan associates itself with the
statement made earlier today by the representative of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. I would like to
share some additional remarks in my national capacity.
The challenges facing the world today and the
increasing instability give rise to the need to strengthen
the international legal order and to rekindle faith in
multilateralism and confidence in the United Nations.
The United Nations is a critical pillar of multilateralism
and the purposes and principles of its Charter constitute
the foundational normative framework in international
relations. There is no alternative to the commonly
agreed rules and their universal application. It is our
common duty to promote and support a reformed,
reinvigorated and strengthened multilateral system.
Azerbaijan
commends
the
Secretary-General’s
strong commitment to reform and fully supports his
determination to genuinely contribute to preventing
wars, sustaining peace and making the United Nations
more integrated, effective and efficient.
First and foremost, all States must strictly comply
with their international obligations, particularly those
relating to respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States and the inviolability of their
internationally recognized borders. The objective of
ensuring a peaceful, just and prosperous world is hardly
achievable if the universally accepted fundamental
values, norms and principles are overtly disregarded so
as to whitewash aggressions and other illegal actions.
The established principle of the inadmissibility of the use
of force for the acquisition of territory and the ensuing
obligation of non-recognition of situations resulting
from serious violations of international law must be
applied and enforced universally and unconditionally.
Needless to say, the implementation of resolutions
adopted by the principal organs of the United Nations, as
well as accountability, acquires significant importance
in that connection. Apparent disregard of Security
Council resolutions containing binding demands
54/83

09/11/2018

cannot constitute an accepted practice in the Security
Council’s discharging of its primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
The faithful implementation of international
treaties is also among the key prerequisites of the global
system of harmonizing international relations and of
individual and collective efforts towards confronting the
threats and challenges to peace, security and stability.
Important progress has been achieved in recent years in
enhancing cooperation between the United Nations and
regional partners under Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations across a full range of areas — from
the maintenance of international peace and security
and humanitarian assistance to development and the
protection of human rights.
However, serious challenges remain. While
regional organizations are normally well-positioned to
understand and address the causes and consequences of
armed conflict and crises, not all of them are capable
of ensuring Member States’ compliance with their
statutory commitments. In some instances, regional
arrangements are evidently misused by the violators
of international law as a shield for consolidating
military gains and undermining efforts aimed at
achieving solutions to regional conflicts and other
security problems.
The United Nations, which was established to
prevent war and human suffering by binding all its
Members through a common rules-based order, plays a
central role in ensuring that all involved in addressing
peace and security concerns uphold the uniform
application of the purposes and principles of the
Organization. Support for that role of the United Nations
and for safeguarding its collective security, political
and humanitarian mechanisms is crucial in maintaining
peace, stability and sustainable development.
Coherent global responses and common efforts,
with the United Nations at its core, are the most
effective ways to address conflicts, fight climate change
and global terrorism, manage forced displacement
and migratory flows and achieve the goals of peace,
inclusive sustainable development and human rights
for all.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Blanchard (Canada) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the Chinese presidency for having
18-36863

09/11/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8395

chosen to include this issue on the Security Council’s
agenda. I am struck by the number of Member States
that want to contribute to this discussion — clearly, we
all want to address it meaningfully.

each do our fair share; whether we fulfil the global
compacts we have agreed — on climate change and on
migration and refugees — and whether we implement
the Sustainable Development Goals.

We believe that it is first important to remind
ourselves why multilateralism matters and what it
means to our planet and its inhabitants. For us in
Canada, multilateralism of course leads us to think first
of the work of the Blue Helmets, who work to protect
civilians. We celebrate the fact that fewer people died
in the first decade of this century than in any decade
in the twentieth century. We think of the more than
80 million people in over 80 countries helped by the
World Food Programme each year. We also recall the
work of the International Civil Aviation Organization
on civil aviation, the work of the International Maritime
Organization on maritime routes, by the World Trade
Organization on the development of inclusive trade
and by the World Health Organization in helping to
eradicate smallpox — and hopefully also polio in the
near future. While the system is imperfect, most of us
believe it to be essential in resolving the challenges of
the present and the future. That is why we want not only
to maintain it but to improve it as well.

Multilateralism is too often associated with
inefficient bureaucracy, disconnected from the reality
of the people it aims to assist. We cannot sweep these
criticisms under the carpet. We need to address the
trust deficit, both within the United Nations and in the
broader multilateral context by engaging and listening,
as well as being inclusive and open to compromise. We
need to commit to reforming the United Nations and
our own institutions to make them more transparent,
inclusive, effective and accountable.

(spoke in English)
This multilateral architecture will always remain
a work in progress. There will be no day when we will
say: “This is it. It is all done; it is all perfect.” This is
the nature of the beast. From its inception, the world
has always been changing. The difference in the last 25
to 50 years is that the speed of change has accelerated
and our multilateral institutions — like many other
institutions of the world — are, unsurprisingly, finding
it challenging to adapt fast enough. One thing is clear: it
is urgent that we build a more inclusive and sustainable
world. It is also clear that multilateral institutions are
essential to this construction. Let us go back to what
is essential for a moment. The Charter of the United
Nations obliges us to act in the best interest of all of
humankind, reaffirming
“faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity
and worth of the human person, in the equal rights
of men and women and of nations large and small”.
The Charter grounds our actions in a set of obligations
that Member States accept when they join and are
expected to carry out thereafter. Looking forward, the
challenge to multilateralism is fundamentally whether
we choose to live up to our obligations; whether we

Multilateralism is not about posturing or preaching.
It is not about adopting the same resolutions year after
year. It is about listening to each other, learning from
each other, finding solutions together and getting
things done for our people and our planet. Canada is
committed to helping build a better world where a rulesbased international order is inclusive and sustainable,
with its benefits are shared by all. That is one of the
reasons Canada is seeking a non-permanent seat on the
Security Council for the period 2021-2022.
Together we can renew and revitalize the
institutions that we have spent more than seven
decades building. They have contributed so much to
our global development and security. The foundation is
there — it is solid, yet let us never take it for granted.
That is why we absolutely need to work even harder
together to make them fit for purpose. Let us agree,
like my colleague from Hungary just said, that we may
have to accept getting out of our comfort zones to do
so. Let us find opportunities to work together in good
faith and partnership towards a safer, fairer and more
secure and sustainable world — a world where no one
is left behind.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Braun (Germany): A lot has already been said,
but at the outset I wish to align myself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union, as well
as fully subscribing to what the Secretary-General said
this morning at the beginning of the meeting. He set
out a historic framework for our debate and highlighted
the major challenges we face, particularly on climate
change and the Sustainable Development Goals. I
would like to be brief and make four short points.

18-3686355/83

S/PV.8395

Maintenance of international peace and security

My first point has to do with cherry-picking. Today
everybody lauded multilateralism and affirmed that
they are in favour of a rules-based international order.
At the same time, we all know that there are individual
States that say, “I feel constrained by a particular
Security Council resolution, and I just do not abide by
it. I ignore it.” Or there is another State that would say
that, “I feel constrained by a ruling by an international
arbitration court, and I just ignore it.” Or there is
another country that says, “There is an international
memorandum, but I feel constrained. I just ignore it.”
If everybody in this Chamber does that, that is the end
of multilateralism and a rules-based order, and we will
return, as Robert Kagan just wrote, to the jungle. Of
course there are many resolutions and international
agreements that we might not like too much, but we
have to see it as a long-term investment. We all benefit
from a rules-based international order. Germany will
always defend the rules-based order. We believe that
the international rules create reliability, predictability
and acceptance. We believe that we have a collective
interest in upholding the international rules-based
order and maintaining legitimacy in the eyes of our
stakeholders — our people.
The second point that I would like to make concerns
accountability. If we agree on a rules-based order, we
need to ensure that the rules are observed. Uncertainties
in international law must be removed and violations
need to be sanctioned. In that connection, I want to
thank the Chinese presidency for inviting the President
of the International Court of Justice to the discussion
today to highlight this point. We are commemorating the
end of the First World War. Germany is responsible for
some of the worst crimes and violations of international
law being committed. We are also responsible for what
happened in the Second World War, for the Holocaust.
For us, and I think for humankind, it was very important
that we had the Nuremberg trials. We also think it is
very important that we have the International Criminal
Court and that we uphold the Court’s rulings.
Let me come to my third point, which concerns
human rights. The dignity and worth of the human
person are at the foundation of the Charter of the United
Nations. We commemorate this year the seventieth
birthday of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
We need to take our responsibilities seriously. We are
witnessing enormous suffering today. We see children
killed, women raped. We see people dying of hunger.
Civilians are bombarded. We see people marginalized
56/83

09/11/2018

because of their race or colour. We cannot accept that.
That must remain at the centre of our attention. We
must stay focused on the individual.
My fourth point is that we need to reform. I want
to echo what my Canadian colleague just said about
multilateralism being always a work in progress. Yes,
we have to uphold the existing rules. But we also have
to develop them further. We face new challenges that
we have to cope with. The world is changing. We also
have to reform the United Nations, its bodies and its
working methods. We fully support and commend the
Secretary-General for the reforms that he has so far
carried out. We also believe that there is an urgent need
for a reform of the Security Council so as to preserve
its legitimacy.
Germany will join Security Council starting on
1 January. For us, the overarching principle will be
to observe the rules-based international order. The
Security Council is in charge of preserving peace and
security. We want to concentrate on the prevention side
to prevent threats to peace and security from arising.
Therefore, we want to concentrate on the catalysts
and drivers of conflict, human rights, climate change
and sexual violence against women. In doing that, we
are looking forward to working with our regional and
cross-regional partners.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the observer of the Holy See.
Archbishop Auza: The Holy See thanks the
presidency of the People’s Republic of China for
convening this open debate on the important and
timely topic of multilateralism and the role of the
United Nations.
This theme has acquired new urgency today as the
international community is suffering from what the
Secretary-General has defined as trust deficit disorder.
People are losing faith in political establishments within
their own countries. Unilateral foreign policies backed
by economic and military might are undermining trust
between nations. There is a weakening in multilateral
trust, seen, for example, in how the disarmament agenda
is experiencing paralysis, as well as other worrisome
developments in the multilateral negotiating bodies.
The Holy See believes that multilateralism cannot
be grounded in a false sense of security, such as the
threat of mutual destruction or annihilation, or in
simply maintaining a balance of power. A healthy,
18-36863

09/11/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

universally beneficial multilateralism is built on justice,
integral human development, respect for fundamental
human rights, care for our planet, the participation of
all in public life, trust between peoples, the support of
institutions that promote peace, access to education and
health care and solidarity and dialogue. In that regard,
the recent high-level dialogue of the Presidents of the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and the Security Council was an important step towards
renewing the commitment of the United Nations to
multilateralism, not only in terms of its multiple actors
but also for its multifaceted approach to the challenges
of our time. That is a confirmation of the crucial role
that the United Nations can and should play in order to
rebuild trust among its Members.
In considering multilateralism, we have before us
two opposing perspectives: the first is based on the
conviction that conflicts can be resolved through a
determined and broad-based willingness to negotiate
effectively in the light of the ways and wisdom of law;
the second perspective maintains that, in the face of
threats to peace and security, force is more efficacious
and direct. The latter, however, seriously compromises
international cooperation rather than enhancing
it, leading inexorably to negative repercussions on
multilateralism. One of the outcomes emerging from
this open debate must therefore be a clear message in
favour of the force of law rather than the law of force.
Interdependence among nations and the risks of
reciprocal destruction require renewed emphasis on
multilateralism, which, rather than placing excessive
importance on force or practicing selective treatyenforcement, demands all States and individuals to
enforce decisively the laws and procedures that have
been established to mitigate and eliminate threats.
Aware of the gravity of the present situation, in which
law must be chosen to prevail over force, every member
of the international community must be animated by a
profound sense of responsibility.
Besides guaranteeing peace and security, the noble
vocation of the United Nations as the pre-eminent
multilateral institution consists in promoting integral
development and defending human rights. With
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the
international community committed itself to ending
poverty in all its forms and dimensions and pledged
that no one will be left behind. It did so based on
an approach that recognizes the centrality of the
human person. Integral human development and the

S/PV. 8395

full exercise of human dignity, however, cannot be
imposed, but rather must be allowed to flourish for
each individual and for every nation in relation with
others. We must affirm the common conviction that
everything is interconnected and that genuine care for
our own lives and our relationship with nature should
be reflected in fraternity and fairness among nations.
We cannot rebuild broken trust unless we begin to walk
together in solidarity with our less fortunate brothers
and sisters and so help free them from oppressive
poverty and enable them to become dignified agents of
their own destiny.
That common vision must draw strength from a
renewed understanding of multilateralism, founded
on the idea of the international community as a family
of nations committed to pursuing the good of all.
It requires the exercise of solidarity on the part of
Governments, international organizations and all men
and women. Its strong foundation is the collective and
shared responsibility for the common good and the
development of those who are poorest so that every
human being may truly feel that we are a member of
the global family.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cuba.
Mrs. Rodríguez Camejo (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We are grateful to China for holding this open debate
on such an important topic.
We align ourselves with the statement made by the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
We believe that, in confronting global challenges
and threats, it is imperative to preserve and promote
multilateralism, especially by strengthening the central
role of the United Nations and promoting international
cooperation. In that regard, Cuba reiterates its firm
commitment to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, which form the basis of
multilateralism and of the international system that we
have built within the framework of the Organization.
The principles of international law enshrined in the
Charter — namely, sovereign equality among States;
respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of States; non-intervention in
matters under States’ domestic jurisdiction; refraining
from the threat of the use or use of force; and the
peaceful settlement of disputes — must continue to be
the basic foundation of international law and should

18-3686357/83

S/PV.8395

Maintenance of international peace and security

guide the actions of States and international relations
at all times.
Attempts to impose domestic policies; enact and
apply extraterritorial laws, such as the economic,
commercial and financial blockade imposed by
the United States on Cuba for almost 60 years in
contravention of international law, the Charter of the
United Nations and 27 General Assembly resolutions;
the vulgar manipulation, politicization and double
standards concerning matters of global importance,
including human rights, by the Government of the
United States and its pressure, reprisals, sanctions
and financial blackmail against the United Nations,
are an attack on multilateralism and pose enormous
challenges and threats to the peaceful norms governing
the coexistence of States. Disregarding previously
agreed international commitments and obligations,
such as the withdrawal of the United States from
international agreements of enormous consequence for
addressing global phenomena, such as climate change,
for example, only demonstrates a profound disrespect
for international norms and puts the equilibrium, wellbeing and security of our planet in jeopardy.
We reject in the strongest terms this morning’s
statement by the Permanent Representative of the
United States in this Chamber against the Government
and the people of Cuba. The Government of the United
States does not have even slightest moral authority
to criticize Cuba or any other entity in the area of
human rights. We recall that Cuba is a State party to
44 international human rights instruments, while the
United States is a State party to only 18. It does not
respect the right to life, peace, development, security
or food security, nor does it recognize the rights
of children. It flagrantly violates the human rights
of its own citizens, especially African-Americans,
Hispanics, minorities, refugees and migrants, whom
it jails in cages, including children. It has carried
out extrajudicial executions, kidnapping and torture,
including in the prison of Naval Station Guantánamo
Bay, which illegally occupies our territory. We all know
that the United States Government is responsible for
crimes against humanity. It used nuclear weapons on a
civilian population. It established military dictatorships
in Latin America, organized bloody coups d’état and
intervened unscrupulously in the electoral processes
and internal affairs in the majority of States of the
world. Certainly, none of that honours multilateralism.
58/83

09/11/2018

In a global environment characterized by
increasing threats to international peace and security;
unconventional wars; gross violations of States’
sovereignty; policies of domination through the use of
force; attempts to re-impose a unipolar order; breaches
of international law; the ominous and arbitrary breaking
of international treaties; the proliferation of unilateral
sanctions and trade wars, the only possible response
is to preserve and revalidate multilateralism, based
on strict respect for the principles of international law
and the Charter of the United Nations. To that end, the
reform of the United Nations aimed at achieving a truly
democratic and participatory Organization — with
a transparent and democratized Security Council
and a revitalized General Assembly — is imperative.
Cuba reiterates its unshakeable commitment to
continue working together with the United Nations
and its Member States towards the establishment of a
democratic and just international order that responds
to the demand for peace, development and justice of
peoples throughout the world and that guarantees the
preservation and strengthening of multilateralism.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Kayinamura (Rwanda): Allow us to join other
delegations in congratulating China on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We
also thank you, Sir, for convening this open debate,
which is very important to most delegations. We recall
the statement made by the State Councillor and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of China during the general debate
during the high-level week in September (see A/73/
PV.12) when he emphasized the importance and the
necessity of multilateralism. Therefore, it comes as no
surprise, Sir, that you chose to hold this debate during
the earliest days of your presidency, and my delegation
joins others to voice their concerns in defence of
multilateralism. The Security Council is the right place
for us to do just that. We also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his statement and his commitment to
ensuring that the United Nations continues to play its
central role in facilitating multilateralism. We also
thank the other briefers for their contributions to
today’s debate.
Global governance is characterized by political
and security interdependence. Most contemporary
challenges — whether terrorism, climate change,
migration or transnational organized crime, among
many others, — cannot be effectively addressed
18-36863

09/11/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

without multilateral cooperation. The formation and
evolution of the United Nations over the years have
shown us that multilateralism is an essential ingredient
for a peaceful world. The authors of the Charter of the
United Nations were not mistaken when they set out
in that great document by recalling the horrors and
pains of the scourge of war, which we unfortunately
so easily forget. They did not envisage how much the
international system would evolve, and they did not
have to. Their bitter experience convinced them that
multilateralism was the only way to save humankind
from destruction.
And they were right. That is the true spirit of the
Organization. The purposes and principles of the Charter
enhance that vision and the practice of multilateralism
by encouraging States to pursue cooperation over
isolation, the peaceful settlement of disputes over war
and a common vision whereby Member States relate
as equals. However, the world is a dynamic place, and
history is always on the move. New challenges have
emerged over the years and require us to adapt to them.
I am reminded of the words of the legendary Nigerian
author Chinua Achebe:
“Eneke the bird says that since men have learned
to shoot without missing, he has learned to fly
without perching.”
We too, as the nations of the world, must learn to adapt
and address evolving challenges. In no way are we
saying that multilateralism is perfect. The question
is, how do we make multilateralism work for us in our
context? In that regard, I will make three brief points.
First, while we are all pursuing our national interests,
at the core of it all we need to build on the fact that the
people we serve have common aspirations. They want
to live in a peaceful, sustainable and dignified world.
Let us build on those shared aspirations rather than
focus on myopic goals. In that regard, Rwanda calls for
continued cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations. For instance, the recently signed
Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for an
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security is a good
example of effective cooperation. The African Union
(AU) is rooted in our belief that regional organizations
can demonstrate how multilateralism continues to be
relevant and beneficial for people all over the world.
Secondly, let us move ahead with reforming the
Organization, which belongs to us all. The SecretaryGeneral needs our continued support. Africa has made

S/PV. 8395

its position clear on key issues, such as reforming
the Council. Given the amount of time that the same
arguments have been made, surely it is reasonable that
we address these issues conclusively. The Security
Council is one of the United Nations organs that
contribute much to global peace and security. It needs
to expand its scope of representation and extend the
power of the veto to other Member States. Security
challenges are multiplying in number and complexity;
they need an inclusive decision-making process.
Thirdly, it is vital that the United Nations
continues its support to the regional peace and security
arrangements and mechanisms that have demonstrated
gains in conflict mediation and peace restoration.
For example, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development conflict-resolution mechanism, which
led the peace process in South Sudan, and the United
Nations-AU partnership aimed at ending the crisis
in the Sahel region and the Lake Chad basin are
good examples of initiatives that are successfully
embracing and putting into practice the principles of
multilateralism.
In conclusion, we have all that it takes to resolve
our contemporary challenges. Nothing is new or alien
to us. There is no unbridled force that we are dealing
with. As States Members of the United Nations, we
all have the prerogative to do what we can to create a
better world for future generations. I reaffirm Rwanda’s
commitment to multilateralism and the equality of
States. We believe that, with the reforms that are being
pursued here at the United Nations, we can breathe new
life into the Organization and make it fit for purpose.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.
Mr. Al-Maawda (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): It is
a pleasure for me to congratulate you, Mr. President,
and your friendly country on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
November. We also thank you for providing us this
opportunity to discuss an extremely important topic for
the international community.
The challenges facing the world have served to
underscore the singular importance of the role played
by multilateral diplomacy in meeting those challenges
and strengthening international relations, while
also supporting the efforts of the United Nations to
ensure the aspirations of the international community.
Multilateral diplomacy therefore plays a critical and

18-3686359/83

S/PV.8395

Maintenance of international peace and security

vital role in upholding international law and advancing
international cooperation. The United Nations has
thereby become the conscience of humankind and
the compass marking the trends of the international
community. For more than seven decades it has served as
a unifying platform aimed at maintaining international
peace and security, mitigating and preventing conflicts,
achieving development and preserving human dignity.
The current international order is experiencing
a critical stage of crises and conflicts, as well as
various challenges that go beyond the imagination of
the founding fathers of the United Nations. Based on
that reality and in order to achieve the goals of the
United Nations as a multilateral system representing
the entire international community, our commitments
as Member States compel us to use our capacities to
promote security and the role of the United Nations so
as to address international challenges and enable the
Organization.
The United Nations has played a vital and significant
role in confronting challenges, conflicts and crises
created by irresponsible policies. The resolutions and
procedures of the United Nations, as well as international
legal instruments, have been a safety valve to maintain
international peace and security and respect for the rule
of law. They also have been a deterrent against all those
who seek to undermine international security. That is
why cooperation between Member States to achieve the
United Nations goals is a non-negotiable commitment.
No State can work in isolation from other States — a
notion that reflects the concept of collective security in
the international system as stipulated in the Charter of
the United Nations.
Amid the intertwining interests of States and
societies, the commitments dictated by the multilateral
international system call on us to continue working
together and not lose the achievements and gains
attained by the United Nations in different fields,
while upholding the mechanisms identified by the
Charter and the relevant international legal systems.
Those are binding rules to tackle joint challenges and
threats, ensure respect for international law and deter
its violators, ensure respect for the sovereignty and
security of States, prohibit the use or threat of use of
force in international relations, respect the rights of
people to self-determination and prevent conflicts and
crises while resolving existing ones by peaceful means.
60/83

09/11/2018

Multilateral diplomacy and support for the United
Nations represent an essential pillar of the State of
Qatar’s policy. We are keen to continue promoting
the capacity of this international Organization to
achieve its goals. We have continued to strengthen our
international partnerships to achieve the purposes and
principles of the Charter. We are closely working with
effective stakeholders at the international level and
with United Nations bodies to support all initiatives
that help the United Nations to resolve regional and
international crises.
The State of Qatar believes in the principle of
international cooperation and shared responsibility.
We have continued our voluntary contributions to
many activities and programmes carried out by the
Organization at all levels. We have also strengthened
our partnership with numerous United Nations entities
in order to enable them to effectively carry out their
mandates, particularly with regard to international
peace and security, combating terrorism and extremism
and promoting human rights and development. In that
context, we are continuing our efforts to open United
Nations House, which would host representative offices
from many United Nations bodies. That would facilitate
and support their work in the region.
In order to support United Nations efforts to resolve
and prevent conflicts in our region, the mediation
undertaken by the State of Qatar with relevant parties
as part of multilateral diplomatic means has been
appreciated and welcomed by the United Nations. The
aim is to peacefully defuse and settle many of the crises
in the region, in line with the purposes and principles
of the United Nations. Last January, the State of Qatar
hosted regional consultations on sustainable peace
in the Middle East and beyond, which is consistent
with our policy to support United Nations efforts and
objectives in the area of peace. The goal was also to
support preventive diplomacy, which is one of the
Secretary-General’s priorities. Those consultations
were part of the preparations for the high-level meeting
of the General Assembly that was held in April.
In conclusion, the State of Qatar reiterates its
commitment to the multilateral work at the international
level and to supporting the role played by the United
Nations. We continue our cooperation and partnership
with the Organization in order to achieve the goals for
which the United Nations was founded, which we all
seek to achieve.
18-36863

09/11/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): I would also like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this open debate on a
matter of increasing relevance.
Seventy-three years ago in San Francisco, we
committed ourselves to strengthening the three pillars
of the current international system, namely, peace and
security, human rights and development. Building
on that commitment, we developed institutions and
adopted rules. Those institutions and rules help us
resolve our differences peacefully. They enable us to
establish norms for dealing with global challenges,
from climate change to weapons of mass destruction.
They help regulate free trade and secure financial
services. We all know that those institutions and rules
are not perfect. The need for reform is well known. We
may not completely agree on how to best fix the system;
however, we can all agree on the benefits of a rulesbased world order. Also, we can all agree that the correct
approach is neither unilateralism nor exceptionalism.
Unilateralism is a departure from our common values.
It is not a sign of good leadership. Exceptionalism is a
departure from our joint responsibilities. It is not a sign
of strength. If we want everyone to commit to a rulesbased system, we need to lead by example. And the new
age of multilateralism can only start here, at United
Nations Headquarters. The United Nations system can
be more responsive, efficient and effective. It can once
again lead and inspire. We need to define our priorities
better to that end.
First, we must reform the Security Council
into a more transparent, democratic, representative
and accountable body. The more transparency the
Council displays while undertaking its work, the more
accountable it will be. The more it shares information,
consults and accepts input, the more effective it will
become. A Council that is more responsive to the
United Nations membership will be better placed to
meet the challenges of an increasingly complex world.
Any success in that process depends on a genuine spirit
of compromise among us, without exception. Let us
remember that, by signing the Charter of the United
Nations, we reaffirmed our faith in the equal rights of
nations large and small.
Secondly, the United Nations needs to devise more
effective ways of preventing conflicts and crises. To do
so, we must address the root causes properly. Building

S/PV. 8395

and sustaining peace requires us to fight poverty,
inequality, extremism and discrimination as well. We
also need to promote human rights and the rule of
law. We need to ensure increased participation and
economic empowerment among all segments of society.
At the same time, the United Nations can make use of
Chapter VI tools more often. The guiding principles
of mediation and good offices have a solid foundation
in the Charter. That is why the Group of Friends of
Mediation, co-chaired by Turkey and Finland, strives
to increase the role of mediation in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts.
Thirdly, the principle of local ownership should be
at the core of our collective efforts within the United
Nations system. Successful partnerships with local
Governments, civil society and the private sector are
key factors in effectively mobilizing resources. One
such recent initiative is the process on the global
compact on migration. Over the past 18 months,
we conducted together an inclusive and transparent
dialogue with the contribution of civil society. We were
able to bridge our differences. We collectively achieved
a positive outcome to create better lives for 260 million
migrants around the world. We now look forward to
the adoption of the global compact in Marrakesh. The
compact is an inspiring testament to the importance of
multilateralism. It is an example of the moral vision that
we can inject into the heart of the international system.
The underlying message during this open debate
has been the necessity to uphold multilateralism and
enhance international cooperation against all odds.
The Council has an important role to play to that end.
Increased transparency and effectiveness will further
enhance the legitimacy of this body. That, in turn,
will only strengthen the role of the United Nations in
achieving peace, security and economic prosperity
to the benefit of all, with a renewed commitment to
multilateralism.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Vieira (Brazil): I thank you very much,
Mr. President, for convening this timely debate.
For the past 73 years we have been striving to build
a rules-based order, in which principles such as equality
among States, the peaceful settlement of disputes
and the promotion and protection of human rights
underpinned our relations. Those are the same values
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, and

18-3686361/83

S/PV.8395

Maintenance of international peace and security

together they constitute the bedrock of multilateralism.
However, the very idea of placing our hopes in shared
institutions and rules is now unfortunately in jeopardy.
Multilateral institutions are at a difficult juncture, and
there is a widespread feeling that changes must be
urgently undertaken. But what are the causes of the
current crisis?
First of all, our institutional architecture, including
the United Nations, is not well equipped to respond to
current challenges. As the Secretary-General stated in
the plenary of the General Assembly last September,
“twenty-first century challenges outpace twentieth
century institutions and mindsets” (A/73/PV.6,
p. 1). We have failed to update our main institutions
to properly reflect the current geopolitical landscape
and the increasingly multipolar order. Entire regions
and countries with excellent records in contributing
to international peace and security are still excluded
from permanent representation in the Security
Council. While the majority of situations on the
agenda of the Council relate to African countries, the
continent remains without permanent representation.
It is crucial to increase the number of members
in both categories — not only non-permanent but
also permanent. It is regrettable that in 25 years of
continuous discussions no results whatsoever have
been achieved in the efforts to reform the Council. Even
worse, several Member States feel the pressure to not
even engage in the current international negotiations.
The result is ever-growing scepticism about the ability
of the Council to deliver on its mandate and to manage
sensitive conflicts. Brazil strongly believes that the
Security Council is still the appropriate body to deal
with threats to international peace and security. But, in
order to avoid the progressive erosion of its legitimacy,
it is high time for real and effective reform.
At the same time, the Security Council must avoid
encroaching on issues that fall under the purview of
other United Nations bodies. Even though we agree that
the Council must address the root causes of conflicts,
that should happen in very specific contexts related
to items on its agenda, and never with the purpose of
developing general policies and norms. Our crisis is
also compounded by the inability to stick to what we
agree upon. Selectivity in choosing which obligations
to follow also undermines multilateralism and
international cooperation, since it directly impairs our
capacity to build trust among ourselves.
62/83

09/11/2018

One case in point is nuclear disarmament, an
objective we have not attained in spite of the very
clear provisions of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons. That Treaty has greatly helped
us achieve progress in containing proliferation. But
the nuclear threat will be completely addressed only
through disarmament. Unfortunately, the opposition
by some countries to the recent Treaty on the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons calls into question the
commitment to rid the world of all types of weapons
of mass destruction. That opens up space for unilateral
decisions and reduces the faith in multilateralism as a
means to reach decisions on hard and sensitive matters.
Some issues relating to the use of force are also
worrisome examples of the inability to stick to what
we agreed upon. There are increasingly frequent
attempts to depart from the collective security system
created in 1945. We simply cannot afford to lose
sight of the fundamental notion that the prohibition
on the use of force is the rule and that self-defence
and Chapter VII authorization are exceptions. Brazil
has been consistently voicing its disagreement with
interpretations that seek to expand the scope of the right
to self-defence, in particular with regard to non-State
actors. Also, we have been calling upon the Security
Council to follow up on notifications received under
Article 51, to ensure that the obligations laid out in the
Charter are being fulfilled.
There is also room for improvement in the monitoring
of the implementation of Security Council resolutions
authorizing the use of force. Brazil has suggested
that inspiration be drawn from the peacekeeping and
sanctions regimes so as to ensure that those resolutions
include sunset clauses, demand adequate reporting and
establish panels of experts. Given their exceptional
nature, such authorizations must be limited in their
legal, operational and temporal aspects. Those troops
might not be wearing blue helmets, but they act under
the authority — and legitimacy — of a blue text.
We must do our best to preserve the United Nations
as the most symbolic expression of international
democracy and of our determination to live in
peace, promote and protect human rights and attain
sustainable development. We must above all heed the
lessons of the past. Multilateralism is not an option, it
is an undeniable need. The alternatives to it are grim:
fragmentation, unilateralism, more frequent use of
force and the inability to tackle challenges that no one
can solve without cooperation. It is our responsibility to
18-36863

09/11/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8395

work with a sense of urgency to update our institutions
and norms in order to promote international peace
and security. Brazil will remain fully committed to
strengthening the United Nations at this difficult
juncture.

United Nations to act. Responsibility, political will,
commitment to reforms and making compromises are
top prerequisites in order to change the current state of
multilateral affairs. We need to use this moment as an
opportunity for genuine and lasting reforms.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Lithuania.

Our commitment to stronger global governance and
binding rules should translate into the effective reform
of the United Nations system. There is no better way
to preserve and reinforce the relevance and credibility
of the United Nations than making the Organization
more efficient. In that regard, we stand fully behind
the Secretary-General’s reform agenda in all its
dimensions. That agenda has the potential to make the
whole United Nations family less fragmented and more
united and coherent.

Ms. Plepytė (Lithuania): Let me start by thanking
the Secretary-General for his insightful briefing today.
I also thank the Chinese presidency of the Security
Council for organizing this timely debate.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union.
The United Nations is now 73 years old. Addressing
the assembled delegates at the start of the meeting
in San Francisco at which the Charter of the United
Nations was signed, the President of the United States,
Harry Truman, said
“You members of this Conference are to be the
architects of the better world. In your hands rests
our future.”
Today his words are more important than ever. The
United Nations was created to provide the foundation
and framework for a rules-based multilateral system.
Such a system is the backbone of, and a recipe for, a
better world. Since the end of the Second World War,
multilateral institutions have helped countries around
the world to avoid catastrophic wars and achieve
unprecedented levels of development. As much
as we need more international cooperation today,
multilateralism has come under pressure. As this open
debate serves to indicates, we are arriving at a point
where multilateral cooperation is beginning to seem
like more of an aspiration than a reality.
Lamenting the dire state of multilateralism is only
paying lip service to the rules-based international order.
We all know the diagnosis of current global affairs. We
all know too well the consequences when the United
Nations Charter-based order fails. Protracted conflicts
in Ukraine, Syria, Yemen and elsewhere, as well as the
worst humanitarian crisis since the end of the Second
World War are only a few stark reminders of such
failure. We need action. During her statement at the
general debate of the General Assembly in September
(see A/73/PV.10), the President of Lithuania, Ms. Dalia
Grybauskaitė, urged the international community
to take responsibility for our future and enable the

A relevant and strong United Nations requires an
efficient, transparent and inclusive Security Council.
Directly or indirectly, inaction by the Security
Council and the international community encourages
aggression and the use of force and threatens the entire
multilateral system, which is based on international law.
Restraining the use of the veto, inter alia, would make
the Council’s responses to ongoing crises more coherent
and reliable. Lithuania therefore strongly supports the
French-Mexican initiative on limiting the use of the
veto in cases of mass atrocities, genocide, war crimes
and crimes against humanity. Lithuania also actively
endorses the relevant initiatives of Liechtenstein and
the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group.
Justice cannot be vetoed. It must go beyond political
manipulation. International peace, security and justice
are not possible without international law. Ending
impunity and ensuring justice for all is an absolute
must in order to reinforce trust in the United Nations
and ensure the credibility of our multilateral system.
At the same time, when justice is not ensured and
impunity thrives, multilateralism can neither function
nor perform.
It is important to acknowledge that many of the
current challenges to the global order are born and
grown domestically. Blaming the United Nations,
international institutions and agreements for our
domestic failures is not a viable way forward. While it
is true that multilateralism needs to deliver much better
at the country level, it is also true that respect for the
rules-based global system starts at home. It begins with
open, peaceful societies based on the rule of law, the
freedom of expression, access to independent justice,

18-3686363/83

S/PV.8395

Maintenance of international peace and security

09/11/2018

respect for human rights and accountable and inclusive
institutions.

contribution of young people in conflict prevention and
resolution.

Finally, let me conclude by underlining that the
value of multilateralism itself transcends any particular
policy or goal. The rule of law has intrinsic value.
Multilateralism must not lead to inaction, and we all
need to contribute to rebuilding trust in the capacity
of the United Nations to deliver. Lithuania remains
committed to playing its active role in multilateral
action.

Within the United Nations system, Portugal
has defined a consistent approach that encompasses
responsibilities in missions around the world. Portugal
is currently engaged in seven United Nations missions,
notably the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
where 178 Portuguese peacekeepers are on the ground
in the Central African Republic, embodying our strong
commitment to contributing to the effort of stabilizing
the country and the region.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Portugal.
Mr. Vaultier Mathias (Portugal): I thank the
Chinese delegation for convening today’s open debate.
Portugal is firmly engaged in a multilateral
system based on the primacy of international law and
the principles and values of the Charter. Multilateral
organizations continue to be privileged platforms for
constructive and inclusive dialogue among States
for the purpose of tackling the increasingly complex
challenges facing the world. Whereas no country can
address all threats on its own, we have to build bridges
and broaden dialogue by strengthening interregional
alliances and international cooperation.
Against this background, it is crucial to preserve
and strengthen the multilateral system, especially the
irreplaceable role of the United Nations and its capacity
to advance a comprehensive and transversal concept of
peace that simultaneously promotes human rights and
sustainable development. Several international bodies
are faced with declining budgets. The lack of funding
and political support impairs the implementation of the
reforms needed to improve their effectiveness for the
benefit of all.
At the outset, we must strengthen conflict
prevention by developing early-warning systems that
can trigger immediate action by the international
community. Similarly, we must support the ongoing
reforms to improve the United Nations peace and
security pillar under which peacekeeping operations
take place. Aware of the interdependence between
security and development, we are convinced that
lasting peace will be achieved only if we address the
root causes of conflicts. Underdevelopment and the
imbalance of wealth distribution are the most obvious
causes. Finally, it is important to integrate our action
by including the perspective of gender balance and the
64/83

As I conclude, I wish to recall the last time Portugal
held the presidency of the Security Council, precisely
seven years ago. Our main initiatives then were,
coincidentally, a discussion on new challenges to security
(see S/PV.6668) and an open debate on the working
methods of the Security Council (see S/PV.6672). Apart
from the new threats and risks to international security,
which were then being increasingly acknowledged,
such as terrorism, transnational organized crime and
climate change, just to name a few, we were also very
much aware of the importance of addressing the wellgrounded demands for a more transparent, efficient and
operational Security Council as the collective security
mechanism.
Finally, allow me to quote the words of His
Excellency the President of the Portuguese Republic
in his speech at the general debate of the seventy-third
session of the General Assembly:
“Portugal believes that multilateral action,
political dialogue and diplomatic wisdom are the
only possible path to harmonious coexistence
among nations and peoples” (A/73/PV.9, p. 26).
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Edrees (Egypt): (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by thanking the delegation of the People’s
Republic of China for having convened today’s
important meeting on ways to strengthen multilateral
action and for inviting Member States to take part in
this debate. I also thank the Secretary-General and the
representative of the President of the General Assembly
for their valuable briefings at the beginning of the
meeting.
Today’s debate follows another high-level dialogue,
which was called for by the President of the General
18-36863

09/11/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

Assembly on 31 October, on the renewal of our
commitment to multilateral action. That debate was
also co-sponsored by the Presidents of the Economic
and Social Council and the Security Council. Our
recurring dialogue on this issue reflects the difficulty
of the challenges multilateral action faces, as well as our
shared awareness of the need not to delay in addressing
them by strengthening contexts and practices related to
multilateralism. In this regard, I would like to stress
three areas that I believe are particularly important and
should be a priority in strengthening multilateralism.
First is the comprehensive approach pertaining to
crises and other issues. The adoption of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development as a road map for our
common future has provided us with a global approach
to development. Nevertheless, we are concerned to
see that attempts are being made by some to choose to
discuss certain issues and close their eyes to others. Our
efforts to establish international peace and security are
facing similar challenges. This selective approach is
undoubtedly leading to opportunistic multilateralism,
which is harmful in the long term to the trust and
credibility we have placed in international institutions
and multilateral action.
In this context, the selective approach of the
Security Council in dealing with certain issues,
including those relating to the Middle East, and its
double standards with regard to the implementation of
its own pertinent resolutions have greatly contributed
to the current regrettable situations in that delicate part
of the world, which is characterized by deterioration
and disorder. This selective approach is exacerbating
the state of polarization we have historically seen in
the Council, and has undermined the ability of the
international community to resolve recent ongoing
crises, such as those in Yemen and in Syria, as well
as its ability to reach fair and lasting solutions to more
long-standing issues, such as the Palestinian question.
That brings me to the second area in strengthening
multilateralism, which is through the establishment of
democracy worldwide and ensuring the universality of
multilateralism and fair representation. The successive
crises that we are facing as a human society have proved
that multilateral action on a small scale — so-called minimultilateralism, or closed forums diplomacy — have
created a kind of alternative multilateralism, which has
not prevented conflicts from breaking out or made it
possible for the international community to overcome
them. That applies to all areas, be it the maintenance of

S/PV. 8395

international peace and security, global crises or other
issues, including the recent international financial
crisis, the effects of which are still being felt.
With regard to multilateral institutions, I would
like to make particular reference to the structural
irregularities of the Security Council. It is important
that we advance towards the genuine reform of the
Council in order to remedy the hegemony of certain
members. We support the Common African Position,
which seeks to bring genuine change to the Council’s
decision-making mechanism, rather than simply
cosmetic changes.
That brings me to the third and final aspect of our
vision for strengthening multilateral action and our
practices, namely, the lack of commitment to collective
action in the light of the difficulties we face and the
substantial efforts that are required to achieve it.
The notion of collective action entails the generation
of solutions on which everyone agrees so that we
can attain the Sustainable Development Goals and
maintain international peace and security. In practice,
that requires intensive and tough deliberations and
consultations, as well as compromise and creative
and innovative vision. However, we cannot ignore the
impression shared by some of us, enhanced by some of
our practices, that our main multilateral Organization is
increasingly becoming a forum for the mere delivery of
speeches, with no effective implementation of measures
or real impact. That is creating pseudo-multilateralism,
of which we should be very wary.
The effectiveness of our Organization depends on
our belief in it and respect for its Charter and on the
capacities that we dedicate to allowing it to effectively
fulfil its mission. In that regard, it is important that
multilateralism also include decision-making and not be
limited to mere deliberations and statements. We also
need to provide the Organization with the resources
necessary to implement the mandates that we have
entrusted to it. In that context, I would like to warn
against the growing threat of becoming dependent on
voluntary funding as opposed to regular base funding,
which is moving the Organization away from its mission
and the multilateral nature of its main objectives.
In the light of the three areas that I have mentioned,
and given that my country is a major contributor
to peacekeeping operations, as well as the fact that
Egypt is due to Chair the African Union in 2019, and
that the African continent has the highest number of

18-3686365/83

S/PV.8395

Maintenance of international peace and security

peacekeeping operations and contributes the highest
number of peacekeeping personnel, allow me to once
again state that Egypt welcomes the adoption of the
Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations, an initiative of the SecretaryGeneral that will enable troop-contributing countries to
participate in a more significant way in the consultations
pertaining to strengthening peacekeeping operations.
Egypt remains convinced that the effective deployment
of peacekeeping operations requires an overall vision
of all their stages, from designing the mandates to the
periodic reviews, as well as the structure of operations
and the equipment, predeployment and exit strategy.
It is therefore important that we establish practical
and objective frameworks to assess performance through
the competent bodies. We also have to ensure that there
are sufficient resources available for the implementation
of mandates and that the structure of the operation is
commensurate with the specific nature and situation
of the mission. In that regard, during its chairmanship
of the African Union in 2019 Egypt will continue to
focus on the various dimensions to implementing the
Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations, notably by strengthening the
institutional framework for tripartite dialogue among
the troop- and equipment-contributing countries and
the Secretariat. We also intend to deepen the strategic
partnership with the United Nations in peacekeeping
and in rebuilding and development efforts in postconflict situations. On 18 and 19 November, Egypt will
host a regional high-level conference on improving the
performance of peacekeeping operations in Africa,
based on the Declaration of Shared Commitments on
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, and allow
troop-contributing countries to take part in discussions
related to improving peacekeeping operations.
In conclusion, we have become accustomed to
the presence and criticism of the United Nations. We
have therefore forgotten that the results achieved by
the Organization can only reflect our cooperation or
lack thereof. Allow me to remind the Council of the
wise words that should never be forgotten of former
Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, at the first
Security Council summit ever held on 31 January 1992,
in which he stated,
“Collective security can be based only on
collective confidence and good faith — confidence
in the principles by which it is governed and good
faith in the means by which it is sought to be
66/83

09/11/2018

ensured. With all the convulsions in global society,
only one power is left that can impose order
on incipient chaos: it is the power of principles
transcending changing perceptions of expediency.”
(S/PV.3046, p. 11)
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the observer of the International Committee of
the Red Cross.
Mr. Mardini: The International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC) warmly welcomes this debate
on strengthening multilateralism and the role of the
United Nations. We know from our humanitarian work
in armed conflicts around the world how cooperation
among States is of critical importance the maintenance
of international peace and security. As guardians of
international humanitarian law, we also have our own
distinct relationships with States and have seen how
effective multilateralism can have a long-lasting impact.
The Geneva Conventions will celebrate their
seventieth anniversary next year. Adopted in 1949,
they have been universally ratified by States and are
at the core of international humanitarian law. To this
day, we see their impact on the ground. We know
not only that they are proof that multilateralism can
work, but that they are essential for multilateralism
to work. Today, I want to emphasize three points on
why international humanitarian law is key to better
upholding multilateralism and effectively addressing
today’s global challenges.
First, international humanitarian law mitigates
suffering and the impact of armed conflict on people’s
lives. Multilateral agreements among States develop
international humanitarian law to ensure that legal
limits are in place. For example, multilateral efforts
have secured humanitarian agreements on nuclear
weapons, chemical weapons, landmines and the arms
trade. Those rules save lives. Current multilateral
discussions on certain new weapons are essential to
keeping international humanitarian law up to speed
with the rapid developments in technology. Greater
State support for the implementation of and respect for
international humanitarian law can help prevent and
minimize human suffering in armed conflict.
Secondly, international humanitarian law regulates
and limits the methods and means of warfare. Today’s
armed conflicts involve large numbers of States in
protracted regional conflicts in many parts of the world,
often working together in multilateral coalitions and
18-36863

09/11/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

partnered operations. Multilateral military operations
must respect the rules that States have developed and
committed themselves to under the Geneva Conventions
and other components of international humanitarian
law. States supporting parties to armed conflict can
and should use their influence on the conduct of
hostilities to encourage greater respect for international
humanitarian law. They can do that, for example, by
embedding humanitarian rules into their own and their
partners’ policies on targeting military objectives,
training soldiers and fighters and detaining adversaries.
Thirdly, international humanitarian law is
principled and people-centred. Under the Charter of
the United Nations, all people of the world and the
sovereign equality of States are given due consideration.
This people-centred view is core to international
humanitarian law, to principled humanitarian action
and to impartial humanitarian organizations like the
ICRC. Our work in reducing human suffering across
all conflict-affected communities is founded on the
principles of humanity, impartiality, neutrality and
independence. Multilateral cooperation respecting
those principles and rules — agreed to by all States — is
necessary if humanitarian action is to be effective, so
that civilians can receive the support they are entitled
to under the Geneva Conventions.
International humanitarian law is integral to
multilateralism and multilateralism is integral
to
international
humanitarian
law.
These
rules — painstakingly developed by States over the
years — create important multilateral consensus on the
limits of violence, which can be used on the ground
every day to reduce human suffering and protect
essential infrastructure. These rules work best when
multilateralism works. People suffering in armed
conflicts need multilateralism that works. Our call
on the Security Council, on the upcoming seventieth
anniversary of the Geneva Conventions, is to renew its
commitment to people, to international humanitarian
law and to multilateralism.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ireland.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I thank you, Sir, for
organizing today’s meeting. The Irish delegation sees
it as a welcome opportunity and a continuation of the
high-level debate at this year’s General Assembly.
Indeed, as your very useful concept note (S/2018/982,
annex) points out, Mr. President, the vast majority of

S/PV. 8395

Member States at the General Assembly spoke up in
defence of multilateralism — and many did so with
great passion. Ireland was one of those.
Against the background of increasing international
instability and uncertainty, Ireland’s Deputy Prime
Minister described his concerns for the future
effectiveness of the United Nations (see A/73/PV.13).
He insisted that the Organization’s work simply
cannot be replicated by transactional and selective
bilateral engagement in which the powerful dominate
and decisions are no longer based on the strength of
argument and the need for fair outcomes. It might seem
at this hour on Friday afternoon a bit clichéd to say it,
but it is true that our challenges are too great and too
global for anyone to take a unilateral approach in the
long run. History shows us that those who took such
a path have had to return to the multilateral family to
share burdens and look for shared solutions.
One of the many Member States that expressed
worry in the general debate about the current trends in
global governance was China. We took particular note
of two questions posed by China’s Foreign Minister:
“Should we stay committed to multilateralism or
let unilateralism have its way? Should we seek to
uphold the architecture of the world order or allow
it to be eroded and collapse?” (A/73/PV.12, p. 17)
We must be very clear in our answers to the choices
offered as we seek to strengthen multilateralism and
the role of the United Nations. In doing so, of course,
we must defend the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. At the same time we
must recognize that there are new and very different
threats to international peace and security, to the very
survival of the planet and to the stable development of
our societies. In some respects, the debate is no longer
about effective multilateralism, but about saving the
multilateral system.
As the concept note for this debate rightly states,
we must grapple with the intertwining of traditional
and non-traditional security issues. Collectively,
we must acknowledge the pivotal nature of new and
different factors, such as climate change and migration.
Who could not have been convinced by the statement in
the general debate by the Prime Minister of Barbados,
in which she described the impact of flooding on her
island State (see A/73/PV.13)? Who could have been
left in any doubt upon hearing the words of the Prime
Minister of Lesotho about the unprecedented magnitude

18-3686367/83

S/PV.8395

Maintenance of international peace and security

of the challenges facing migrants and the implications
for us all (ibid.)?
Time today is very brief, and I cannot hope to detail
how we can strengthen the overall system of the United
Nations. But there are a few things that are obvious,
if not easy. We need to simply implement multilateral
agreements that we have signed on to, such as the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change and the Sustainable
Development Goals. That will give credibility and
strength to our system. We need to make the multilateral
agenda relevant by ensuring that key constituencies,
such as women and youth, are centrally included and
involved.
We must enhance our partnerships. Today, no one
can go it alone. The United Nations must strengthen
its capacity to engage locally, nationally and regionally,
and with international partners. We see a role for
regional and subregional organizations, civil society
actors and the private sector. We must communicate our
own successes. International organizations are doing
great work in many areas such as health, education and
child advocacy. We should not let that go unnoticed or
unreported.
Ireland believes that we need to press for change, not
simply for reform of the administrative and budgetary
structures of the multilateral institutions. We need
simple, straightforward, hard-nosed political reform
at the United Nations — none more necessary than
here in the Security Council. Political reforms at the
United Nations, in particular in the composition of the
Council, would give an increased sense of ownership
and participation on the part of Member States, our
general public, and would strengthen its standing. We
believe in particular that the anachronistic injustice in
relation to the underrepresentation of Africa needs to
be corrected, and soon. We also believe there should
be consideration for a designated seat for small island
States, but it goes beyond the question of composition.
We would like to see an end to the use of the veto
in this organ. In the meantime, we fully support the
Franco-Mexican initiative to limit the use of veto in
cases of mass atrocities.
My country, Ireland, is convinced that we need
to combat the narrative that collective engagement
somehow diminishes our sovereignty. A transactional
diplomacy of the strong against the weak represents the
real threat to our standing as independent nations.
68/83

09/11/2018

As the concept note points out, the most basic
principle of multilateralism is that matters in the
international arena must be dealt with in a fair and just
manner. For a small State like Ireland, that means that
every State is given an opportunity to have its voice
heard and to have its concerns objectively weighed.
As an aspiring member of the Security Council for the
period 2021-2022, we say that with sincere conviction.
As we commemorate the centenary of the end of
First World War, we are very much reminded of the
high costs of unilateralism and unchecked nationalism
and the wars that it engendered. The ruinous fighting
of 100 years ago is the hard evidence of our need to win
today’s battle for multilateralism.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Indonesia aligns itself
with the statements made by the representatives of
Venezuela, on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, and of Singapore, on behalf of Association
of Southeast Asian Nations.
I begin by congratulating you, Mr. President,
and your country, China, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
thank you for convening this important debate, which,
most importantly, looking at the many countries taking
the floor, everyone finds timely.
I have unshakeable belief in the virtue of
multilateralism in finding solutions to the challenges
facing humankind and in promoting sustainable peace
and development. At the heart of the multilateral system
is the United Nations — the largest congregation of
nation States. It embodies the international community
and exemplifies our collective determination to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war. The
United Nations provides a rules-based platform for
dialogue and cooperation, bringing together nations,
large and small, on the basis of sovereign equality.
It saddens me to say that multilateralism is now
under unprecedented strain. The United Nations
is increasingly challenged to respond to ever more
complex global challenges — from conflicts in remote
parts of the world to climate change, from terrorism to
extreme poverty and from weapons of mass destruction
to pandemics.
I should mention the lack of progress in resolving
the question of Palestine, which is one of the longest18-36863

09/11/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

standing issues on the United Nations agenda. A
performance deficit breeds a trust deficit, and signs
of a trust deficit towards the United Nations are
becoming more prevalent than ever, as seen in the
growing recourse to unilateralism and isolationism,
countries withdrawing from internationally agreed
commitments, trade differences leading to disputes
that affect the global economic stability, and the use of
coercive measures to achieve national policy objectives.
Indeed, some of the world’s largest problems today
are precisely the result of those kinds of irresponsible
actions. Against that backdrop, I would like to make the
following points.
First, we all must renew our commitment to
multilateralism. No nation, no matter how powerful,
can effectively address the global challenges on its
own. The United Nations was established to harness
our collective efforts, knowing that we would fail if
we acted separately. That was true in 1945, and it also
remains true now. The world must not be seen as a zerosum game. Kofi Annan once said:
“Peace, security and freedom are not finite
commodities ... which one State can acquire at
another’s expense ... [T]he more peace, security and
freedom any one State has, the more its neighbours
are likely to have.” (A/57/PV.2, p. 1)
I should make a reference to United Nations
peacekeeping, underlined by the Secretary-General
as a concrete example of multilateralism at work. As a
core business of the Security Council, United Nations
peacekeeping was designed to enable us to contribute
to peace and security, sharing the responsibility under
the United Nations flag. However, the survival of
multilateralism ultimately depends on the capacity of
the United Nations to adapt to new challenges and to
the quality of its response.
My second point is that we must enhance
our support for United Nations reform. Stronger
multilateralism requires a stronger United Nations. The
reform of the United Nations is critical to ensuring that
the Organization remains relevant and fit for purpose
and that it has an impact on the ground. All those words
and jargon must be translated into concrete actions. We
are now in the implementation phase of wide-ranging
reforms initiated by the Secretary-General. It is also
our job to ensure that the process remains inclusive and
transparent. The goal of the reform is clear: the United
Nations must be better positioned to help countries

S/PV. 8395

to sustain peace and development. Only then can we
restore the faith of global community in the United
Nations.
Much needs to be done to communicate the
achievements and positive work being done by this
Organization. We must perhaps increasingly harness
the power of social media and engage with the wider
United Nations stakeholders, bringing their views
into our deliberations here, and vice versa. Many have
said that we must invest in defending multilateralism.
We must also be sure that our investment in the past
is not for nothing. A simple test of our desire for
multilateralism is to renew our commitment to past
agreements, such as the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the Paris Agreement, as well as to
adopting future agreements, such as the global compact
for safe, orderly and regular migration. That is a simple
test for us all.
In conclusion, in his opening statement at the
recent 2018 annual meeting of the International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank, held in Bali from
8 to 14 October, referring to the multilateral system,
which is under attack, the President of my country,
Mr. Joko Widodo, used the metaphor that the world is
like the Game of Thrones television serial, where the
evil winter is coming. I would like to add that if winter
really comes, we all will be left in the freezing cold.
No one country will survive if we choose unilateralism
over multilateralism. We would be frozen in our tracks.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Mr. Hattrem (Norway): I deliver this statement on
behalf of Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden and my
own country, Norway.
The multilateral system is under pressure, as are
the norms that underpin it. A rules-based international
order is in the interests of all Member States. It brings
predictability and creates the conditions for tackling
global problems. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, the Addis Ababa Action Agenda and
the Paris Agreement are the results of multilateral
cooperation. All such agreements are crucial to
addressing global challenges. Climate change, conflict,
instability and human rights violations impede global
sustainable development.
We must step up our collective efforts to prevent
and curb conflicts and wars and build basic social

18-3686369/83

S/PV.8395

Maintenance of international peace and security

and economic infrastructure for the whole of society,
especially for those in the most vulnerable situations.
We must understand and make use of the linkages
among human rights, sustainable development and
peace and security. It is crucial that we apply a gender
perspective in all policy areas and that we engage both
women and men.
The consequences of instability affect us all, and
global security threats require global responses. The
Security Council must be able to act, and so must we as
Member States. Terrorism and violent extremism in all
their forms and manifestations represent a truly global
threat. That threat requires a global response. The
Nordic countries believe that any measures aimed at
countering terrorism and preventing violent extremism
must be in compliance with the rule of law and human
rights.
Furthermore, the Nordic countries encourage the
Council to make full use of its mandate to engage in,
support and promote mediation efforts, as it did by
providing united and clear support for the Colombia
peace process. However, mediation is not a quick fix
and cannot take a one-size-fits-all approach. Social
and economic development remains crucial if we are to
address the root causes of conflict.
We recognize that regional organizations are often
best placed to take the lead in mediation efforts. We
welcome and support the strengthened relationship
between the African Union (AU) and the United Nations
and between the AU Peace and Security Council and
the Security Council. The World Trade Organization
(WTO) is an essential multilateral tool that strengthens
our ability to trade and interact with the world. We need
to defend and reform the WTO. Free trade agreements
have contributed to economic growth, the reduction of
poverty and falling child mortality rates. The Nordic
countries are staunch supporters of rules-based and
predictable trade arrangements.
We, the United Nations, must also do our
part — and we must do it better. The world needs a
stronger, coherent, effective and responsive United
Nations, which is why all Member States should
continue to back the Secretary-General’s reform
agenda. We, the Nordic countries, will be consistent
partners for a common future.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Georgia.
70/83

09/11/2018

Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): At the outset, let me also
express our appreciation to the Chinese presidency for
convening this debate.
Undoubtedly, we are confronted with a crisis of
multilateralism in today’s globalized and interdependent
world. The alternative to the rules-based order is chaos.
Hence our common duty to strengthen the multilateral
system through relevant reforms and making multilateral
institutions more fit for purpose. The United Nations
is at the core of this and, in that context, we welcome
the United Nations reforms launched by the SecretaryGeneral, within the three pillars of the Organization.
When we talk about disruption of the rulesbased order, the region I come from is no exception.
Unfortunately, it was shattered by destructive role of
one of the permanent members of the Security Council.
This year marks the tenth anniversary since Georgia
experienced full-scale military aggression by Russia,
which resulted in the illegal occupation of 20 per cent
of my country’s territory. A few years later, Ukraine
also fell victim to the very same aggressor. These
blatant violations of fundamental norms and principles
of international law, in disregard for the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of States, was a massive blow
to European security and the entire international order.
The Government of Georgia remains firmly
committed to pursuing a peaceful conflict resolution
policy directed towards the de-occupation of the two
Georgian regions, on the one hand, and reconciliation
and confidence-building between the communities
divided by war and the occupation line, on the other. Yet
we are confronted with often asymmetrical challenges
countering our peace initiatives.
As we speak, the Russian occupation regime in
Tskhinvali continues to fortify the occupation line
adjacent to the village of Atotsi, in Kareli municipality,
by installing one-kilometre-long artificial barriers.
Razor wire fences and other artificial barriers erected
along the occupation line have already reached 100
kilometres, dividing families, depriving them of the
right to free movement and access to their property,
agricultural lands, religious sites and cemeteries,
as well as to health care, emergency services and
education in their native tongue. I previously informed
the Council about abductions, tortures and killings
based on ethnic origin that have taken place against the
civilian population living along the occupation line. For
the past 10 years, the occupying Power has continued its
18-36863

09/11/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

military build-up, instead of abiding by the agreement
it signed — the European Union-mandated ceasefire
agreement of 12 August 2008.
Clearly there is a need for the immediate creation
of international security mechanisms on the ground,
as well as for unimpeded access of international
human rights monitors to the Abkhazia and Tskhinvali
regions of Georgia. What we see instead is deliberate
targeting on the part of Russian of these negotiation
formats through undermining the Incident Prevention
and Response Mechanisms (IPRMs) established under
the Geneva International Discussions. We do not need
to emphasize the crucial importance of the Geneva
International Discussions and IPRMs — unique
negotiation formats to address and resolve security and
humanitarian issues experienced by the people affected
by the unresolved conflict between Georgia and
Russia. The formats have been essential in preventing
the large-scale escalation of conflict in the light of
increased provocations on the ground.
I would like to recall that the Security Council was
actively engaged with Georgia from 1993 to 2009, until
the brazen use of the veto power by Russia blocked
the prolongation of the mandate of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG). By vetoing
its extension when it was needed most — shortly after
the August 2008 war — a dangerous precedent in the
history of United Nations peacekeeping was created.
Being party to the conflict, using its veto power to
block the extension of the UNOMIG mandate came
in direct contradiction with Chapter V, Article 27 of
the Charter of the United Nations. Paragraph 3 clearly
stipulates that “a party to a dispute shall abstain from
voting”.
Misuse of the veto power has resulted in tragic
consequences in other parts of the world as well, with a
record high numbers of vetoes cast in the past two years.
Therefore, we consider it crucial to reform the Security
Council — and the United Nations in general — to
increase effectiveness in addressing global challenges,
be they conflicts, humanitarian and economic crises,
forced displacement or climate change. That will enable
us to achieve cohesion, inclusivity and the development
of societies, with respect for international law and the
rules-based order at heart.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.

S/PV. 8395

Mr. Gonzalez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I wish
to congratulate the delegation of the People’s Republic
of China on assuming the leadership of the Security
Council during the month of November. I would also
like to thank them for convening this open debate
and for the substantive concep paper they provided us
(S/2018/982, annex.)
My delegation believes the holding of this open
debate to be most timely. The global challenges we
face require the international community to enhance
its working methods so that we can become more
efficient. In the face of such challenges, we must also
consider how to promote all the fundamental principles
of the Charter of the United Nations together, without
detriment to any of them. I would like to refer to three
topics during my statement.
First, I reiterate the importance that Colombia
attaches to the purposes and principles of the
Organization’s Charter. They are not a pointless
enumeration of general values and
​​
goals; rather, they
are the very foundation upon which our Organization
is built, enabling States to constantly and collectively
strive for a more peaceful, prosperous and just world.
The purposes and principles uphold international law
and relations and are as valid today as they have been
for seven decades.
The Government of President Duque Márquez
firmly believes that, given the increasing number of
actors involved in international relations, today’s world
requires a system of governance that, while giving order
to and facilitating the management of international
affairs, also helps to consolidate the capacities of
States to meet the demands of society and guarantee
our common good. The strengthening of multilateral
forums promotes a greater degree of symmetry in
international relations, contributing to transparency
and the development of equitable rules of the game
that can be accepted by all. The broad and democratic
participation of States in multilateral forums enables us
to forge joint commitments and fulfil the obligations
that arise from them, thereby strengthening the
principle of collective responsibility as a criterion to
confront global challenges.
Strengthening multilateralism therefore fosters
cooperation and consolidates fairer and more balanced
rules of the game. There is nothing more beneficial for
the efforts of the international community in its fight
against the scourges that burden us than the existence

18-3686371/83

S/PV.8395

Maintenance of international peace and security

of commitments entered into democratically by States.
These must be developed as a result of dialogue and
political consultations and established on balanced
criteria that consolidate institutions and strengthen the
international order.
The second issue I would like to address is the need
for flexibility and adaptation in our Organization. The
effective implementation of the three reforms of the
United Nations system spearheaded by the SecretaryGeneral will ensure that its management is more
modern, transparent and efficient. That also includes
achieving gender equality and the promotion of a
results-based system so that the Organization can fulfil
its mandates expeditiously.
Likewise, protecting and strengthening the Security
Council means that it is essential to democratize this
collective mechanism. When we speak of a more
democratic Council, we refer to a body that is more
representative, more transparent and more effective.
My delegation, together with the countries of Uniting
for Consensus, has presented solid proposals calling
for a reform of the Security Council that will attend to
those principles by means of an increase in the number
of non-permanent seats and establishing a new category
for longer-term seats or introducing the possibility of
seats that qualify for re-election.
Finally, there is an urgent need to place prevention
at the heart of the Organization’s activities. Prevention
has been identified by the Secretary-General as a
priority for making the Organization more effective
and for saving succeeding generations from the scourge
of war. Such an approach should lead the Organization
to react quickly and in a coordinated manner to produce
results on the ground. We believe that, at the current
time, strengthening the role of the United Nations
Resident Coordinator, as a result of the repositioning
of the development system, can and must play a
fundamental role in that regard.
Preventing
conflict
means
strengthening
institutions and building resilient societies. It means
placing respect for human rights at the heart of
national and international policy. It means protecting
and empowering women and girls, one of the most
important steps in sustainable development. And it
means achieving the Sustainable Development Goals.
I conclude my statement by reiterating my
delegation’s commitment to an international rulesbased order in which the United Nations is at the centre.
72/83

09/11/2018

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Latvia.
Mr. Pildegovičs (Latvia) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I very much support the theme
of multilateralism.
(spoke in English)
I would like to thank the Chinese presidency of the
Security Council for organizing this open debate in order
to reflect on the need to strengthen multilateralism. I
also thank the Secretary-General for his statement in
that regard.
Latvia aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union.
In an interdependent and globalized world
we can address and resolve global problems only
through multilateral means, including dialogue and
international cooperation. History shows that a strong
multilateral, inclusive and rules-based international
order is essential for the maintenance of global peace
and security. It must be our joint responsibility to
defend and strengthen it.
The United Nations was created because the world
had paid too high a price for the absence of a credible
and functional international system. It was necessary to
put an end to the world where might makes right, where
big Powers dominate and dismember their neighbours.
Latvia is convinced that only genuine respect for the
Charter of the United Nations can prevent the world
from plunging into chaos. The relations between States
must be exclusively based on law and dialogue, and not
on force and coercion.
Since regaining its independence and acceding to
the United Nations, in 1991, Latvia has been a strong
supporter of multilateralism. Latvia has always been a
staunch supporter of international law and a promoter
of international principles of democracy, human rights
and the rule of law. Those principles are fundamental for
maintaining international order based on predictability,
stability and the security of States. For us, the United
Nations is the core of the multilateral system — the
proper place for finding global solutions to global
problems.
Current pressing issues — such as conflicts,
terrorism, climate change and migration, to name a
18-36863

09/11/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

few — serve to underscore the relevance and increased
interdependence of all three pillars of the United Nations:
peace and security, human rights and development.
They are even more relevant now as the United Nations
and its States Members advance the implementation of
the bold 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
its Goals.
Conflict prevention has its rightful place at the
centre of the United Nations agenda. Also, early
action by the United Nations in situations of concern
is critical. Latvia strongly believes that respect for
human rights, the rule of law and good governance are
key to maintaining peace and security. Therefore, it is
important to act early and effectively where serious
human rights law and humanitarian law violations take
place. They can be an early indication of a descent into
conflict or an escalation of conflict.
However, the potential of the United Nations to
prevent the outbreak, continuation or resurgence of
conflicts has not been used effectively. Far too often,
the United Nations has been unable to prevent conflicts,
build peace or stop atrocities. Too often resources are
spent on responding to and managing crises instead
of preventing them. In that regard, Latvia champions
the Secretary-General’s gender-responsive agenda,
including on conventional and light weapons. That is
why Latvia has selected gender-based violence as the
theme of its presidency of the Arms Trade Treaty.
The Member States of the Security Council have
a particular responsibility in maintaining international
peace and security. Inaction by the Security Council
when mass atrocities are taking place runs counter to
the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations.
Since permanent members of the Council are granted
a special privilege — the veto power — in order to protect
the Charter of the United Nations and the international
order, they also bear a special responsibility that this
power be used in the interests of common peace and
security. We also believe that Security Council reform
is long overdue. We should all focus on strengthening
the legitimacy of this important body.
In order to strengthen the role of the United Nations,
serious efforts should be made to uphold the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Territorial integrity and sovereignty, as enshrined in
the purposes and principles of the Charter, must be
respected by all Member States.

S/PV. 8395

At the same time, the United Nations as an
Organization must be able to change in order to respond
accordingly to twenty-first-century challenges. Latvia
supports the reforms of the Secretary-General in order
to bring the United Nations closer to the people and
be able to respond to their needs for security and
well-being. The United Nations can and must be a
significant global player, a community of nations proud
of its values and committed to multilateralism and the
principles of international law.
Multilateral diplomacy can be challenging, but
even with differences between Member States great
compromises in the form of international agreements
have been achieved while putting people and our planet
at the centre of what we do. With more unity and
collective action, we can strengthen the principles of
multilateralism. We all have the obligation to overcome
the grim challenges of the present times and to make
the world a better place.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kenya.
Mr. Amayo (Kenya): I wish to congratulate you,
Mr. President, and the People’s Republic of China on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of November. May I also take
this opportunity to thank you, Sir, for providing us with
a detailed concept paper (S/2018/982, annex) to guide
this debate. We equally welcome the detailed briefing
on the subject provided earlier today by the SecretaryGeneral, the Acting President of the General Assembly,
the President of the Economic and Social Council and
the President of the International Court of Justice.
Kenya welcomes this timely debate and is everconscious of the fact that its pursuit of foreign policy
objectives is guided by certain important principles.
Among them are the pursuit of peaceful co-existence
with neighbours and other nations, the resolution of
conflicts by peaceful means, respect for the equality,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States, as well
as respect for international norms, customs and laws.
Our common humanity has become a constant
element in the modern globalized world. Kenya
places great emphasis on cooperation, collaboration
and building partnerships in tackling our common
challenges and utilizing the available opportunities.
That is what the Charter of the United Nations calls
upon us to do. We believe that is the essence of
multilateralism.

18-3686373/83

S/PV.8395

Maintenance of international peace and security

However, the apparent fundamental disconnect
between a growing number of global challenges and the
current inadequate structures for international problemsolving and decision-making call for a fresh relook at
the seven decades of the United Nations existence and
what the future holds.
We must ask ourselves why it is that globalization
has, to some extent, led to the loss of momentum in
multilateralism. Globalization is about the cherished
ideal of open markets driving the global economy to
achieve unprecedented levels of economic growth and
development. It has lifted individual standards of living
in many parts of the world and lifted masses up from
abject poverty across the world. As a result, many people
have experienced newfound political and economic
freedoms and many countries have graduated from
lower income to higher income within a relatively short
span of time. Paradoxically, however, as globalization
deepens, multilateralism is retreating. Why? We know
that at the individual, societal, national and international
levels, both globalization and multilateralism have a
tendency towards universality — the former for markets
and the latter for governance.
In essence, this means that multilateralism requires
sovereign responsiveness and purposeful adaptability
to keep up with globalization. Unfortunately, that is the
challenge of multilateralism, as many modern States,
big and small, rich and poor, remain reluctant to shift
away from the pre-nineteenth-century nation-State
model of governance, which closely reflects the Treaty
of Westphalia. Unless the delicate balance between
globalization and multilateralism is restored, change
will be upon us. We believe the United Nations
should be at the forefront of restoring multilateralism
to bridge its gap with globalization. The question is
whether the United Nations can stand up to the task
of restoring that delicate balance between globalization
and multilateralism in order to bequeath peace to
future generations. Opportunities to strike that balance
abound and are in plain sight.
Some of the most intractable challenges of our time,
such as climate change, terrorism, the protection of the
oceans and of natural fauna and flora, tackling serious
pandemics and the governance of outer space and the
cyberdomain, call for concerted multilateral action
based on consensus and adherence to international law,
not unilateral arrangements. My delegation believes
that adherence to international norms and practices
74/83

09/11/2018

developed through mutual consensus should be the
guiding light for the restoration of multilateralism.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Armenia.
Ms. Simonyan (Armenia): Armenia would like
to express its appreciation to the Chinese presidency
for convening today’s open debate and providing the
concept paper (S/2018/982, annex).
The theme of today’s meeting is indeed central
to addressing the global problems and challenges
that require multilateral action. Restoring humanity,
sustaining peace and respecting human dignity
are important priorities that can be achieved only
through concerted efforts and a coordinated response.
Systematic violations of human rights, denials of past
crimes and impunity, the use of force or economic
coercion and a lack of international protection are
among the main factors fuelling risks and instability.
Tendencies to radicalism and exclusion, as well as a rise
in intolerance and hate speech, have been increasingly
permeating the international agenda, distorting the
global discourse and fostering political and social
divides. The conspicuous decline in the international
commitment to multilateralism and respect for human
rights is particularly troubling at a time when we need
more international cooperation and greater capacities
for them.
The Secretary-General’s recent report on the work
of the Organization (A/73/1) demonstrated the need
for a stronger commitment to multilateralism as an
effective instrument for addressing the multitude of
global challenges and disturbing realities facing us.
The report is a stark reminder that those challenges
cannot be addressed by individual States in isolation.
Multilateralism is not only an end in itself but is also
essential to achieving our shared objectives of peace
and prosperity. Collectively, we should do more to
help mitigate crisis situations where basic human
rights, including human beings’ right to life, are being
increasingly challenged. That requires reinforcing our
emphasis on the capacity of multilateral institutions to
deliver adequate responses.
We support the Secretary-General’s efforts to
prioritize prevention in the ongoing reform of the United
Nations system. Armenia is obliged and determined
to contribute to that concept, with a focus on early
action in order to prevent grave violations. Our track
record is well known. The United Nations resolutions
18-36863

09/11/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

that Armenia has introduced are aimed at formulating
strategies for the prevention of genocide, war crimes
and crimes against humanity. The adoption of General
Assembly resolution 69/323, designating 9 December
as the International Day of Commemoration and
Dignity of the Victims of the Crime of Genocide
and of the Prevention of This Crime, was a powerful
manifestation of responsible multilateralism with a
substantive outcome achieved by consensus. This year
we are marking the seventieth anniversaries of the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide and the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, in yet another milestone reaffirming
our collective determination to fight impunity and
prevent any recurrence of human suffering.
Upholding human rights remains a global
imperative that is as relevant as ever. Armenia has
presented its candidacy to the Human Rights Council
in order to recommit to resolute multilateral efforts
in the promotion of human rights and dignity. The
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms
has been at the centre of the fundamental democratic
transformation in Armenia manifested in our peaceful
velvet revolution. The domestic changes that took place
in Armenia in May demonstrated our commitment
to decisively embracing policies aimed at promoting
inclusion, equal rights and opportunities, development
and peace at the national, regional and international
levels.
In addressing multilateralism’s current challenges,
it is important to highlight the centrality of strong
collaboration with regional settings, platforms and
formats and of working to avoid any duplication of
effort. Well-established and internationally mandated
formats within regional organizations have the potential
and capacity to address complex challenges, especially
in situations of conflict. The Charter of the United
Nations prescribes the effective utilization of regional
arrangements as a pathway to the peaceful settlement
of disputes. Armenia welcomes the unwavering and
continued support of the United Nations system and
the Secretary-General for the mediation efforts aimed
at negotiating a peaceful settlement of the Nagorno
Karabakh conflict, led by the Minsk Group of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
co-chaired by France, the Russian Federation and the
United States. The ability of the international community
to remain consistent in supporting agreements reached
within the mandated formats and helping reinforce a

S/PV. 8395

mediated solution is critically important to upholding
the vision and practice of responsible multilateralism
and shared peace.
Multilateral institutions offer platforms where
member States, regional organizations and civil
society can discuss and agree or disagree on solutions
to global problems that no nation acting alone can
resolve. Multilateralism provides important avenues for
conducting discussions and identifying and broadening
areas of potential agreement. Working together is not
optional. It is the only way forward, and patient yet
resolute engagement in addressing mutual concerns
and disagreements therefore remains an important
objective to which we are fully committed.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Oman.
Mr. Al Harthy (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): Let me
begin by congratulating you, Mr. President, and your
friendly country, the People’s Republic of China, on
your presidency of the Security Council this month.
We are confident that your wisdom and your country’s
policies will help you to steer the Council’s work and
achieve the right results.
Today, at the President’s initiative, the Council
is discussing a subject that is very important to
Member States and the international community — the
maintenance of international peace and security in a
multilateral world. Maintaining international peace
and security has always been one of the most important
purposes for which the United Nations was established,
and the President’s initiative is consistent with Member
States’ growing interest in multilateralism, as also
expressed by the Secretary-General and the Acting
President of the General Assembly.
There can be no doubt that our many and diverse
issues with global impact require global solutions and
cooperation on the part of all States, big and small,
especially with regard to the importance of reforming
the mechanisms of the work of the United Nations and
of avoiding double standards in the implementation of
justice and international law.
The Sultanate of Oman believes in the United
Nations and in multilateralism and joint international
action. In our view, they represent the best way
to resolve and settle many of the issues facing the
international community. We therefore hope to see
certain States move away from unilateral measures

18-3686375/83

S/PV.8395

Maintenance of international peace and security

that are inconsistent with the principles of the United
Nations and international law.
Peace and security demand that we believe in
multilateralism, joint work and commitment to the
Charter of the United Nations. That is what Member
States chose when they founded the Organization, and
that is what we should work for and achieve.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Atlassi (Morocco) (spoke in French): I would
first like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
presidency of the Security Council for the month
of November, and to thank you for organizing this
very important debate. I would also like to take this
opportunity to thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing on the subject.
In a globalized world that is tested daily and
faced with challenges of many kinds, multilateralism
is not a choice but a necessity, even an obligation,
to work together for the benefit of humankind and
the well-being of humans. In the twentieth century,
multilateralism became a way to end the ravages of
war and anarchy. That is why the founding fathers of
the Organization signed the United Nations Charter
in San Francisco on 26 June 1945, to save succeeding
generations from the horrors of war and poverty, and
of disrespect for human dignity and human rights. The
aim is to maintain international peace and security,
guarantee development and promote human rights. The
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations were therefore carefully designed to ensure that
they would not date and that they would restore human
dignity and enshrine the principle of equality among
the States Members of the United Nations. Importantly,
the link between those principles has been shown over
time to confirm the notion of causality. A failure of any
one of them has a negative impact on the others.
Multilateralism’s raison d’être is now more essential
than ever, considering the emerging challenges facing
our States. In addition, the proliferation and expansion of
terrorism, the growing numbers of conflicts and hotbeds
of tension, as well as the expansion of transnational
organized crime and its links to international terrorism,
along with other challenges, have emerged and have had
a major and acute impact on the international scene.
Those other challenges include worsening poverty and
outbreaks of famine in several regions; unemployment,
especially among young people, which has reached
76/83

09/11/2018

alarming levels in various countries, encouraging some
of those young people to embrace the fundamentalist
tenets of terrorism, radicalism and violent extremism
and to become easy prey for transnational crime and
trafficking networks; climate change and its impact
on the environment and people; increases in natural
disasters such as earthquakes, tsunamis, the El Niño
phenomenon, forest fires and so forth, along with
desertification and pollution on land, air and sea. All of
those problems should challenge us to act together and
foster multilateralism.
There is no shortage of examples that reaffirm
the importance of multilateralism and the crucial
role played by the United Nations as a fitting venue
for uniting us around the principles important to the
international community. In that regard, we support
the reforms initiated by the Secretary-General aimed
at providing the United Nations with better tools for
meeting our current challenges. The principles of the
Charter must be achieved by taking a comprehensive
and multidimensional approach that focuses on the
rule of law in all aspects of international relations,
including respect for the Charter of the United Nations,
the peaceful settlement of disputes, respect for States’
sovereignty, national unity and territorial integrity, and
non-interference in their internal affairs.
In fealty to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, the Kingdom of
Morocco became a member of the Organization on
12 November 1956. Ever since then we have been an
active member of the international community and an
ardent defender of the purposes and principles of the
Charter, which have become the pillars of our foreign
policy and international action. Morocco affirms the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations relating
to the peaceful settlement of disputes, as outlined in
Chapter VI, and firmly supports the continued role
of the United Nations as a universal Organization
responsible for resolving issues related to maintaining
international peace and security, promoting human
rights and fostering sustainable development.
It is in that spirit that the Kingdom of Morocco,
positioning its foreign policy within a framework of
preventive diplomacy, encourages the use of dialogue
and negotiation in seeking the peaceful settlement
of disputes. Constructive and responsible dialogue is
essential to that end. Morocco has willingly assisted
in efforts aimed at reconciliation and the settlement of
disputes, as His Majesty King Mohammed VI did in
18-36863

09/11/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

the mediation efforts to resolve the crisis in the Mano
River region, and in supporting our Malian brothers
in dealing with their crisis and our Libyan brothers in
getting back on their feet. We hosted the inter-Libyan
dialogue held under the auspices of the United Nations
that culminated in the signing of the Libyan Political
Agreement in Skhirat on 17 December 2015. Beyond
that, we want to contribute to building a united Arab
Maghreb, a united Arab world and a united Africa.
In addition, in its efforts to resolve crises on our
African continent and elsewhere, since 1960 Morocco
has been involved in United Nations efforts to maintain
international peace and security through its participation
in peacekeeping operations in Somalia, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Côte d’Ivoire and Mali, as well as
in NATO and European Union operations mandated by
the Security Council. In addition, during its three terms
as a non-permanent member of the Security Council,
the Kingdom of Morocco has consistently defended the
objectives and principles of the Charter and advocated
for efficient and effective multilateralism.
Climate change is an extremely important issue
for Morocco, which is why in Marrakech in November
2016 we hosted the twenty-second Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change.
Lastly, in Marrakech on 10 and 11 December, the
Kingdom of Morocco, continuing its tireless efforts
to revitalize and foster multilateralism, will host the
Intergovernmental Conference to Adopt the Global
Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Viet Nam.
Mr. Dang Dinh Quy (Viet Nam): At the outset,
I would like to thank the Chinese presidency for
convening today’s open debate on this very important
issue. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
opening remarks.
Viet Nam aligns itself with the statements delivered
earlier by the representatives of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, and the Republic of Singapore,
on behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
Since the United Nations was founded, history
has shown that unilateral and bilateral measures
alone cannot solve our global security challenges.
On the contrary, multilateral measures, based on the

S/PV. 8395

principles of international law enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations, have been crucial to addressing
them. Nowadays, as peace and security in our world
are facing increasing and unprecedentedly complex
challenges, old and new, traditional and non-traditional,
it is more vital than ever that we uphold multilateralism
and make it more effective in addressing these issues,
especially the transnational challenges that are beyond
the capacity of any Member State to deal with alone,
regardless of how powerful it may be. Viet Nam is doing
its best to promote multilateralism, and we call on the
international community to work together to make it
more effective as a means for achieving peace, security
and sustainable development. We therefore have the
following proposals.
First, all Member States, particularly those with
the greatest capabilities, must maintain a strong
political commitment to pursuing multilateralism
and preserving a rules-based international order that
deals with all issues in a fair, just and equal manner,
and to taking concrete measures to that end. Secondly,
our multilateral mechanisms, and the United Nations
above all, must also change, with a view to becoming
more effective, transparent and accountable to Member
States, and truly relevant to all peoples. In that regard,
Viet Nam fully supports the Secretary-General’s reform
initiatives and stresses how crucial it is that we now
set up and implement an appropriate plan of action for
realizing those reforms.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Viet Nam’s
support to the central role of the United Nations in
maintaining peace, security and promoting sustainable
development, and to reaffirm our strong commitment to
fostering multilateralism, with the United Nations at its
heart. As an active, responsible and committed member
of the international community, Viet Nam will continue
to strive for a peaceful, prosperous, sustainable and
equitable world.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belarus.
Mr. Rybakov (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): We
thank the Chinese presidency for organizing this open
debate on the critical issue of strengthening multilateral
cooperation for peace and security.
The principles of multilateralism in international
relations today are not merely neglected but are being
completely ignored. We have forgotten the meaning of
mutual trust and respect. Armed conflicts, political

18-3686377/83

S/PV.8395

Maintenance of international peace and security

confrontations between the world’s greatest Powers,
information wars, the undisguised persecution of
uncooperative countries, international provocations
and sanctions are all vivid proof of that. Doubt has been
cast on the fundamental documents of multilateralism
in the area of the maintenance of international peace
and security. Our disarmament and non-proliferation
regimes are being dismantled, and we have seen
recent examples of that in events related to the
Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty and the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action for Iran’s nuclear
programme.
Belarus has always adhered to the principles of
a peace-loving, non-confrontational policy based on
multilateralism and mutual respect. Not only do we
participate in the implementation of peace initiatives,
we are also active contributors to stability and security
in our region. Belarus is the only country in the postSoviet space that has never been involved either
directly or indirectly in active or extended conflicts in
the region. We have continued to consistently support
the peace process for resolving the conflict in southeastern Ukraine, making a significant contribution by
holding in Minsk the meetings of the Tripartite Contact
Group on Ukraine and its working subgroups. We also
call for a solution acceptable to all the parties regarding
the formulation of parameters for deploying a possible
United Nations peacekeeping mission in the region, and
we are ready to contribute to the work of such a mission.
The principles of multilateralism also correspond
to the idea that Belarus has long promoted for
recreating a comprehensive process for resolving
relations between East and West analogous to the
Helsinki process, based on a new, broad discussion.
Our appeals have not gone unnoticed, and only last
week in Minsk we held a major international event,
a meeting of the Munich Security Conference’s Core
Group, which brought together leaders of European
States, prominent and authoritative political figures,
representatives of international organizations and the
academic community, and experts. Nowadays the mere
possibility of bringing States to the negotiating table is
a valuable and important achievement for international
peace and security, and we will continue to stick to the
principle behind the wise Chinese saying that water
wears away stone. In Chinese the phrase goes something
like “dripping water will wear a hole in stone”. Or, as
President Alexander Lukashenko of Belarus said at the
78/83

09/11/2018

meeting in Minsk, “Better years of negotiations than
one day of war.”
Preserving and strengthening multilateralism
in international relations, in accordance with the
principles of mutual respect and consensus, can give all
of us a chance for a future, for geopolitical calm and for
peace and security.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mali.
Mr. Konfourou (Mali) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Mali associates itself with the statement
delivered earlier today by the representative of
Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.
I would like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President,
for organizing today’s open debate on the theme
“Maintaining international peace and security:
strengthening multilateralism and the role of the United
Nations”, which is certainly a topical one at a time when
multilateralism is being seriously questioned. It is also
very relevant at a time when the United Nations, which
epitomizes multilateralism and which was created in
1945 to save future generations from the scourge of
war, has never been so assailed by new challenges and
complex threats to international peace and security.
There can be no question that the United Nations
embodies the profound aspirations of the nations of
the world for peace and security, development and
respect for human rights, and that it is therefore the
true incarnation of a better future for the peoples we
represent here in New York. It is undoubtedly an ideal
framework for multilateralism and cooperation among
the peoples of the world. Our shared Organization
offers every nation represented in it, whether powerful
or less powerful, in peace or in crisis, an opportunity to
express itself freely and participate on an equal footing
in debates and negotiations on the major international
issues of the moment. That great achievement in
itself underlines the relevance of multilateralism and
therefore of the United Nations, in that it fosters mutual
trust and understanding, thereby reducing tensions and
even conflicts between Member States.
Secondly, in the face of new threats to the world,
including terrorism and other forms of organized crime
such as trafficking in drugs, arms and migrants, as
well as cybercrime and climate change, Mali continues
to believe that only a multilateral approach, based
18-36863

09/11/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

on cooperation between the countries concerned, is
capable of sustainably meeting these challenges. It
is no exaggeration in that regard to paraphrase the
Secretary-General when he says that working together
in a multilateral framework is not an option — it is the
only answer. No country can achieve its own security
by fighting alone, and no country can live in peace at a
time when others are mired in instability.
Mali remains a firm advocate of multilateralism and
cooperation among nations, with a view to achieving
the triad of security, development and respect for
human rights. Our country’s serious commitment has
been manifest in our citizens’ participation in processes
aimed at reaching political settlements of tensions
around the world and the deployment of Malian troops
in peacekeeping missions of the United Nations, the
African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and now the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). That same commitment to
multilateralism and international solidarity explains
why, despite our challenging domestic situation, we
continue to send our sons and daughters to peacekeeping
operations all over the world. Malians are very proud
today to be able to benefit from international solidarity
in return, through the presence of military and civilian
personnel on our territory from the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali, the African Union, ECOWAS, the European
Union, the G-5 for the Sahel and a number of other
friendly partners working by our side to help Mali
restore its authority throughout its territory.
As much as we are committed to multilateralism,
we cannot ignore the fact that multilateralism is at
a crossroads. We have a collective responsibility
to breathe new life into the multilateral framework
of the United Nations. To do that, we must commit
to addressing international issues in a transparent,
equitable and just manner. Ultimately, we must also
agree to advance reform of some of the principal organs
of the United Nations — in this case, the Security
Council and the General Assembly — and including
their composition and working methods. We must spare
no effort in supporting the various reforms undertaken
by the Secretary-General, particularly those concerning
the peace and security pillar and the development
system. We also know that the United Nations cannot
do it all alone, which is why it is important to continue
strengthening cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations. For its part,

S/PV. 8395

Mali remains committed to supporting all initiatives
aimed at strengthening multilateralism and the primary
role of the United Nations in safeguarding future
generations from the scourge of war.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belgium.
Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
First of all, Belgium associates itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the observer of the European Union.
Today’s open debate on multilateralism is very
timely. Given the scope of the challenges we are facing,
we want to emphasize more than ever our support for
multilateralism and the importance of investing our
resources and energy in it. A month ago, in his address
to the General Assembly, my Prime Minister delivered
a passionate statement encouraging multilateralism, in
which he said,
“Putting human beings at the centre and establishing
the rule of law as the basis for international order
is what should drive the engine of multilateralism.”
(A/73/PV.10, p. 33)
For centuries Belgium was a battleground for the
Powers surrounding it. Thanks to close cooperation
among countries and our respect for diversity and
mutual dependency, we are now living in the longest
period of peace in our history to date. That is why we
firmly believe in the usefulness of the United Nations,
its Charter and the universal values that inspire
it. Belgium supports a constructive and integrated
approach to the three pillars of the work of the United
Nations — sustainable development, human rights
and peace and security — as the best way to prevent
conflicts and achieve lasting peace. That belief must
now be translated into concrete multilateral action. We
must demonstrate that effective and joint steps taken
here in the Security Council can make a difference
for men, women and children on the ground. That
will certainly be the goal of Belgium’s mandate on the
Security Council over the next two years. Three key
words will guide our work.
The first is prevention, which can be achieved by
analysing and addressing the root causes and drivers of
conflicts in an integrated and comprehensive manner,
in close partnership with regional and subregional
organizations, the countries most concerned and civil
society. The fight against impunity is also a crucial
preventive tool. The second is protection, above all

18-3686379/83

S/PV.8395

Maintenance of international peace and security

of civilians — men, women and children — with a
particular emphasis on children in armed conflict
and respect for international humanitarian law. The
third is performance, which is about strengthening
the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations and
prioritizing support for political solutions and the
protection of civilians.
I would also like to emphasize three areas where
we must step up our efforts in supporting a rules-based
international order in the area of peace and security. We
should all ensure that the international norms that we
have all agreed on are consistently respected. All Council
members therefore have a responsibility to ensure that
their actions in the Council do not contribute directly
or indirectly to violations of international humanitarian
law, human rights or non-proliferation regimes. In that
regard, efforts such as the France-Mexico initiative on
the veto and the code of conduct of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group remain extremely
relevant. Secondly, we must be able to take advantage
of existing multilateral instruments so as to provide
concrete solutions to situations on the Council’s
agenda, and those instruments must in turn reinforce
the work of the Security Council. In that respect, the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) plays a very important role in Syria. That is
why Belgium has allocated €2 million for building new
laboratories so that the OPCW can remain on the cutting
edge in its research and verification activities. And the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty could play an
important and useful role in forging an agreement with
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Lastly, if we want to build a rules-based
international order, we must also ensure that those
rules are truly respected. We have developed important
instruments — not only the International Court of
Justice, the International Criminal Court and the
Permanent Court of Arbitration, but also a range
of instruments for verification and the attribution
of responsibility. While there is of course room for
improvement where they are concerned, we must also
be able to use them when appropriate in order to make
multilateralism more effective.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Penaranda (Philippines): The Philippines
welcomes this open debate initiated by the Chinese
presidency of the Security Council, and aligns itself
80/83

09/11/2018

with the statement delivered earlier by the representative
of Singapore on behalf of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations.
Our discussion is timely, considering the growing
trend towards unilateralism and increasing efforts to
discredit multilateralism, mainly, and ironically, by the
chief architect of the United Nations. The Philippines
supports the Secretary-General’s call for a renewed
commitment to a rules-based order and a vigorous
return to multilateralism, which gives voice to the
voiceless, counsels patience until the relevant facts are
in, weighs the options for practicality and sustainability
and imparts to actions when they are finally taken a
credibility often rightly denied to unilateral and, more
often than not, impulsive decisions. The ongoing
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development manifests one of the main and lasting
achievements of collective action. Member States have
painstakingly developed national agendas aligned with
the Sustainable Development Goals. However, the
environment conducive to peace, stability and progress
that we endeavour to nurture can be lost with a single
impulsive, unilateral act. Multilateralism is sometimes
too slow to act and just as slow to achieve consensus on
the most urgent issues. There have been tragic instances
when what cried out to be done was not.
As a founding member of the United Nations,
the Philippines actively promotes the multilateral
process. With regard to economic and social issues,
we are coordinating and facilitating issues that
really matter to our constituents — migration and
development, trafficking, persons with disabilities
and biological diversity, as well as human rights.
We have been advocating for the global compact on
migration, which is anchored in human rights and
just plain decency. Concerning peace and security,
the Philippines has championed the universal ban on
nuclear weapons. We cooperate closely with the United
Nations on counter-terrorism. Since 2004 we have also
been partnering with Pakistan on an annual General
Assembly resolution under the agenda item on a culture
of peace.
In the area of maritime cooperation at the regional
level, while recognizing differences among States and
never compromising our respective core interests, the
Philippines has the coordinating role for the next three
years on the adoption of a common code of conduct in
the South China Sea.
18-36863

09/11/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

The success that the Philippines has had in
countering terrorism has revealed this scourge’s
transnational nature and confirmed that it is the most
pressing threat to peace and security in the world today.
The fight against terrorism should therefore unite us
all. It demands our total and sincere cooperation.
We firmly believe that reform of the Security
Council is integral to strengthening multilateralism,
and that developing international norms further and
in a balanced manner is critical. However, while the
Philippines is strongly supportive of multilateralism,
we emphasize that the United Nations and its agencies
are a collection of sovereignties. It is not itself a
sovereign collective. It is therefore always imperative
to ensure first and foremost that the sovereignty of
States is respected and upheld. States are always by far
the best positioned to solve any problem, and there is
no agency or group that can act with anything close
to a State’s own effectiveness. If a State itself is the
problem, that State itself is in the best position to solve
it. So let us work with it.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ecuador.
Ms. Yánez Loza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first like to thank the People’s Republic of China,
in its capacity as President of the Security Council for
the month of November, for convening this important
open debate on the theme “Maintenance of international
peace and security: Strengthening multilateralism and
the role of the United Nations”.
Ecuador attaches great importance to the role
of the United Nations in maintaining a world order
based on respect for international law and the norms
and principles established in the founding Charter of
the United Nations, which is unquestionably a moral
reference point for advancing international peace and
security, promoting human dignity and prosperity
and defending human rights and the rule of law. We
agree with Secretary-General António Guterres that
the problems of our time are increasingly global in
scope, and that multilateralism is more important and
necessary today than ever before.
No State is immune to the threats facing humankind
today, but neither will a response come about on its own.
For that reason, Ecuador reaffirms its commitment
to a multipolar system with the active and collective
participation of every country in the world and other
relevant actors. Effective governance and the rule of law

S/PV. 8395

at the national and international levels are fundamental
to the maintenance of international peace and security.
International law is the backbone of multilateralism,
since it enables us to create conditions conducive to
maintaining justice and respect for the obligations that
States have agreed to on fundamental issues such as
sustainable peace, access to justice, gender equality,
economic development, judicial independence and the
promotion of democracy. There can be no lasting peace
without justice and accountability.
In that context, reform of the United Nations
represents an opportunity to achieve a strengthened,
more united and less fragmented multilateral system.
That effort must be accompanied by a political
commitment on the part of all of us to achieve
consensus, whether on the simplest areas under debate,
such as working methods, or on those that require joint
decisions by every part of the system, along with the
long-awaited reform of the Security Council. The full
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development is an example of that, since it was adopted
as a common objective of the Member States and the
greatest possible effort is needed to achieve it, based on
cooperation and above all on an international order that
has human beings at its heart and that can enable us to
respond effectively to our ever-growing and evolving
challenges.
In this context, Ecuador, together with Bolivia
and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, sponsored a
high-level event held on 31 October under the theme
of “Renewing the commitment to multilateralism”,
attended by the Presidents of the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council and by Bolivia,
the President of the Security Council for the month of
October. That meeting was an opportunity for us to
consider the fundamental role of multilateralism in
enabling us to deal with especially urgent challenges.
The large number of speakers in the meeting testified to
the membership’s level of concern about the issue and
the importance that it attaches to it.
I would like to conclude by reiterating Ecuador’s
commitment to multilateralism and how valuable we
believe regional and subregional organizations are.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Mayong Onon (Malaysia): I would like to
join earlier speakers in thanking China for convening
today’s open debate.

18-3686381/83

S/PV.8395

Maintenance of international peace and security

My delegation associates itself with the statements
made by the representatives of Singapore, on behalf
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, and
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
the Secretary-General, the Acting President of the
General Assembly, the President of the Economic and
Social Council and the President of the International
Court of Justice for their views on today’s topic.
Malaysia firmly believes that all Member States
must remain united in our collective resolve to uphold
and respect the purposes and principles enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations. As prescribed in the
Charter, the United Nations has been and remains at
the forefront of various international and multilateral
efforts to combat challenges and maintain international
peace and security.
In its 73 years of existence, the global multilateral
system, underpinned by the United Nations, has paved
the way for Member States to make great strides in areas
such as multilateral trade, socioeconomic development,
poverty eradication, the promotion and protection
of human rights, countering terrorism and violent
extremism and addressing environmental concerns.
However, the evolving nature of the traditional threats
and non-traditional security challenges facing the
United Nations threatens to undermine many of the
gains that have been achieved. Despite various efforts,
the United Nations has not been successful in settling
some of the longest-standing issues to international
peace and security. For example, the struggle of the
people of Palestine for their self-determination has
remained unresolved for more than seven decades. The
longer that Palestinians are denied self-determination,
human rights and the rule of law, the more we are all
collectively guilty of not fully respecting and upholding
the Charter. The Security Council’s approach to that
issue still stands out as an example of selective inaction
in implementing the purposes and principles of the
Charter.
Malaysia is a strong supporter of reform initiatives
with a view to strengthening the United Nations.
Although we have recognized the challenges associated
with the reform process, we strongly encourage
all Member States to work collectively to expedite
the process of ensuring that the United Nations
remains central to the multilateral architecture. If
82/83

09/11/2018

multilateralism is to be effective, Malaysia believes
that only a reformed and strengthened United Nations
is the way forward.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Kazi (Bangladesh): Bangladesh thanks the
Chinese presidency for convening today’s open debate,
and we appreciate the Secretary-General’s introductory
briefing.
We also align ourselves with the statement made
by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.
During the high-level week of the seventy-third
session of the General Assembly, we heard a resounding
reaffirmation of multilateralism by most of our leaders.
In tandem, they made a compelling case for the United
Nations as a critical vehicle of multilateralism and
underscored the need to make it fit for purpose in the
twenty-first century. The word “reform” recurred as a
common refrain, with much of the focus on the Security
Council itself.
In our world today, multilateralism remains a
critical guiding light for a rules-based order in the dark
tunnels we often find ourselves in. Over the past 70
years, the international community has accustomed
itself to a multilateral approach, centred on the United
Nations, to addressing most of the pressing challenges
of our times. This has been particularly relevant in the
context of maintaining international peace and security.
The Charter of the United Nations has emerged as the
main reference point for the peaceful settlement of
disputes and for adhering to a set of internationally
agreed norms and principles during armed conflicts.
Despite the United Nations limited results in managing
conflicts, the Organization has emerged as the most
reliable forum in which to raise concerns over the
outbreak, escalation and recurrence of conflicts in any
given situation. This has been guided by the values
and principles the United Nations stands for, and not
merely on the basis of its balance sheets of successes
and failures.
With the rapid advancement of science and
technology, especially in the domains of information
and biological technology, the conventional notion of
humanity itself will be subject to new, challenging
questions. These questions will continue to require
18-36863

09/11/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

the collective consideration of all humankind, and
not just a select few. We will need global responses to
what will be essentially global challenges concerning
the world of work, the planetary environment and
security in new frontiers. It is critical that such global
responses remain mindful of the discontents of those
who consider themselves to be left out for one reason or
another. Otherwise, there will be a growing temptation
to take recourse to protectionism, isolation, intolerance
and xenophobia.
Such temptations and strategies can be politically
expedient, but cannot be a viable solution for the alleged
ailments of globalization. Instead of turning our back
on global processes and discourses, it is crucial that we
redouble our efforts to address the polarization that is
yet again creeping into the multilateral context. The
multilateral process can be slow and painstaking, and
yet it is worth all the efforts invested in it. There is
no reason why globalization and multilateralism should
stand in conflict with our sense of patriotism and
nationalism, or why they should not draw strength from
these to promote the common interest of all peoples
around the world.
Anyone who may have doubts about multilateralism
should perhaps consider the case of Bangladesh. Thanks

S/PV. 8395

largely to multilateralism, a nation born with a warravaged economy and dismissed as a basket case has
managed to withstand all odds and chart out a pathway
for itself as one of the fastest growing economies in
the world, lifting more than a million people out of
poverty. Multilateralism has always been the mainstay
of our foreign policy engagements and remains so on
the basis of our sheer national, existential interest. The
Sustainable Development Goals reinforce our national
aspirations to build a peaceful, just and inclusive society
by pursuing the comprehensive pathway to sustaining
peace. In the aftermath of the recent episode of the
Rohingya humanitarian crisis, Bangladesh has had
no option but to seek recourse to the United Nations,
and particularly the Council, for its custodianship
of the crisis until a peaceful and lasting solution can
be reached.
Bangladesh will therefore remain an ardent
champion of the United Nations, commensurate with
our resolve to prepare ourselves for the emerging
opportunities and challenges before our world. Our lead
contribution to United Nations peacekeeping operations
is driven by the values we cherish as a nation in support
of multilateralism and international peace and security.
The meeting rose at 6.05 p.m.

18-3686383/83
