S/PRST/2006/40

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
22 September 2006
English
Original: French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5533rd meeting of the Security Council, held on 22 September 2006, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo”, the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council pays tribute once again to the extraordinary
commitment of the citizens of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
demonstrated by their peaceful participation in the first stage of democratic
elections of historical importance to their nation.
“The Security Council commends the substantial efforts being made by
the United Nations Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC), and the international community as a whole in support of peace
and democratic elections in the DRC. It stresses its commitment to the
peaceful conduct of the second round of the presidential election and of the
provincial elections scheduled for 29 October 2006, and its determination to
ensure that the peace process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
succeeds, in the interests of the Congolese people, as well as central Africa and
the Great Lakes region.
“The Security Council deplores the violence that erupted in Kinshasa on
20 to 22 August 2006 between security forces loyal to President Kabila and
Vice-President Bemba, and commends the effective action of EUFOR
R.D.Congo in support of MONUC.
“The Security Council shares the serious concern expressed by the
International Committee in Support of the Transition (CIAT), in its statement
of 11 September 2006, regarding the unchecked circulation of weapons and
armed individuals in Kinshasa. It endorses its call for a cantonment of the
security forces of both candidates and of FARDC troops in the province of
Kinshasa, and for a ban on the circulation of armed individuals in this
province.
“The Security Council calls on all political parties and in particular
President Kabila and Vice-President Bemba to restate their commitment to the
peace process and to work within the framework they have agreed to establish
with the facilitation of MONUC as a means of peacefully resolving political
differences. It welcomes the meeting that took place between President Kabila

06-53189 (E) 220906 220906

*0653189*

S/PRST/2006/40

and Vice-President Bemba as a first step in this direction and encourages them
to continue to seek a peaceful resolution of their differences.
“The Security Council recalls its support to the Independent Electoral
Commission and to the High Media Authority. It urges all candidates and all
parties in the DRC to banish any message that could incite hatred and violence
and to comply with the codes of conduct that those institutions have
respectively elaborated for the conduct of free, fair and transparent elections in
a peaceful climate. It commends the role of the International Committee of
Eminent Persons and reiterates its support for it. It emphasizes again the
importance of respecting the electoral calendar.
“The Security Council invites the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1533 (2004) to examine the situation in Kinshasa, if appropriate, in
the context of the arms embargo imposed by resolutions 1493 (2003) and 1596
(2005) and renewed by resolution 1698 (2006). It also expresses its readiness
to consider possible measures against individuals and entities who would
further threaten the conduct of free and fair elections, in particular through the
use of “hate media”, preventing equal and responsible access to media, inciting
violence and recourse to violence to prevent elections, dispute their outcome
or subvert the peace process.
“The Security Council emphasizes the need for all political parties to act
responsibly within the framework of democratic institutions after the elections.
“The Security Council underscores to the Congolese parties the
importance of preventing impunity for those responsible for violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law that constitute crimes.”

2

06-53189
