so

General As1embl7

(iii) If he has validated a period of prior non-pensionable

service under article III, such amount, not exceeding 5
per cent of his pensionable remuneration for that period,
as he may have received from the Provident Fund of a
member organization in excess of his own contributions
thereto, and have refunded to that member organization.
Article X, paragraph l(b) (amended text)

If the participant has five or more years of contributory
service, he shall be entitled; four months after his employment
ceases, to a lump-sum payment which shall be the actuarial
equivalent, at the date his employment ceased, of the retirement
benefit payable at the age of sixty calculated on the basis of his
contributory service and final average remuneration, provided
that the amount to be received under this clause shall not be less
than the amount receivable under sub-paragraph (a) above.
During that period of four months he shall not be eligible for a
disability benefit but shall be eligible for a death benefit based
on his contributory service at the date he ceased to be employed
by a member organization; except that
(i) A widow's benefit will be payable only if his widow was
his wife at the time his employment ceased, and
(ii) If a death benefit becomes payable under article VII, 5,
and no child's benefit is payable under article VIII, the
death benefit shall not be less than the withdrawal benefit
which would have been paid to the participant if he had
requested earlier payment under the terms of sub-paragraph (c).
If he dies during this period of four months and a death benefit
becomes payable under article VII, no further benefit shall be
payable.
Article X, paragraph 1 (d) (amended text)
Any participant whose years of contributory service when
added to his age at withdrawal equal sixty or more may elect
to receive, in lieu of the lump sum_ due under sub-paragraph (b)
above, his withdrawal benefit in the form of either :
(i) Nlife annuity, either immediate or deferred to age sixty,
which is the actuarial equivalent of such lump sum, or
(ii) One-half of the lump sum due under sub-paragraph (b}
above and a life annuity deferred to age sixty which is
the actuarial equivalent of one-half of such lump sum, or
(iii) In the case of a married male participant, a life annuity,
either immediate or deferred to age sixty, including a
prospective widow's benefit for his wife, which is the
actuarial equivalent of such lump sum. Where a participant who has so elected dies, such widow shall be entitled to a widow's benefit half as large as the life
annuity which was being paid to the deceased at the time
of his death, or had been deferred to age sixty as the
case may be. This benefit shall cease on the widow's
remarriage and the widow shall be entitled to a lumpsum payment equal to twice the. annual amount of her
widow's benefit.
Article X, paragraph 2 (amended text}

The payment of any lump sum due under this article shall be
postponed at the request of the person entitled to the benefit for
a period not exceeding three years from the date when the
benefit became due.
Article X, paragraph 3 (new text)
Where a lump sum payment of a withdrawal benefit due
under this article is made more than four months after the date
when a participant's employment ceasea, compound interest at
2¾ per cent per annum shall, from that date, be added to the
amount of benefit to which he is entitled.

Article XI (revised text)
Summary dismissal for serious misconduct
A- participant who, in conformity with the Staff Regulations,
has been summarily dismissed for serious misconduct shall
receive:
(a) His owri contributions to the Pension Fund, with compound interest at 2¾ per cent per annum, plus

Tenth Seesion
( b) Such amount as may have been transferred on his account to the Pension Fund from the Provident Fund at thetime of his entry into the Pension Fund, without interest, provided that, on the recommendation of the Secretary-General of
the United Nations, or of the competent authority of the member organization concerned, the Joint Staff Pension Board shall,
to the extent so recommended, grant to such participant a lump
sum equal to either the whole or a part of the remainder of the
benefit he would have been entitled to, under article X, had he
ceased to be employed for reasons other than summary dismissal
for serious misconduct.

Article XLI (new text)
Jurisdiction of the United Nations
Administrative Tribunal
1. Applications alleging non-observance of the Regulations.
of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund arising out of
a decision of the Joint Staff Pension Board may be submitted
directly to the United Nations Administrative Tribunal by:
(a) Any staff member of a member organization which hH
accepted the jurisdiction of the Tribunal in Joint Staff Pension
Fund cases who is eligible under article II of the Regulations
as a participant in the Fund, even after his employment hu
ceased, and any person who has succeeded to such staff member's rights upon his death;
( b) Any other person who can show that he is entitled to
rights under the Regulations of the Fund by virtue of the par•
ticipation in the Fund of a staff member of such member organization.
2. In the event of a dispute as to whether the Tribunal has
competence, the matter shall be settled by a decision of the
Tribunal.
3. The decision of the Tribunal shall be final and without
appeal.

4. The time limits prescribed in article 7 of the Statute of the
Tribunal are reckoned from the date of the communication of
the contested decision of the Joint Staff Pension Board.

956 (X). Acceptance by the specialized agencies
of the jurisdiction of the United Natlou
Administrative Tribunal in matters involving
applications alleging non-observance of the
Regulations of the United Nations Joint Stair
Pension Fund
The Genera/, Assembly
1. Takes note of the report10 of the Secretary-General
on the acceptance by the specialized agencies of the jurisdiction of the United Nations Administrative Tribunal
in matters involving applications alleging non-observance
of the Regulations of the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Fund ;

2. Takes note of the observations of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
as set forth in its third report11 to the General Assembly
at its tenth session.
539th plenary meeting,
3 November 1955.

957 (X). Procedure for review of United Nations
Administrative Tribunal judgemente: amendments to the Statute of the Administrative
Tribunal
The General Assembly,
Recalling section B of its resolution 888 (IX) of 17
December 1954 in which it accepted in principle judicial
10

Ibid., document A/2970.
document A/2986.

11 lbid.,

Resolutiona adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

review of judgements of the United Nations Administrative Tribunal,
Having considered the report12 of the Special Committee on Review of Administrative Tribunal Judgements submitted pursuant to that resolution.
1. Decides to amend the Statute of the United Nations
Administrative Tribunal, effective from the date of
adoption of the present resolution, with respect to judgements rendered by the Tribunal thereafter, as follows:
(a) Add the following new articles 11 and 12 :

"Article 11
"1. If a Member State, the Secretary-General or
the person in respect of whom a judgement has been
rendered by the Tribunal ( including any one who
has succeeded to that person's rights on his death)
objects to the judgement on the ground that the Tribunal has exceeded its jurisdiction or competence or
that the Tribunal has failed to exercise jurisdiction
vested in it, or has erred on a question of law relating
to the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations,
or has committed a fundamental error in procedure
which has occasioned a failure of justice, such Member State, the Secretary-General or the person concerned may, within thirty days from the date qf the
judgement, make a written application to the Committee established by paragraph 4 of this article asking
the Committee to request an advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice on the matter.
"2. Within thirty days from the receipt of an application under paragraph 1 of this article, the Committee shall decide whether or not there is a substantial basis for the application. If the Committee decides
that such a basis exists, it shall request an advisory
opinion of the Court, and the Secretary-General shall
arrange to transmit to the Court the views of the person ref erred to in paragraph 1.
"3. If no application is made under paragraph 1
of this article, or if a decision to request an advisory
opinion has not been taken by the Committee, within
the periods prescribed in this article, the judgement of
the Tribunal shall become final. In any case in which
a request has been made for an advisory opinion, the
Secretary-General shall either give effect to the opinion of the Court, or request the Tribunal to convene
specially in order that it shall confirm its original
judgement, or give a new judgement, in conformity
with the opinion of the Court. If not requested to convene specially, the Tribunal shall at its next session
confirm its judgement or bring it into conformity with
the opinion of the Court.
"4. For the purpose of this article, a Committee
is established and authorized under paragraph 2 of
Article 96 of the Charter to request advisory opinions
of the Court. The Committee shall be composed of
the Member States the representatives of which have
served on the General Committee of the most recent
regular session of the General Assembly. The Committee shall meet at United Nations Headquarters
and shall establish its own rules.
"S. In any case in which award of compensation
has been made by the Tribunal in favour of the person
concerned and the Committee has requested an advisory opinion under paragraph 2 of this article, the
12 Ibid., Tenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 49, document
A/29@.

Secretary-General, if satisfied that such person will
otherwise be handicapped in protecting his interesb,
shall within fifteen days of the decision to request an
advisory opinion make an advance payment tu him of
one-third of the total amount of compensation awarded
by the Tribunal less such termination benefits, if any,
as have already been paid. Such advance payment shall
be made on condition that, within thirty days oi thl'
action of the Tribunal under paragraph 3 of this arti
de, such person shall pay back to the United Nations
the amount, if any, by which the advance payment
exceeds any sum to which he is entitled in acconlanct
with the opinion of the Court.

"Article 12
"The Secretary-General or the applicant may applj
to the Tribunal for a revision of a judgement on th,
basis of the discovery of some fact of such a natur,
as to be a decisive factor, which fact was, when th,
judgement was given, unknown to the Tribunal and
also to the party claiming revision, always provided
that such ignorance was not due to negligence. The
application must be made within thirty days of the
discovery of the fact and within one year of the date
of the judgement. Clerical or arithmetical mistake;,
in judgements, or errors arising therein from any accidental slip or omission, may at any time be corrected
by the Tribunal either of its own motion or on the
application of any of the parties";
( b) Renumber the former articles 11 and 12 as arti
des 13 and 14 respectively, and in paragraph 3 of arti
de 9 substitute the words "article 14" for "article 12"
( c) Amend paragraph 2 of article 10 to read :
"Subject to the provisions of articles 11 and 12,
the judgements of the Tribunal shall be final and
without appeal" ;
2. Recommends that Member States and the Sec1e
tary-General should not make oral statements befori,
the International Court of Justice in any proceedings
under the new article 11 of the Statute of the Adminis ·
trative Tribunal adopted under the present resolution.
541st plenary meeting,
8 November 1955.
958 (X). Report of the Negotiating Committee fmExtra-Budgetary Funds
A
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report18 of the N egotiati nr
Committee for Extra-Budgetary Funds appointed ,,
the ninth session of the General Assembly,
Believing that provision should be made for the co1:
tinuation of the work of the Committee,
1. Requests the President of the General Assembl;
to appoint a Negotiating Committee for Extra-Bud
getary Funds consisting of not more than ten member'
to serve from the close of the tenth session to the cln ,:
of the eleventh session of the General Assembly for t\11
purpose of consulting with Member and non-membe1
States as to the amounts which Governments mav con
tribute on a voluntary basis toward each of the pro
grammes approved by the General Assembly for which
funds are not available through the regular budget of
the United Nations and for which the Committee is
specifically requested by the General Assembly to obtain
pledges of voluntary contributions from Governments;
is Ibid., agenda item 40, document A/2945.
