Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

2. Approves the special report 5 on economic conditions in the Non-Self-Governing Territories as a supplement to the report 6 approved in 1951;
3. Invites the Secretary-General to communicate the
special report to the Members of the United Nations
responsible for the administration of N on-Self-Governing Territories, to the Economic and Social Council,
to the Trusteeship Council and to the specialized agencies concerned for their consideration ;
4. Expresses its agreement with the suggestion in the
report that the Secretary-General should convene the
sixth session of the Committee on Information from
Non-Self-Governing Te;ritories for the spring of
1955;
5. Invites the Committee to submit a report to the
General Assembly at its tenth session, paying particular
regard to social conditions in Non-Self-Governing
Territories as indicated, in particular, in the information transmitted to the Secretary-General in 1954;
6. Decides that, notwithstanding the provisions of
paragraph 4 (a) of General Assembly resolution 218
(III) of 3 November 1948, the full summaries and
analyses of the information transmitted during 1955
should be submitted to the General Assembly in 1956.
498th plenary meeting,
22 November 1954.

k47 (IX). Information on problems common to
regional groups of Non-Self-Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Having since 1950 approved annually special reports
on economic, social and educational conditions in NonSelf-Governing Territories,
Considering that these reports express general views
and recommendations applicable to Non-Self-Governing Territories as a whole,
Recognizing that conditions in the various regions
and in particular Territories may present special problems,
Believing that the consideration of these special
problems by the General Assembly should provide an
opportunity for the expression of views and recommendations of concrete value to certain regional groups
of Territories,
1. Requests the Committee on Information from
Non-Self-Governing Territories at its 1955 session to
study the manner in which the future reports prepared
for the General Assembly may most appropriately be
directed to the consideration of information or recommendations concerning the particular problems common
to certain regional groups of Territories;
2. Further requests the Committee to examine
whether any amplification or amendment of the Standard Form is necessary so as to assist the Administering
Members in providing concrete information on the
particular problems common to certain regional groups
of Territories;
3. Suggests that the Committee give full consideration to the views expressed on these subjects during
5
6

Ibid., part two.
Ibid., Sixth Session, Supplement No. 14, part three.

17

the discussions in the Fourth Committee at the ninth
session of the General Assembly.
498th plenary meeting,
22 November 1954.
848 (IX). Voluntary transmiHion of information on political development in Non-Self.
Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Conscious of the functions it bears over peoples of
Non-Self-Governing Territories under the principles
and objectives set forth in Article 73 of the Charter
of the United Nations,
Considering that these principles and objectives relate
to the political as well as the economic, social and educational advancement of the peoples concerned,
Recalling that by resolutions 144 (II), 327 (IV) and
637 B (VII) it has sought to secure the transmission
by Members administering Non-Self-Governing Territories of voluntary information on the manner and
extent to which the peoples of Territories under their
administration are being developed for self-government,
Noting with satisfac.tion that some Members responsible for the administration of Non-Self-Governing
Territories already have voluntarily transmitted some
information on the development of self-governing institutions in the Non-Self-Governing Territories,
But noting further that other Members have not yet
transmittecl such information,
1. Reiterates the view that voluntary submission of
information on the political development of peoples in
Non-Self-Governing Territories is fully in accord with
the spirit of Article 73 of the Charter;
2. Invites the Administering Members concerned to
give the United Nations their utmost co-operation in
this regard.
498th plenary meeting,
22 November 1954.
849 (IX). Cessation of the transmission of information under Article 73 e of the Charter in respect of Greenland

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, by resolution 222 (III) of 3 November 1948, the General Assembly, while welcoming any
development of self-government in Non-Self-Governing Territories, considers it essential that the United
Nations be informed of any change in the constitutional
status of any such Territory as a result of which the
responsible Government concerned thinks it unnecessary to transmit further information in respect of
that Territory under Article i3 e of the Charter,
Having received from the Government of Denmark
a communication 7 dated 3 September 1953 informing
the Secretary-General that, as a result of the constitutional amendment adopted on 5 June 1953, Greenland
has become an integral part of the Danish Realm with
a constitutional status equal to that of other parts of
Denmark and that, as a consequence of this constitutional change, the Danish Government regarded its
responsibilities under Chapter XI of the Charter in
7

See documents A/ AC.35/L.155 and Corr.l
