VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

consultation with the Governments concerned, ways to involve
youth organizations in development activities of the United
Nations at the national level.
2. The Office of Public Information of the Secretariat
should continue to work in close co-operation with the Joint
United Nations Information Committee to provide information
on the issues on which the United Nations is working in a
way as to attract young people, at the national level, and
interest them in the ideals and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations.
3. Bearing in mind proposals contained in his note on
the role of youth in the promotion and protection of human
rights,84 the Secretary-General should explore, _in consult~tion
with Governments, the feasibility of identifymg a national
liaison and focal point on youth within each country, taking
into consideration the networks of national correspondents
which have been set up to facilitate communication between
countries and with the United Nations in allied fields of social
development.

B.

REGIONAL

4. The regional commissions should be requested to pay
special a:ttention to the question of active participation_ of
youth in the process of national development and to consider
at their forthcoming sessions appropriate forms in which
regional commissions can assist Governments in this field and
establish contacts with youth and youth organizations.

C.

INTERNATIONAL

5. The scope of the quarterly Youth Information Bulletin
should be extended and it should be published in French and
Spanish in addition to English, within the existing budgetary
allocations. Both governmental and non-governmental bodies
dealing with youth should be encouraged to provide material
for dissemination through the Bulletin and to assist in its
distribution so that it may be made available to as many
young people and youth organizations as possible.
6. The work of the Office of Public Information and the
Center for Economic and Social Information of the Secretariat, in the creation of suitable radio and television programmes about the United Nations and its activities, should
be intensified within their existing budgetary allocations.
7. The Secretary-General should continue to utilize the
existing channels of communication between the United Nations
and international and regional non-governmental youth organizations.

32/136.

Draft Convention on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31 / 136 of 16 December
1976, in which the General Assembly, inter alia, approved the Programme for the United Nations Decade
for Women, 8 " which entails the adoption by the Assembly of the Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women and its entry into force during the
first half of the Decade, between 1976 and 1980,
Convinced that the adoption of that Convention and
its entry into force will contribute to the implementation of the principal objectives of the United Nations
Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace,
and to the realization of the principles of equality between men and women,
Noting the work done in 1976 by the Commission
on the Status of Women at its twenty-sixth session with
84 E/CN.5/528 and Corr.I.
85 Official Records of the Economic

and Social Council,
Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 3 (E/5909), annex V.

155

a view to the elaboration of the draft Convention on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women, 86
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
2058 (LXII) of 12 May 1977, in which the Council
requested the General Assembly to take up consideration of the draft Convention as a matter of urgency
at the outset of its thirty-second session with a view to
its adoption at that session,
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the
Working Group of the Third Committee on the Drafting of the Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women; 87
2. Recommends that a working group should be
established at the beginning of the thirty-third session
to continue consideration of the articles which have
not been completed during the current session;
3. Expresses the hope that the draft Convention
will be adopted during its thirty-third session;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-third session, as a matter of high priority, an
item entitled "Draft Convention on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women".
105th plenary meeting
16 December 1977

32/137.

International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 31/135 of 16 December
1976, in which it endorsed the establishment of an
International Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women, and Economic and Social
Council resolution 1998 (LX) of 12 Mav 1976 concerning the same question,
·
Recalling further the reports of the Secretary-General on the progress achieved towards the establishment of the Institute, submitted to the General Assembly at its thirty-first session 88 and to the Economic
and Social Council at its sixtieth and sixty-second
sessions, 8n
Convinced that the early establishment of the Institute
will contribute substantially to the realization of the
objectives of the World Plan of Action for the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Women's Yearno and the Programme for the United Nations
Decade for Women,u 1
Noting the preparations already undertaken by the
Secretary-General for the establishment of the Institute,
Considering that those preparations should be actively
continued and that a preliminary draft document describing the structure and composition of the Institute
should be prepared not later than April 1978,
~n A/32/218, annex IV.

'• A/C.3/32/L.59.
"' A/31/310.
S!J E/5772, E/5926.
!Hl Report of the World Conference on the International
Women's Year (United Nations publication., Sales No.
E.76.IV.1 ), chap. II, sect. A.
!ll Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 3 (E/5909), annex V.

156

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

1. Notes the efforts made thus far by the SecretaryGeneral with a view to the establishment of the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women;
2. Requests the Secretary-Gener~! to cc_mtinue those
efforts and to prepare, in consultation with the competent bodies of the host country, the competent organs
and institutions of the United Nations system and the
regional commissions concern~~- a draft do_c~~1~nt describing the structure, compos1t1on, respons1b1ht~es ~nd
programme of the Institute, as well _as the co-ordmation
of the activities of the Institute with those of the organizations concerned, particular)y the Unit~d _Nations
Development Programme, the regional comm1ss10ns and
the regional research centres for the adva1;-cement of
women, having regard to the recommendation~ of the
Group of Experts set forth in the repor~ submitted ?Y
the Secretary-General to the Econmmc and Social
Council at its sixtieth session;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to report to ~he
Economic and Social Council at its sixty-fourth session
on the progress achieved towards the establi~h~ent. of
the Institute, including substantive and ~dmm~strative
preparations, and to submit to it for co~s1deratton an~
adoption the draft document referreJ to m paragraph above.
l 05 th plenary meeting
16 December 1977
32/138.

lnteragency programme for the United
Nations Decade for Women

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3520 (XXX) of 15 December 1975, in which it proclaimed the period from 1976
to 1985 United Nations Decade for Women: Equality,
Development and Peace, to be devoted t? effectiv_e and
sustained national, regional and international action to
implement the World Plan of Action for the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Women's
Year 92 and related resolutions 9 H adopted by the World
Conference of the International Women's Year,
Recalling further that in its resolution 31 / 136 of 16
December 1976 it approved the Programme for the
United Nations Decade for Women94 which focused on
the first half of the Decade, 1976-1980,
Noting that the joint interagency programme for the
integration of women in development, whose establishment was called for in paragraph 5 ( b) of General Assembly resolution 3520 (XXX), has become an interagency programme for the United Nations Decade for
Women based on the implementation of the World
Plan of Action, for the formulation of which the
Centre for Social Development and Humanitarian Affairs serves as focal point,
Noting also that this programme was drawn up in
July 1977 in the context of the conceptual framework
and the co-ordination of ongoing activities and planned
activities of the agencies concerned,
92 Report of the World Conference on the Internatimw/
Women's Year (United Nations publica,tion, Sales No.
E.76.IV.1 ), chap. II, sect. A.
93 Ibid., chap. III.
94 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 3 (E/5909), annex V.

Notinr; further that this programme, which should
be brought up to date every two years, i~ currently the
subject of a study which is to be cons1~ered by. the
special interagency meeting on the Umted Nations
Decade for Women to be held in July 1978 with a
view to preparing for the World Conference of the
United Nations Decade for Women,
l. Notes the measures already taken by the Secretary-General to implement the Programme for the
United Nations Decade for Women; 95
2. Emphasizes that constant and increasing efforts
must he made at the national, regional and international levels to attain the objectives of the Decade;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with all the interested agencies and organizations of the
United Nations to submit to the General Assembly at
its thirtv-third s~ssion, through the Economic and Social
Council, the study of the interagency programme accompanied by the observations formulated by the Council with regard to it;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to transmit to Governments every two years the study of the
intcragcncy programme for the Decade;
5. Urges the interested agencies and organizations
of the United Nations system to identify and undertake
as quickly as possible projects to be executed jointly.
105th plenary meeting
16 December 1977

32/ 139.

Pledging confereuee for the
Nations Decade for Women

United

TI//' General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31/137 of 16 December
1976, in which it requested the Secretary-General to
convene during the thirty-second session of the General Assembly a pledging conference for contributions
to be made to the Voluntary Fund for the United
Nations Decade for Women and to the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of
Women,
Noting with satisfaction the results of the first Pledging Conference for the United Nations Decade for
Women, held at the Headquarters of the United Nations
on 8 November 1977,
Convinced that the Programme for the United Nations Decade for Women,11<1 if it is to be fully effective,
must be translated into the greatest possible number of
projects and programmes at the national, regional and
interregional levels,
Also convinced that the speedy establishment of the
International Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women will contribute substantially
to the attainment of the research and training objectives
of the World Plan of Action for the Implementation of
the Objectives of the International Women's Year,n 7
1. Expresses its thanks to the Secretary-General for
having convened the first Pledging Conference for the
United Nations Decade for Women;
nr. A/321175.
96 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Sixty-secoll(/ Session, Supplement No. 3 (E/5909), annex V.
97 Report of the World Conference on the International
Women's Year (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.76.TV.l ), chap. II, sect. A.
