of the Commissions or Sub-Commissions and
actual expenses for travel on business of the Commissions or Sub-Commissions shall be borne by
the budget of the United Nations. The maximum
travelling allowances to and from meetings of
each Commission or Sub-Commission shall be
restricted to the equivalent of first-class accommodation by recognized public transport via
an approved route from the capital city of the
Member State to the place where the Commission
or Sub-Commissiotl is meeting, and shall not include the payment of subsistence except where
this is included as an integral part of the regular
posted schedule for first-class accommodation for
recognized public transport. Actual travelling expenses shall be reimbursed to each Member by
means of an adjustment in the Member's annual
contribution.

Forty-ninth plenary meeting,
I9 November I946.

71

(I). Utilization by UNESCO (United

rendre aux reunions des Commissions et des SousCommissions et pour en revenir, ainsi que les
frais reels exposes au cours de missions confiees a
!'occasion des travaux de ces Commissions et SousCommissions, seront supportcs par le budget des
Nations Unies. Les indemnites pour frais de
voyage aller et retour allouees aux membres assistant aux reunions des Commissions et SousCommissions s'clcvent au plus au montant du
transport en prcmicre classe, scion un itineraire
approuve, de la capitalc de l'Etat Membre au
lieu ou doit sc reunir la Commission ou la SousCommission; ii ne ~era pas verse d'indemnites
de subsistancc, sauf lorsque ccs frais figureronl
au tarif officid des premicrcs classes des transpotts publics. l.c rcmbourscmcnt des frais de
voyage exposes par chacun des Etats Membres
s'effectuera par dedurtion sur la contribution
annuelle.
Quarante-neuvieme seance pleniere,
le 19 novembre I946.

71

(I). Utilisation par l'UNESCO (.Or-

Nations Educational. Scientific
and Cultural Organization) of
the Property Rights of the
League of Nations in the
International Institute of
Intellectual Co-operation

ganisation des Nations Unies
pour la science, l'education
et la culture) des droits de
propriete de la Societe
des Nations sur l'lnstitut
international de Cooperation
intellectuelle

I'he General Assembly,
1. Recommends that as soon as possible after
UNESCO has been definitely established, it shall
take over, in accordance with Article XI, paragraph 2, of its Charter, such of the functions and
activities of the International Institute d Intellectu"I Co-operation as may be performed within
the scope of the programme adopted at the
UNESCO General Conference as set forth in the
draft agreement 1 between the United Nations
and UNESCO, under the terms of Article 63 of
the United Nations Charter;

L' Assemblee gent!rale,
1. Recommande que l'UNESC..:0 reprenne aussitot que possible apres l'elaboration de son statut
definitif selon Jes modalites de l'artide XI, paragraphe 2, de sa constitution, les fonctions et activites de l'Institut international de cooperation
intellectuelle qui entrent clans le cadre du programme adopte a la conference generale de
!'UNESCO, tel qu'il est expose clans le projet
d'accord 1 entre Jes Nations Unies et l'UNESCO
conformement a !'Article 63 de la Charte des
Nations Unies;

2. Further recommends that an agreement be
concluded between UNESCO and the Institute
before 31 December 1946, in order to facilitate
the assumption by UNESCO of the functions and
activities referred to in paragraph I of the present
resolution;

2. Recommaride, en outrc, <p1"t111 accord soit
conclu entre !'UNESCO et l'Institut avant le ~1
decembre 1946, de fai;:on a faciliter la reprise par
!'UNESCO des fonctions et activites visees au
paragraphe I de la presente resolution;

3. Invites the Secretary-General, in order to
ensure, under the auspices of UNESCO, the continuity of the work performed by the International Institute of Intellectual Co-operation, to
authorize UNESCO to utilize the assets of the
Institute transferred by the League of Nations to
the United Nations.

3. Invite le Secrt!taire general, pour assurer,
sous Jes auspices de l'UNESCO, la continuite de
l'reuvre accomplie par l'Institut international de
cnoperation intellectuelle, a autoriser !'UNESCO
a utiliser les avoirs de l'Institut transferes aux
Nations Unies par la Societe des Nations.

Forty-ninth plenary meeting,
I9 November r946.
'This agreement was approved by the General Assembly
at ill sixty-fifth plenary meeting on 14 December 1946
(documents A/77, A/77/Corr. 1 and 4/77/Corr. 2), see
page 78.

Quarante-neuvieme seance pUniere,
le r9 novembre I946.
'Cet accord fut approuve par l'Assembltt ~neralc .k
sa soixante-cinquieme seance plenihc, le 14 decembre 1946
(documenis A/77, A/77/Corr. , et A/77/Corr. 2), ,·oir
page 78.

188
