UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

1867th

MEETING:

18 DECEMBER

1975

UN

Ll#@,Ry

JUN151984

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1867) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Timor:
Letter dated 7 December 1975 from the Permanent Representative of Portugal
to the United Nations addressed to-the- President- -of -the Security- Council
(S/l 1899) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .-.........................................

1

S/PV. 1867

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . ,) are normally published in
quarterly Supjd#cnts
of the Offlcicrl Rreords qf the, Swurity Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions cud
Decisions
of the Scc’urity Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1867th’ MEETING
Held in New York on Thurdhy,

18’f)ecember’ 1975, at 11 a.m.

- President: Mr. Ivor RICHARD
(United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).-

At the invitutiun
of the President,
Mr. Hurry
(Australia) and Mr. Johut+ (Muluysiu) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chumber.

Present:
The representatives
of the following
States: Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China,
Costa Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy, Japan,
Mauritania, Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Cameroon, United Republic of Tanzania and United States of America.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

3. The PRESIDENT:
In. addition,
I have also
receivedletters
from the representatives
of Guinea
and Guinea-Bissau requesting that they be invited to
participate in the current discussion in the Security
Council. In accordance with Article 31 of the Charter
and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure,
I propose to invite them to participate in the Council’s discussion without the right to vote. Since there
are no objections,
I invite the representatives
of
Guinea and Guinea-Bissau,
in accordance with the
usual practice, to take the places reserved for them
at the side of the Council chamber on the usual
understanding
that they will be invited to take a
place at the Council table whenever it is their wish
to address the Council.

agenda (S/Agenda/l867)

of the agenda

The situation in Timor:
Letter dated 7 December 1975 from the Permanent
Representative of Portugal to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1899)

At the invitution of the President, Mr. Fernundes
(Gaineu-Bjsssau) took the pluce reserved for him ut the
side of the Council chum&r.

The m’4eting wus culled to order at 12.15 p.m.
Adoption

4; The PRESIDENT:
The Security Council will
now continue its examination of the item on its agenda
relating to the situation in Timor. The first speaker
is”the representative of the United Republic of Tanzania, on whom I now call.

of ‘the agenda

The ugendu wus adopted.
The situation in Timor:
Letter dated 7 December 1975 from the Permanent
Representative of Portugal’. to the United Nations
addressed to the President’ of the Security Council
(S/11899)5

,

5: Mr. SALIM
(United
Republic
of Tanzania):
My delegation has already made its pasition very
clear in the Fourth Committee
of the General
Assembly’ ,with regard to the process of decoloniz&ion of Timor. We consider the principle of selfdetermination
for all colonial peoples as sacrosanct.
In pursuit of that principle we have never faltered in
opposing its ‘violation by colonial Powers or by any
other State which sought to impede or put an obstacle
in the way of its total application.
For us, that right
is not negotiable. The opinion of the people of the
colonial Territories
is paramount,
and it must be
expressed without any interference from anybody.

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions taken previously [/864th meeting],
I propose
now, with the consent:of the Council, to invite the
representatives of Portugal, Indonesia, Malaysia and
Australia
to participate
in the discussion of the
question before the Council. without the right to vote.
At the invitution
of the President,
Mr. Gulvdo
Teles (Portugul)’ und MP. Anwur Suni (Indonesia)
took pluces ut the Council t&e.

6. In that context we were dismayed at the news
of the Indonesian invasion of East Timor for we had
believed that Indonesia, a prominent Asian State, an
active member of the non-aligned group, one which
itself emerged from the yoke of colonialism
through
a long and turbulent struggle, could not take measures which not only defy known principles of the
Charter and of international
law but also fly in the

2. The PRESIDENT:
I invite the representatives
of Malaysia and Australia to take the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber on the
usual understanding that they will be invited to take a
place at the Council table when it is their turn to
address the Council.
1

,

face of the very conduct that we ourselves, as nonaligned
States, have consistently
espoused and
defended. Indeed, there is no denying the fact that
the use of force against another State, and the violation of international
frontiers are matters which the
international
community,
and in particular the countries of the third world, have vigorously condemned.

11. We are not unaware of the arguments made,
both in the Council and outside, in an attempt to
justify Indonesia’s
invasion. But we are not persuaded that such arguments are either morally sound
or legally valid. I shall refrain from commenting
in detail on the arguments I allude to, but a peripheral
mention of some of them would be pertinent.

7. Furthermore,
on a number of occasions we
all have rejected .the practice of those who give
themselves the rights of international
policemen.
It
was, and it is, the firm view of my delegation that
these very considerations
should have restrained
Indonesia
from taking any unilateral
measures
against Timor. Furthermore,
we had every reason to,
expect that Indonesia
would not take measures
which would jeopardize the rights of the preople of
East Timor to decide their own’ future. Indeed, the
assurances we had received from the representatives
of Indonesia reaffirmed our belief.

12. We were told of the burden placed on Indonesia by the influx of refugees. We certainly understand and share the Indonesian Government’s
legitimate concern if its country, as we have been told,
was burdened by refugees. But could that burden
be used as a legitimate argument for invading Timor?
We believe not. Many States Members of the United
Nations .have been at one time or another faced
with the question of refugees, which in some cases
has posed very critical problems. In this connexion,
I can cite my own country’s experiences.
13. The United Republic
of Tanzania has lived
through considerable difficulties as a result of the
influx of refugees from neighbouring
countries
because of colonial oppression -or--&r-some
other
reasons. But would it have been right
--- for
.- the United
Republic of Tanzania, or for countries of-similar
experience, to take matters into its own hands and
restore order in those neighbouring Territories? The
answer is, emphatically,
no. The Charter of the
United Nations does not give any one of us the role
of a policeman
in the neighbouring
Territories.
Nor does it give us the right to assume the responsibility of an administering
Power when and if there
is a failure on the part of the administering
Power
to assume its responsibility.

8. As recently as 3 December 1975, the representative of Indonesia, Mr. Anwar Sani, declared before
the Fourth Committee that “Indonesia’s
reaction to
the desire expressed by APODETI
-or integration
had been -to emphasise--that
it had no territorial
claim on Portuguese Timor”,
and that “if the people
of that Territory decided freely and democratically,
in accordance with General Assembly resolutions
1514 (XV) and 1541 (XV), to become independent
through integration with Indonesia, Indonesia would
welcome that decision”.*
He continued to emphasize
that
“Indonesia
had been born of a bloody .revolution against colonialism and had always supported
the struggle of peoples everywhere to eradicate
that evil. With its heritage and record, it could
have no reason to oppose the exercise of the same
right of self-determination
by other peoples still
living under colonial domination.“3

14. That is why I do not want to believe that Indonesia wishes to assume the roie. of policeman
in
East Timor. That is why I do not want to believe
either that Indonesia wants to give itself the role
of admmistering
Power, with all the consequent
obligations to provide information
on the Territory,
as provided for by the Charter.

9. It was in the light of such ‘assurances, and
bearing in mind the considerations to which I alluded
earlier, that my delegation
received with dismay
and sadness the news of the Indonesian invasion of
Timor on 7 December 1975. By that armed intervention,
Indonesia
appears to have considered
irrelevant that it was the people of Timor;and
they
alone, who must decide their right to self-determination
in accordance with General Assembly
resolutions 1514 (XV) and 1541 (XV).

15. I have followed with interest and attention the
arguments made by my good friend and colleague
Mr. Anwar .Sani, the representative ‘of Indonesia,
when he drew the analogy of a fire breaking out in
the apartment next door, and its implications.
I must
say that I was frankly disturbed by that argument
because I kept wondering what would happen if all
of the more powerful States decided to take unilateral action to restore order and peace in neighbouring countries when, in their evaluation
and
consideration,
the situations in .those areas were
explosive, or potentially
explosive, and detrimental
to their perceived national interests. Our worries
are even further reinforced when we are made to
believe that, because the nature of the regime in
Timor as represented by FRETILIN
[Frente Revolucionhia
de Timor Leste Independente]
was perceived as being against Indonesia’s interests, intervention was considered justifiable.

10. And, most certainly, there could be no credible
argument that by invasion Indonesia was supporting
the people of Timor in getting rid of a colonial
Power. This military
intervention
by Indonesia is
certainly a matter of grave concern to my dele-’
gation, and while we neither desire nor consider it
necessary to speak at length on this, we must reiterate what the General Assembly has already declared
in its resolution 3485 (XXX) of 12 December 1975,
to the effect that the Indonesian action was deplorable.
2

To. agree to that p,roEosal is to jeopardize
all the
small States whose eXlstence has been guaranteed
only by a scrupulous adherence to the principle of
the Charter with regard to respect for the territorial
integrity and non-interference
in the internal affairs
of others.

16. We all know the political
objectives of the
political
parties in Timor;
we have heard their
representatives speaking before the Council. I therefore need not tire representatives with that. But my
delegation has been clearly disturbed by some of the
information
which has been put at our .disposal. I
have in mind, for example, the, report on the visit
to East Timor of the Timor Task Force for the Australian Council for Overseas Aid in October 1975. On
page 5 of that report the following is stated:

19. That is why my delegation is, quite frankly,
concerned today that when we Idok at the events of
the recent past we see a day not too far off when
the rule will be for the mighty State to do what
it likes. If we are not careful, we may reach a stage
when intervention
and arbitrary actions by more
powerful States will be the law and non-intervention
considered a serious departure from the new morality.
My delegation cannot associate itself with such an
ominous development;
nor can the Security Council
do so. Otherwise it will mean it is abandoning its
responsibility
as the major organ of the Organization to keep peace in the world. It will mean a
breach of the Charter, which remains the major
hope of the majority of the people in the world.
We believe, therefore, that the Security Council
must act decisively against this intervention
as it
must act. against all interventions
which violate the
Charter and threaten peace and security, irrespective of who the perpetrators may be.

“Until
six months ago, harmonious
relations
existed between the leaders of the two main parties,
FRETILIN
and UDT (The Timorese Democratic
Union), which between them enjoyed the support of
more than 90 per cent of the population.
Indeed,
----for
a time a coalition,
embodying
a common
programme for independence, was formed by these
parties.”
17. The report continues:
“By mid-August,
however, the political situation in East Timor had degenerated into virtual
civil war, largely because of increasing opposition
to the option of independence and Jakarta’s fear
that a left-wing regime would emerge in Dili and
in some way pose a threat to Indonesia’s security,
and because of deteriorating
political
conditions
in Portugal which led to a hastily put together
and poorly implemented decolonization programme.
In the face of what Jakarta regarded as a dangerous shift to the left, it seems that certain Indonesian leaders advised UDT to take action against
the left in East Timor. Three days after the UDT
leaders returned from Jakarta, a hastily planned
coup was launched.
However,
support
for
FRETILIN
proved more extensive
than had
been anticipated.
And after several weeks of
bloody fighting in which more than 2.000 people
appear to have perished, UDT remnants were
forced to retreat to Indonesian Timor.

20. The General Assembly has already dealt with
the part of the question which relates to the decolonization of the Territory. The Security Council must
shoulder its responsibility
in so far as this question
relates to the instability that is developing in Timor.
On 15 December [1864rh sneering] we heard Mr. Horta
declare before the Council the determination
of his
organization
to continue the fight. Therefore it is
necessary for the Council to act so that conditions
of calm are restored. The first step in that direction
is for the Indonesian
Government
to withdraw all
its forces from Timor.
21. It has not been easy for my delegation to put the
sentiments I have expressed in these terms. We in the
United Republic of Tanzania have very good relations
with Indonesia. We certainly value those relations.
-The history of Indonesia has been an inspiration to
us who had to struggle for our own independence.
The prominent role Indonesia has played in the nonaligned movement
has given. us encouragement.
Indonesia has also played an important role in the
field of decolonization.
Certainly - we continue
to regard the Indonesian people as our brothers of
the third world.’ However, a wrong does not become
right or less wrong simply because it has been
committed
by a brother or a friend. Indeed, for
my delegation,
the converse is valid. In other
words, our disappointments
and regrets become all
the greater when friends or brothers in our own
ranks take actions which when perpetrated in similar
‘circumstances
by others invariably
lead us to
denounce them.
\

“From that side of the border, these troops
began to launch an attack against FRETILIN,
but the latter proved too.good for them, both in
numbers and in their fighting ability (most regular
troops had gone to FRETILIN).
During the past
six weeks there has been dear evidence of
increasing Indonesian involvement,
with the la-st
major assault being spearheaded by Indonesian
troops with heavy support fire.”
18. That report, which was made, as I said, in
October
1975, clearly provides
some disturbing
information.
At this stage I do not wish to go into
the question of whether or not FRETILIN
is a leftist
organization or whether its existence would pose a.
danger to Indonesia. However, whether or not the
belief of Jakarta is right, it is not open for any
State to dictate the form of government
to be
adopted by a people that is to become independent.
3

.

’

22. It is the firm conviction of the Tanzanian delegation that there are cardinal principles which cannot
afford selective application.
Any attempt to apply
double standards in their application can only be to
the peril of the Organization
and more particularly
to the less powerful nations like my own. It is particularly important that I should underscore this point.
The countries of the third world, and the nonaligned nations in particular, have played a leading
role in an attempt to bring about a more just and
rational international order. In the process we have all
strongly advocated,
and in many cases successfully managed to achieve, a more healthy development of international
law. We have all stood against
aggression and intervention
in the affairs of others.
We have rejected all pretexts purporting to justify
the arbitrary unlawful actions of those who wish to
undermine the independence and integrity of others.
Not only is it important that we continue to defend
these principles;
above all, we ourselves must
endeavour to live up to them. Failure to do so could
put us in the same situation as in that ‘of the priest
in the familiar story who told his congregation
to
follow not what he did but rather what he preached.

26. As for modalities
for the decolonization
of
Timor in accordance with known United Nations
principles
and practices,
we believe
that that
remains the purview of the General Assembly. At the
same time, we would view with favour any decisions by the Security Council which would have the
effect of accomplishing
the objectives enunciated in
General Assembly resolution 3485 (XXX).
27. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance ‘with the
decision that the Council has just taken, has taken
this morning, I invite the representative
of GuineaBissau to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
28. Mr. FERNANDES
(Guinea-Bissau):
Mr. President, in the name of my delegation, allow me to
say a few words to you about the way you have
been conducting :the work of the Security Council.
I am quite sure that your vast experience as a man of
law and as a member of Parliament
will certainly
help us in trying to find an equitable solution to
this problem.
29. It is indeed an honour for my delegation to
address the Council on a matter of such crucial
importance. It is the view of my delegation that the
decision the Council takes will transcend the immediate problem of Timor as we know it today. There
is a principle here to be reaffirmed. The Council
has to make it clear, and very clear, that everyone
everywhere has the right to be free, has the right
to choose what he wants to be and what kind of life
he wants to lead.

23. While deploring the role of Indonesia in its
intervention
in East Timor, we must, with no less
emphasis and concern, deplore the failure of the
Government
of Portugal to fulfil its responsibilities
as an administering
Power in Timor. We have had
occasion in the past to pay a tribute to the policies
pursued by the Government of Portugal in the field of
decolonization
in the wake of the events of 25 April,
but it must be said in all candour that Portugal’s
role in Timor leaves a lot to be desired.

30. Being from a very small country ourselves,
we hold this principle as sacred because, in fact, our
very existence might well depend upon it. I am quite
sure that the Council will understand our anguish
when we see this principle violated by a friendly
country like Indonesia, a country which in the 1950s
inspired many oppressed people of the third world and
which helped many of us achieve self-determination
and probably even national liberation,
a country
which at the height of the cold war had the courage
to convene the 1955 Asian-African
Conference
(Bandung Conference). It is very painful to see Indonesia appl . . g massive force to solve a problem
which is pri3 arily political. Indonesia, with its vast
resources and a population of approximately
130 million people spread over an area- covering thousands
of kilometres on as many islands, can in no way-and
I repeat, can in no way-be
threatened by events
taking place on one half of one island with a population of a little more than half a million.

24. While Portugal still regards itself as the administering Power in Timor, and whereas the General
Assembly in its resolution 3485 (XXX) has reiterated
that responsibility,
it is obvious that Portugal’s conduct with regard to Timor gave every indication of
abdication
of its responsibilities.
It is, therefore,
our hope that the attitude and role of the Government of Portugal on the question of Timor will be
more positive and responsible.
25. I believe I have spoken frankly, and if I did so
it was because the people of the United Republic
of Tanzania firmly believe in the principle of selfdetermination
of all the colonial peoples. We in the
United Republic of Tanzania are beneficiaries
of
the scrupulous application
of that principle.
We
could have not done otherwise, therefore, without
. being untrue to the inalienable right of all peoples
to self-determination.
We believe that the people of
Timor are no less entitled to enjoy that right and we
regard the intervention
of Indonesia as posing a
serious, if not fatal, blow to the genuine realization
of that right. Thus, as a first prerequisite
for the
restoration
of conditions
which would enable the
Timorese freely and peacefully to determine
their
destiny, there must be a total withdrawal of the
Indonesian forces in Timor.

31. Our stand should not be taken as an unfriendly
act towards Indonesia. It is not. Quite the contrary,
we do have a profound admiration
for, the friendly
people of those thousand islands and we wish them
success in their struggle for nationhood
and economic independence.
4

58. My. delegation was glad to hear that all the parties concerned would welcome any kind of United
Nations presence in the island. I think that the Council should accept its responsibility
and see to it that
that request is complied with immediately
so that
by the time the United Nations arrives on the island
it will not be facing a fait accompli of annexation
by Indonesia.

32. My country would be perfectly happy to accept
Indonesian presence in Timor if the people of that
country had adopted, or were to adopt in the future,
integration,
federation,
association
or whatever.
If they had adopted that, we would be happy. But
the people of Timor must have that choice. Substituting one colonizer for another is hardly the way to
provide a choice. Manipulation
of people without
experience of political parties, the massive display of
force, the distortion of half-truths-these
are not, in
our opinion, the best way to build a nation.

39. In conclusion, I appeal to the Council to see
to it that the presence of the Red Cross is restored
in the island. There are many defenceless civilians
caught in the conflict, and it is our duty to come to
their help. Furthermore,
we should like to emphasize
that we cannot accept the presence of Indonesian
troops on the island. To accept that is tantamount
to accepting a fait accompli, and we categorically
refuse to entertain that idea. Indonesian troops must
be withdrawn
from the island immediately.
The
question then arises: what is the alternative?
We
hope that the Council will find ways of solving that
problem in consultation
with all the parties concerned. Since we are so far away from the scene
of this tragedy, Guinea-Bissau
does not pretend to
have a ready-made solution for this problem.
All
we are asking is the goodwill of all the parties
involved, and especially, specifically
and I would
say primarily, of Indonesia.

33. We have heard the explanations
given by the
representative
of Indonesia on the motivation
for
their intervention,
but we are not convinced. Some
of the fire. which Indonesia is trying to extinguish
was lit by Indonesia itself in order to justify its
massive interference.
34. I do not have to call the attention of the Council
to the fact that the fighting is still going on and that
Indonesian
troops are encountering
widespread
resistance. Indonesia is a Member of the United
Nations. Articles 2, 3 and 4 of the Charter of the
United Nations clearly state that international
conflicts should not be solved by force, that peaceful
means must be used, that Member States should
refrain from using force. We Hope that we are not
witnessing here the dismemberment
of Indonesia as
a nation itself.

40. We are quite sure that this kind of gesture from
the Council would help to enhance the image of the
United Nations. In the very end, the problem of
Timor has to be solved by the people of Timor, but
I do believe that the Council now has a very good
opportunity to make valid the principle that everyone
has the right to make his own choice in Timor or
anywhere in the world.

35. This tragic situation which has cost thousands
of lives w-as brought about by several factors: first,
the poor leadership offered by Portugal, which lies
at the root of this drama; secondly, the miscalculation by Indonesia of the resistance and the national
sentiment of the people in Timor; and thirdly, the
lack of political experience of most political parties
on that island. All of these factors are responsible
for the situation in Timor today. We hope that the
international
community,
and especially and specifically the Security Council, will take the necessary steps to bring peace to that area.

41. Mr. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation
from
Russian):
The Security
Council has listened to the statements made by the
representatives
of Portugal
[/864th
and
1865th
meetings],
Indonesia
[1864th
meeting],
Malaysia
[ihid.],
Australia [1865th meeting],
the United Republic of Tanzania and Guinea-Bissau today and also to
the representative
of FRETILIN
[1864th
meeting]
and others on this question.

36. On the basis of the principles
of freedom,
equality and self-determination,
my Government
in
the early stage of the conflict recognized FRETILIN
as the most representative
political
party on the
island because it did and still does represent the
aspirations of a very large segment, probably the
largest segment, of the population,
and because it
represented the most viable alternative.
However,
we believe that the affairs of Timor have to be settled
by the Timorese people themselves,
without any
kind of interference from abroad.

42. The events in East Timor have recentlv become
the focal point of the .attention of broad &es
of
public opinion in all countries and in the United
Nations. The particularities
of the process of decolonization in that foimer Portuguese colony have led
to a situation where an armed conflict has erupted
on the island between those in favour of national
independence for East Timor and groups which are
in favour of a union of the Territory
with neighbouring Indonesia.
Furthermore,
in conditions
of
domestic tension on the island there has been military
intervention from the outside which has even further
complicated the situation.

37. We believe that there is still time for all the
parties concerned to take a fresh look at the situation
and to try to find a solution which will take into
account the aspirations of the people and the necessity of keeping peace in the area, of trying to save
the lives of the population
which has been caught
in the middle of this fighting.
5

43. Portugal has broken diplomatic
relations with
Indonesia, yet both are States Members of the United
Nations. The Charter of the United Nations obliges
Member States to refrain in their international
relations from the threat or use of force. The development of events in the area thus cannot buI elicit the
legitimate concern of the Security Council.

which would make it possible for them to implement
this inalienable right to self-determination.
48. The Soviet delegation
will support any constructive measures of the Security Council which
accord with the Declaration
and with General
Assembly
resolution
3485 (XXX)
on East Timor
which would be aimed at restoring a normal situation
in the area and ensuring peace there.

44. The Charter has given the Security Council
the duty of taking all necessary measures to maintain
49. Mr. SAITO (Japan): After listening carefully
and strengthen international
peace and security. The
to the statements made by the previous speakers,
Council should do everything necessary to see to it
I should like to state the position of the Govemthat the situation in ihat area returns to normal in
ment of Japan. My delegation shares the general
every respect. To that end, the General Assembly in
concern over the armed action taken in Portuguese
its resolution 3485 (XXX), on Timor, draws the attenTimor. Therefore my delegation urges that peace and
tion of the Security Council, in conformity
with
-order--be -restored in the area as soon as possibie
Article 11, paragraph 3, of the Charter, to.,the critical
and that foreign forces be withdrawn without delay
situatti
iri’E%t Timor. In that resolution the General
from the area. In this connexion we hold the view
Assembly calls upon all States to respect the inalienable right of the people of East Timor to self- j that the Security Council should first of all take practical and constructive steps to help to establish condetermination,
freedom and independence and their
ditions in Portuguese Timor that will permit the
right to determine
their future political
status in
restoration of peace and order and the completion of
accordance with the principles of the Charter and the
Declaration
on the Granting of Independence
to
the decolonization
processes, on the basis of the right
of the people of Portuguese Timor to self-deterColonial Countries and Peoples. The Assembly also
called upon the Government
of Indonesia to withmination.
draw its armed forces from that Territory. The Soviet
50. In this connexion we note that the Portuguese
delegation supported that resolution of the General
Government,
as the administering
Power,
on
Assembly, as did the majority of the other delegations.
28 November
1975 sent to the Secretary-General
a letter [S/11887] confirming
its determination
to
45. As is known, the Soviet Union was the initiator
support the decolonization
process in Portuguese
of the adoption of the Declaration on the Granting
Timor. We note also that the Indonesian
Govemof Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
ment, one of the original
members of the nonthe fifteenth anniversary
of which was solemnly
aligned group, on 10 December 1975 issued a statement
celebrated by the General Assembly at its thirtieth
saying that it had no territorial ambitions in the area
session on 12 December.4 In that Declaration, among
and confirming the right of the people of Portuguese
other very important
provisions,
it is stated that
Timor to self-determination.
The Council should also
all peoples have the right to self-determination
and
take into account the fact that, in the absence of a
freely to define their own political status in condiresponsible administration
in the Territory, the armed
tions of peace and freedom.
strife between rival parties there has caused bloodshed and grievous suffering, resulting in the flight of
46. The Soviet delegation, basing itself on the funtens of thousands of refugees to Indonesia.
damental position of the Soviet Union on the question
of the right of the peoples of the colonial countries
51. After carefully considering these circumstances,
to self-determination,
has been and is in favour of
and on the basis of the consistent position of my
ensuring that one of the most important principles
Government that all international
disputes should be
of the Declaration,
namely the right of each people
settled by peaceful means, my delegation has reached
freely to decide its own destiny without any outside
the following views with regard to a solution of this
interference, is observed strictly and without reservaproblem.
tion in this case as well. Pursuant to its fundamental
position in support of the right of each people to
52. .I?irst, we feel it imperative that the parties condecide its own fate without any outside intervention,
cerned agree to a cease-fire as a first step and enter
the Soviet Union is opposed to outside intervention
into talks with a view to bringing. to an end the strife
in the affairs of East Timor. We are deeply convinced
in the Territory and ensuring the orderly and free
that the people of East Timor should be granted
exercise of the right of the people there to selfnormal conditions so that they may implement
their
determination.
inalienable right to selfdetermination
by means of a
free expression of their will.
53. Secondly, in order to expedite these developments, and taking account of the fact that the parties
47. As ,to how the people of East Timor should
concerned, including both the Indonesian
and the
do that, it is their own sovereign, inalienable right
Portuguese Governments,
have indicated their wilto decide. The task is first of all to ensure conditions
6
/‘/

..--a

..

lingness to accept the United Nations, role in this
question, my delegation suggests that the Security
Council may wish to ask the Secretary-General
to
take the necessary measures to facilitate consultations among the parties, concerned. And, if the need
arises, the Council may also consider sending a
mission to the area.

the United Natioj~s is necessary and justified
in
order, to guarantee that the people of Timor will be
able to exercise their right to self-determination.
60.. Hence we believe that, in order to restore peace
to the Territory and to ensure that the process of
decolonization
is concluded in the correct way, it
is urgent for a special representative of the SecretaryGeneral to go to Timor, study the situation there
and propose the most appropriate measures for the
restoration of peace, bearing in mind that it is only
through the free exercise by the people of Timor
of their right to self-determination
that peace and
stability can be guaranteed. Taking that into consideration, the Secretary-General
will certainly act
in co-operation with the Special Committee
on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation
of the
Declaration
on the Granting of Independence
to
Colonial Countries and Peoples.

54. Thirdly, in order to create an atmosphere and
conditions favourable for such measures, my delegation urges the Council to issue a strong appeaf to all
the parties concerned to refrain from any further
action which might cause the deterioration
of the
situation in the area and delay completion
of the
process of decolonization.
In conclusion, it is the
earnest hope of my delegation that the Council will
be able promptly to take practical and constructive
steps for a solution of this problem.
55. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Portugal, on whom I now call.

61. In that connexion I should like to remind the
Council that --the Portuguese Government has already
-officially informed the Chairman‘ of that Committee
that it is prepared to co-operate in any way it can
in order to enable the Committee
to carry out the
task assigned to it under paragraph 8 of General
Assembly resolution 3485 (XxX)-that
is, to send a
fact-finding
mission to the Territory
as soon as
possible.

56.

Mr-GAIJ&-TEbES-fPorttigal)
(interprrtaFrench):
While speeches are-being made,.
while serious accusations-are
being levelled,
and
proved, while timid excuses are being presented,
without convincing anyone-in
a word, while time is
passing, in Timor thousands of persons continue to
suffer the tragedy of war, of occupation, of uncertainty
about their future.

tion from

57. The facts are there for everyone to see. No one
challenges them. The provisions of the Charter on
this subject are clear and peremptory. No one denies
that. It is now for the Security Council to take the
appropriate action. It is for Portugal, as the administering Power, to do everything it can to enable
the people of Portuguese Timor freely to exercise
their right to self-determination
and independence.

62. The Portuguese Government
is fully aware of
the need to restore peace and order to Timor after
the withdrawal
of the Indonesian
troops and to
ensure the maintenance
of an “effective
civil
authority” -to use the words of the representative
of Australia [1865th meeting, paru. IOO]-that
will
make it possible to carry out. -the. administration
of
the Territory until the free exercise by the people
of their right to self-determination
and independence.

58. Surely; the Security
Council
will not fail
strongly to condemn the aggression committed
by
Indonesia, just as the General Assembly condemned
that aggression in its resolution 3485 (XXX). But,
as we have said on more than one occasion, the
main question is to find a peaceful and negotiated
solution to the conflict in Portuguese Timor, a solution that will allow the process of the decolonization
of that Territory to be concluded. It is with the aim
of co-operating
constructively
in the search for a
solution to the problem that I am now speaking
again in the Council.

63. That is why Portugal, while continuing to make
every effort to find a peaceful solution, through
talks with the political parties representing the people of Timor, is prepared to undertake to send to
Portuguese Timor,
and to maintain
there, naval
units and military forces to ensure the order and
security necessary to conclude
the process of
decolonization;
we are prepared to do that on the
following conditions:

59. The Portuguese
Government
has repeatedly
stated that it is prepared to assume its responsibilities as administering
Power for Timor. Nevertheless,
to the extent that external factors have prevented
the Portuguese Government from carrying out those
responsibilities,
and in view of the fact that Timor
is a Non-Self-Governing
Territory in respect of which
the international
community
therefore has special
obligations,
we believe that active intervention
by
I

--..

^.*...-“w”

--^.W-...

---..I-

--..

..I_^._”

.

.

_,_.

.-

.

.

-First,
Indonesian forces must be .actually
drawn from the Territory of Timor;

with-

-Secondly,
Indonesia must formally state that it
will not commit any other act of aggression against
Timor and that it will abstain from intervening,
in
any form whatsoever, in the Territory’s
domestic
affairs;
a -Thirdly,
the countries of the region, and particularly Australia, must guarantee that Portugal will
7

have the assistance and logistic facilities-including
free access to ports and airports, delivery of fuel,
and so forth-indispensable
for it to maintain in
Timor the naval units and military forces to which
I have just referred.
64. Consequently,
we believe that the Security
Council could adopt the following plan for intervention by the United Nations and by Portugal as
the administering
Power, with a view to achieving
a peaceful and negotiated solution to the question
of Timor that would enable the people of that Territory to exercise their right to self-determination.
65. In a first stage the Secretary-General
would be
asked to send to Timor a special representative who
not only would investigate the situation and propose
appropriate
measures to solve it, but also would
verify the withdrawal of all the Indonesian armed
forces. In the meantime, on the basis of the results
obtained from that mission and the suggestions
made, Portugal would deploy all efforts, under the
auspices of the United Nations and in particular
the Secretary-General,
to ensure the convening of a
conference with the parties representing the people
of East Timor-a
conference in which other countries of the region would participate as observers-with
a view to reaching agreement on the way to carry
out the administration
of the Territory
until the

people of Timor
and independence.

had

achieved.

self-determination

66. In a second stage, once the Indonesian troops
had been withdrawn and the choice of the form of
administration
had been made, Portugal, with its
troops and in strict and indispensable co-operation
with the United Nations, would ensure the maintenance of peace and order in the Territory and its
civil administration
for the transitional
period of
preparation for self-determination.
67. Should the Security Council prefer that the
maintenance of order be ensured by a force composed of contingents
of different States-possibly
with the participation
of States of the region not
engaged in the conflict-the
Portuguese Government would be prepared to participate
in such a
force too, provided that it assumed command
of
the force.
The meeting

rose ut 1.10 p.m.
Notes

’ See Ofliciul
Records
of the Gene&
Assembly,
Forrrth
Committee,
2185th, 2187jh and 2!88th
2 Ibid.,
2180th meeting, para. 7.
3 Ibid.,
para. 16.
’ Ibid.,
Thirtieth
Session.
PIerwry
Meetings.

Thirtieth

Session,

meetings.
2438th meeting.

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT’

SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS UMES

Les publications des Nations Unies sont en vente darts les librairics et les agences depositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous auprb de votre libraire ou adrcssez-vous a : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
:
KAK

IIOJIY’IHTh

N3AAHIiSf

OPl’AHH-3AIUUi

COMO CONSEGUIR .PUBLICACIONES

OG’bELViHEHHhIX

HAIlHa

DE LAS NACIONRS UNIDAS

Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas e&r en venta en libretias y casas distribuidotas en
todas partes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirljase a: Naciones Unidas, Se&h de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations. New York

00300

82-61202~December

1983-2,200
