S/PV.9117

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9117th meeting

Monday, 29 August 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Zhang Jun/Geng Shuang. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mrs. Gasri
Mr. Biang
Mr. Issahaku
Mrs. Kamboj
Mr. Mythen
Ms. Muigai
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Mills

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393
(2017), 2401 (2018), 2449 (2018), 2504 (2020), 2533 (2020), 2585 (2021) and
2642 (2022) (S/2022/635)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-47474 (E)
*2247474*

S/PV.9117

The situation in the Middle East

Rochdi joined my team this month and hit the ground
running. I look forward to working closely with her.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of welcome to the new Permanent
Representative of Ireland to the United Nations
The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to extend, on behalf of the Council, a warm welcome
to the new Permanent Representative of Ireland to
the United Nations, His Excellency Mr. Fergal Tomas
Mythen. We look forward to collaborating closely with
him and wish him every success.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258
(2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2401 (2018),
2449 (2018), 2504 (2020), 2533 (2020), 2585
(2021) and 2642 (2022) (S/2022/635)
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, the Syrian Arab Republic and Türkiye
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Geir
Pedersen, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria, and Ms. Joyce Msuya, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy
Emergency Relief Coordinator.
The Security Council will now
consideration the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/635, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191
(2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2401
(2018), 2449 (2018), 2504 (2020), 2533 (2020), 2585
(2021) and 2642 (2022).
I now give the floor to Mr. Pedersen.
Mr. Pedersen: Let me start by informing the
Security Council that Deputy Special Envoy Najat
2/22

29/08/2022

Since early 2020, I have stressed that the front lines
have been frozen, and I have noted that this relative calm
provided a window of opportunity to build a credible
political process. However, that opportunity has so
far not been seized, and I am worried that, in recent
months, we have seen troubling signs of a military
escalation along several axes. This month alone saw an
increase in strikes attributed to a wide range of actors.
On 11 August, the Syrian Democratic Forces
publicly acknowledged killing Turkish soldiers on the
border, inside Turkish territory, stating that the strikes
were in response to an escalation in Turkish drone and
artillery strikes. Türkiye has reiterated its security
concerns and made renewed statements threatening
further military intervention inside Syria.
Syrian State media said that the Government carried
out strikes on Turkish and armed opposition sites inside
Syria in response to what it said were Turkish strikes, on
16 August, that targeted and killed Syrian Government
soldiers near Ayn Al-Arab. Strikes on Al-Hasakah on
18 August, caused civilian casualties, including women
and children.
On 19 August, strikes hit a crowded market
in Al-Bab, causing significant civilian casualties,
including women and children. And on 22 August, there
were reports of a round of pro-Government air strikes
in Idlib, with ongoing mortar, rocket and artillery
exchanges across front lines, causing an increase in
civilian casualties.
On 23 and 24 August, United States strikes targeted
what the United States said were Iranian-backed groups
and their infrastructure in Dayr Al-Zawr, in what it said
was a response to two attacks on sites where United
States forces are present in Al-Tanf and Dayr Al-Zawr.
August saw further air strikes in Tartus, Damascus
and Hama, which Syrian State media attributed to
Israel and said hit several Syrian Government soldiers.
Meanwhile, there was an escalation in the southwest, including tit-for-tat security incidents, a Syrian
Government offensive in Tafas and infighting in AsSuwayda. Moreover, listed terrorist groups continue
to launch attacks on Government forces, the Syrian
Democratic Forces and others.
Those are just some of the recent incidents of
particular note. I am concerned about the possibility
22-47474

29/08/2022

The situation in the Middle East

that an escalatory cycle could see events further
unravel, with civilians continuing to pay an already
immense price. International peace and security will
be at risk, given the international nature of many of
the latest clashes. I have noted the various diplomatic
efforts to de-escalate the situation. I hope that those
various efforts can be united to restore calm across
Syria with a view to achieving a nationwide ceasefire,
something that we will underline to the International
Syria Support Group’s ceasefire task force participants
here in Geneva. Of course, a ceasefire would also
require parallel efforts to address the extensive presence
of listed terrorist groups in a cooperative manner and
in accordance with international law so as to protect
civilians and civilian infrastructure.
Meanwhile, the members of the International
Syrian Support Group’s humanitarian task force here
in Geneva were extensively briefed on Friday on the
action needed to support humanitarian priorities on
the ground. That is more relevant than ever, given
that military escalation will only increase needs and
inhibit humanitarian access. I should also note that the
continued support of all members of the Council for the
implementation of all aspects of resolution 2642 (2022)
is important via all modalities, whether cross-border
or cross-line, and with support for early recovery. Let
me remind members that any humanitarian effects of
sanctions that could exacerbate the plight of ordinary
Syrians have to be avoided and mitigated, particularly
in terms of overcompliance.
We need a political process that moves steadily
forward, and at the moment we do not have that. In
closed consultations last month, I briefed the Council
in detail on why plans for a ninth session of the small
body of the Constitutional Committee are temporarily
on hold. In Moscow last week, I met with Russian
Foreign Minister Lavrov, who assured me that Russia
remains focused on Syria and expressed support for
advancing the work of the Constitutional Committee.
We agreed to continue discussions to resolve issues that
are preventing the holding of a ninth session. I also had
direct communications from Iranian Foreign Minister
Amir-Abdollahian, as well as interactions with senior
officials from Türkiye. I appreciate their engagement
and it is my hope that the Committee will soon be able
to reconvene in Geneva. But let us be frank. The key
challenge facing the Committee is not the delay but the
lack of progress on substance. I reiterated my appeal
to Mr. Lavrov and to the Foreign Ministers of Iran and

S/PV.9117

Türkiye ahead of the Astana format summit held in
Tehran on 19 July to support the co-Chairs in ensuring
political will, a faster pace and better working methods.
That is how the Committee could become credible, and
how it could fulfil its mandate and open the door to a
wider political process.
We also need to move on the broader process on
the many other aspects of resolution 2254 (2015). A
series of step-for-step confidence-building measures
could help unlock progress and build a safer, calmer
and more neutral environment if done with precision
and in a coordinated manner within the framework of
the United Nations process.
I have nothing new to report to the Council on
the Syrian presidential amnesty decree of 30 April. I
look forward to further engagement with the Syrian
Government on that decree and on other areas for
confidence-building measures that I have raised with
it. I have continued to work with outside players to be
ready to meet real steps with real steps. I appeal to the
Syrian Government not to miss this opportunity to
make progress via its own sovereign moves. That was
also my message in Moscow to Mr. Lavrov, who took
note of the initiative.
I would like to add a note on the critical issue of
missing persons — an enduring source of suffering for
tens of thousands of individuals from all over Syria
who remain arbitrarily detained, abducted or forcibly
disappeared. Their families have the right to know the
fate and whereabouts of their loved ones. The SecretaryGeneral will shortly release a study commissioned
by the General Assembly that points a way forward
by proposing pathways to fulfil the right of families
to know the truth. I also want to inform the Council
that we are convening the Women’s Advisory Board in
Switzerland this week. Its members continue to present
insightful analyses and remind us of the vital role that
women play in preserving the resilience of Syrian
society. The Civil Society Support room also continues
its valuable work, with meetings planned soon for two
new thematic working groups so that the spectrum of
Syrian experts can make substantive contributions to
the political process.
We clearly face mounting challenges in
implementing resolution 2254 (2015). I regret that
we have not taken advantage of what has been more
than two years of relative calm to advance the process
further. We need relative calm to be restored and we

22-474743/22

S/PV.9117

The situation in the Middle East

need to work towards a nationwide ceasefire. We will
continue to work intensely to resolve issues and resume
the Constitutional Committee in Geneva and we will
continue to look for opportunities for step-for-step
confidence-building measures while paying special
attention to the file of those detained, those abducted
and those missing. But we have to be honest about the
mismatch between the scale of our collective political
efforts and that of the challenge at hand. The degree of
fragmentation in Syria, the region and internationally,
as well as a lack of trust and will, are preventing us
from doing what needs to be done, which is addressing
the conflict in a comprehensive manner with serious
compromises and investment involving all players. I
will continue to remind the Council that this is the only
way to avoid another dangerous collapse. It is the only
way to reunite and repair a fragmented country and
people in order to genuinely restore Syria’s sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity, end the
displacement crisis and enable the Syrian people to
chart their own future.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Pedersen for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Msuya.
Ms. Msuya: To echo Special Envoy Pedersen, I am
also deeply alarmed by the recent increase in violence
in northern Syria, including in the northern Aleppo
countryside and north-eastern Syria. Drone strikes and
shelling have resulted in civilian casualties. An attack
in Al-Hasakah on 18 August claimed the lives of four
civilian women and girls, and an attack on a market in
Al-Bab city on 19 August reportedly killed 13 civilians,
including four boys and one girl. The lives of those
Syrian children were wiped out or forever altered.
Violence breeds the fear of more violence, and
both make people flee. As we hear repeated statements
and read reports about preparations for a possible
military operation in northern Syria, displacement is
already happening.
Violence also impedes our ability to operate. The
cross-line mission to Ras Al-Ayn was postponed due
to increased hostilities, despite all of the necessary
approvals and preparation. Once again, I would like
to remind all parties to the conflict that international
humanitarian law requires them to respect civilians and
civilian objects and to take constant care to spare them
throughout their military operations. I strongly appeal
4/22

29/08/2022

to the members of the Council to ensure respect for the
rules of war and accountability for serious violations.
This year alone, at least 26 murders have been
reported at Al-Hol camp, including those of 20 women,
and we continue to receive reports of sexual violence,
some perpetrated by the camp’s guards. In addition,
humanitarian partners have reported an increase in
sexual exploitation cases. If hostilities escalate in
northern Syria, it is likely that there will be a negative
impact on the protection of people in Al-Hol camp,
where the security situation is already extremely
dire. Security challenges in the camp may further
compromise the grim situation, and women and girls
especially will be at even greater risk.
Humanitarian organizations’ movements to the
camp and to neighbouring areas could be farther
restricted, thereby disrupting emergency and essential
services. Al-Hol residents and the humanitarian
partners working to assist them need more protection,
safety and security. Let me once again call on all
Member States involved to take urgent action and fulfil
their responsibility to repatriate their citizens through
all available routes.
Opportunities for durable solutions for the people
in Al-Hol exist. For example, on 12 August, the
Government of Iraq repatriated 151 families, mainly
female-headed households and highly vulnerable
people, to Jeddah 1 camp in Nineveh governorate,
and 73 internally displaced families left Al-Hol
on 14 August, to return to various areas in Syria’s
Deir ez-Zor.
Syria’s economic crisis continues to affect
civilians across the country. The Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations reported that last
month’s wheat harvest in Syria was one of the lowest on
record and the second failed wheat harvest in two years.
Fuel shortages and radically reduced access to electricity
have a crippling effect on the population, while eroding
livelihood opportunities and severely limiting access
to essential services. That is exacerbated by the water
crisis across the country, which affects access to
sufficient and safe drinking water and irrigation, as
well as to water to produce food and generate power.
As always, the economic crisis disproportionately
affects women, girls, boys and people with disabilities,
particularly their mobility and access to basic services,
including to reproductive health and protection services.
22-47474

29/08/2022

The situation in the Middle East

The United Nations continues to promote more
funding for early recovery and resilience. At least
26 per cent of the overall request for humanitarian
assistance in Syria aims to implement early-recovery
and resilience programmes. That is critical to enabling
Syrians to rebuild their lives with dignity. At least 228
projects have received $333 million to implement earlyrecovery and resilience activities, representing 30 per
cent of the funds requested. Furthermore, at least 51
of those projects contribute to providing electricity to
support basic services, including water and sanitation,
nutrition, health and education.
It is worth noting here that overall funding to
Syria’s humanitarian response plan currently stands at
only 24 per cent of the requested funds. The biggest
challenge for aid agencies right now is funding. As
needs increase and will further increase as winter
approaches, I would like to call for greater solidarity
and increased humanitarian funding from the
international community, especially for early-recovery
and livelihood programmes.
Funding for mine action programmes, especially
clearance, is critical. Progress has been made. Since
December, more than 1 million square metres of
agricultural land have been cleared in rural Damascus.
Increased funding to scale up such programmes
is needed.
Let me turn to an update on humanitarian access.
The United Nations continues to do everything in
its power to make progress on cross-line assistance
to all parts of Syria. In the north-west, the sixth
cross-line mission to Sarmada, in Idlib governorate,
was completed on 4 and 5 August. I urge all parties
concerned to expand those operations by allowing
multiple cross-line convoys each month and increasing
the number of trucks in each convoy.
The United Nations and partners still do not have
humanitarian access to people in Rukban. We remain
deeply concerned about those people, as they have
limited access to essential food items, water, health
care and other basic services. We remain committed
to reaching those people, but need full access to
assess their humanitarian needs and provide regular
humanitarian assistance. We also need the necessary
access and security conditions to support people who
wish to leave the camp in a principled, voluntary
and informed manner. The humanitarian community
is planning a multisectoral response that includes

S/PV.9117

vaccinations. I call on all parties to support that plan
and facilitate immediate humanitarian access and
assistance to people in the camp.
Late last month, I visited Gaziantep and Hatay
in Türkiye to review the cross-border humanitarian
response in the light of resolution 2642 (2022). I
witnessed the large scale of the operation and the
high level of scrutiny applied. I also heard from
affected women in Idlib about the dismal humanitarian
conditions in north-western Syria. They told me that
they need support to get back on their feet — what we
technically call early-recovery programmes — and that
they need better access to education for their children.
Over the coming months, the United Nations will
do its utmost to facilitate the implementation of all
aspects of resolution 2642 (2022). However, to make
that happen, we need the support of all parties. We
need meaningful resources and sustained, regular and
predictable access.
I am very concerned about the irreversible damage
caused by chronic underfunding. It could compromise
life-saving assistance and curtail investments in
livelihoods and essential services. Lack of funding
comes with severe consequences, including more
dropouts from school, higher malnutrition rates and
fewer protection interventions. If we do not act now, a
generation of Syrian children may be lost. It is critical
that the Council share responsibility for humanitarians’
life-saving work in Syria. I also want to remind
all parties of their obligation to facilitate rapid and
unimpeded humanitarian access to all civilians in need
across Syria. I call on all the parties to facilitate access
across all response modalities so that assistance can
reach those in need.
That brings me to my last point. While we need
the Security Council’s support today, we will need it
even more in the coming months, as winter approaches
and our response shifts gears. We know that the Syrian
winter will bring more hardship, and we remain
determined to assist people everywhere we can. We
count on the support of the Council to stay the course.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ms. Msuya for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy Pedersen and Assistant Secretary-

22-474745/22

S/PV.9117

The situation in the Middle East

29/08/2022

General Msuya for their briefings today. Their reports
about the lack of progress in addressing the Syrian
political situation, as envisioned in resolution 2254
(2015), and the further deteriorating humanitarian crisis
should obligate the Security Council to come together
in order to hold the Al-Assad regime accountable for
the decade of war that it has waged and its ongoing
violations of international law. Yet Council unity on
Syria is impossible because one member is repeatedly
putting its narrow interests and those of the Al-Assad
regime ahead of peace, stability and Syrians’ evergrowing humanitarian needs. The United States remains
concerned about the unfounded and unnecessary
delays in advancing the Constitutional Committee’s
process, and we call for an immediate resumption of
the Committee’s work. Delays prolong and increase the
suffering of the Syrian people through no fault of their
own. Russia has repeatedly told the Council that the
political process in Syria must be Syrian-owned and
Syrian-led. We agree. Yet Russia is not practicing what
it preaches, because it is holding up the Constitutional
Committee owing to its own bilateral concerns that
have nothing to do with Syria.

inherent right to self-defence, as reflected in Article 51
of the Charter of the United Nations. On 15 August,
Iran-backed militia groups had attacked United States
forces at two locations in Syria. Those attacks followed
a series of attacks by Iran-backed militia groups on
United States forces and facilities in Iraq and Syria
throughout 2022 and even before that, and all of which
have threatened the lives of United States and coalition
personnel. The United States military action was taken
to protect and defend the safety of its personnel, degrade
and disrupt the ongoing series of attacks against the
United States and its partners and deter the Islamic
Republic of Iran and Iran-backed militia groups from
conducting or supporting further attacks on United
States personnel or facilities.

Furthermore, the United States would like to
remind the Council and the Al-Assad regime that there
is more to resolution 2254 (2015) than just the work
of the Constitutional Committee. The regime should
also be pursuing a nationwide ceasefire and securing
the release of all arbitrarily detained persons in an
organized and humane manner. If the Syrian regime is
serious about a political settlement, the United States
and the international community need to see concrete
steps to demonstrate that Syria is following through
on its announcement of amnesty, for example, by
announcing where and under what conditions it has
released individuals from prison or by issuing lists of
names of individuals released and granted amnesty.
Those important tasks should continue regardless
of the status of the Constitutional Committee, and
we urge the Al-Assad regime to make progress on
them immediately.

As we seek to build peace in Syria, it is as
important as ever that we work to implement resolution
2254 (2015) in an authentic and enduring way. We urge
all members of the Council, as well as the Al-Assad
regime, to work diligently to implement those important
steps and make progress towards peace, as well as to
facilitate humanitarian access to the Syrian people,
including through the cross-border mechanism that we
authorized in resolution 2642 (2022). So far this fiscal
year, the United States has given nearly $900 million
in humanitarian aid to the Syrian people, with nearly
$15 billion given since the start of the crisis. Our
humanitarian aid includes early-recovery programmes
across the whole of Syria. Those programmes help
Syrians access livelihoods and basic services, thereby
reducing their dependence on external aid. The United
States has long supported early recovery efforts
across all parts of Syria, but we remain opposed to
reconstruction in regime areas without authentic and
enduring progress towards a political solution.

The Special Envoy mentioned the United States air
strikes last week. As we stated in a letter to the Council
dated 26 August, on 24 August the United States
undertook precision strikes against a facility in eastern
Syria — a facility used by militia groups affiliated with
Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps. That action
was in response to armed attacks against the United
States and was taken in the exercise of the United States’
6/22

The United States also calls for immediate
de-escalation in northern Syria. We remind all the
parties that they have an interest in stability and
security. We remain deeply concerned about the
destabilizing impact that military activity has on the
region, including the mass displacement of civilians, as
well as on our efforts to ensure the enduring defeat of
the Islamic State of Iraq and the Sham.

There was broad support within the Council or a
full 12-month reauthorization of life-saving aid through
the renewal of the vital cross-border mechanism. Yet
thanks to Russia’s obstruction and its imposition of
a truncated six-month duration, Syrian families and
humanitarians are already fearing what January may
22-47474

29/08/2022

The situation in the Middle East

bring. They are stockpiling for the upcoming harsh
winter and worried that aid may be cut off just as the cold
and the snow descend. The United States welcomed the
14 truckloads of cross-line aid that moved from Aleppo
to Idlib on 4 August, just as we welcome the more
than 800 truckloads of aid moving through the Bab
Al-Hawa crossing into Syria every month. The United
States supports humanitarian access to all Syrians
in need through all modalities. The Al-Assad regime
and Russia cannot say the same. The regime and its
Russian backers continue to block cross-line aid when
it suits their cynical aims, including aid to the people
of Tal Abyad, Ras Al-Ayn and Rukban. They continue
to prevent baby formula and medicine from reaching
the people of north-eastern Syria and to impede
humanitarian access and independent monitoring in
areas under regime control. Why else would the regime
in Russia wish to end United Nations cross-border aid
if not to subjugate the people of north-western Syria in
the same way?
In conclusion, the cross-border mechanism
provides a critical lifeline of assistance. We urge all
Security Council members to support and strengthen
humanitarian access, both cross-line and cross-border.
Ultimately, we reiterate that the only way to end the
dire humanitarian crisis is through a credible, inclusive
political process, as described in resolution 2254 (2015).
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank Mr. Geir Pedersen and
Ms. Joyce Msuya for their overview of the political and
humanitarian situation in Syria.
We are convinced that long-term stability and
security on Syrian soil can be established only through
the full restoration of the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic
and an end to the illegal foreign military presence.
In that regard, we strongly condemn the ongoing
air strikes carried out by the Israeli Air Force against
various targets in Syria. This month alone, the Syrian
port of Tartus has been subject to numerous Israeli
strikes, which have resulted in the deaths of Syrian
soldiers. The occupation of parts of Syria and United
States strikes on its territory are other such violations.
The most recent egregious incidents took place last
week. The United States openly acknowledged that by
issuing a letter to the Security Council to that effect.
Such wrongful and irresponsible actions are a gross

S/PV.9117

violation of the fundamental norms of international law
and must be stopped.
In addition, the threats to security in Syria and
the entire region are related to the persistence of large
pockets of terrorists that have taken refuge in territories
outside the control of Damascus — in Idlib, Deir ez-Zor
and Al-Tanf.
Against that background, progress on the Syrian
political track is especially needed now. In that context,
we held extensive consultations in Moscow with
Mr. Pedersen, during which we confirmed the need
for continuing direct intra-Syrian dialogue, with the
support of the United Nations and within the framework
of resolution 2254 (2015). We are interested in progress
on the Syrian peace process on the basis of the relevant
Security Council resolutions and the decisions adopted
at the 2018 Syrian National Dialogue Congress, held in
Sochi. It is critical that the Constitutional Committee
meet regularly and, most important, in optimal
conditions. That is not a bilateral issue, as our American
colleague suggested. We will continue to facilitate
the work of the Constitutional Committee so that the
Syrians themselves, without external interference, can
reach agreement on constitutional reform.
In that context, we would like to note the importance
of the Astana format, which has proved its role as the
most effective international mechanism for assisting in
achieving long-term normalization in Syria. We expect
to hold another meeting of the format in Nur-Sultan
before the end of the year.
As for the humanitarian dimension, we note that
the United Nations is beginning to recognize the
destructive effects of illegal Western sanctions on
the development of the Syrian economy and stress
the rapidly deteriorating food security of the country.
I am referring to the latest joint report of the Food
and Agriculture Organization and the World Food
Programme, entitled Hunger Hotspots. The United
Nations information about this year’s record-low
wheat harvest in Syria is alarming. There is no need to
explain the importance of bread products in the diet of
Arab countries.
In that context, we would also like to draw attention
to the report entitled Syrian Arab Republic: Access to
Electricity and Humanitarian Needs, which also lists
sanctions among the factors preventing the restoration
of electricity in Syria. Given that resolution 2642 (2022)
expanded the scope of recovery projects to include

22-474747/22

S/PV.9117

The situation in the Middle East

the provision of sustainable electricity to critical
infrastructure, maintaining sanctions would undermine
the Organization’s efforts to fulfil its humanitarian
mandate. We believe that no one wants that.
It is clear that, without a radical solution to the
urgent issue of sanctions against Damascus, we risk
seeing, in the near future, the tragic consequences
of the ill-conceived steps taken by Western States
supposedly defending so-called liberal values. Against
that background, the demonstrative humanitarian
concessions for areas outside the control of Damascus
and the ongoing looting by the United States of Syria’s
agricultural and oil resources are even more shocking.
We see that as an attempt to maintain the fragmentation
of the country.
As for cross-line humanitarian deliveries, we must
agree with the Secretary-General on the importance of
stepping up such efforts in the context of Idlib. After all,
as stated in his report (S/2022/635), similar deliveries to
Deir ez-Zor have continued over the past two years. It
means that, where there is good faith among the parties,
supplying all regions of Syria through intra-Syrian
routes is possible. That became fully evident after the
closure of the Al-Yarubiyah border crossing, despite
the tales we heard from our Western colleagues about
the supposedly tragic consequences of such a step.
Experience shows the opposite.
We continue to look forward to tangible progress
here in the coming six months. However, the information
we are receiving that Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham fighters
are once again threatening to not allow Syrian students
to leave the Idlib de-escalation zone to continue their
studies at universities in Government-controlled
territory raises fears that the terrorists will obstruct
humanitarian workers as well. We call on all sides to do
their part to ensure that the efforts of the United Nations
to establish stable humanitarian deliveries to Sarmada
are not undermined. The United States representative
today frightened us with the prospect of ending crossborder aid. I would like to say to him that, if our Western
colleagues faithfully implement the agreements of the
resolution on the extension of cross-border assistance,
they need not worry about extending it.
We have high hopes for the first round of informal
interactive dialogue, to be held in September, and look
forward to a frank and non-politicized discussion and
substantive input from the United Nations. We noted
with interest the update on early-recovery projects
8/22

29/08/2022

in the Secretary-General’s report. As compared to
the previous reporting period, the number of donorfunded early-recovery projects has increased from 133
to 288. We would like to discuss that issue in detail
in September.
We also believe that it is important to have a
substantive discussion on the situation of Syrian
refugees. They have become a heavy burden for host
countries, which are forced, among other things, to
tolerate the presence on their territory of former White
Helmets, who have been recognized as radicals even in
the West and whose Western patrons in the United States
and Canada, despite earlier assurances, have in the end
refused to take them in because their involvement in
terrorism is too obvious.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): I thank you, Mr. President,
for your warm welcome this morning. I am honoured
to join everyone here at this table and look forward to
working with them in the coming months in order to
advance the vital work of the Security Council.
I deliver this statement today on behalf of Norway
and Ireland as co-penholders on the Syria humanitarian
file. I would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Msuya for her briefing today. As ever, the severe need
of those on the ground is clear.
Humanitarian needs are at their highest levels, and
civilians continue to suffer due to armed conflict and
violence. Eighty-seven civilians, including 25 children,
died between 1 June and 25 July as a result of hostilities.
It is deeply disturbing that many of the attacks
resulting in those deaths appeared to target civilians
or to take place near locations of a civilian character.
We call on all parties to comply with international
humanitarian law, including the prohibition on
indiscriminate attacks and the obligation to take all
feasible precautions to avoid harm to civilians and
civilian infrastructure.
We commend the United Nations and its partners
for their considerable work across all 14 governorates,
in a challenging humanitarian landscape. We welcome
progress on early recovery and the commitment shown
to continue in that regard, including the 51 projects that
contribute to the provision of electricity to support basic
services. Almost 1.7 million people benefited directly
or indirectly from early-recovery and resilience efforts
in June and July. That important work must continue.
22-47474

29/08/2022

The situation in the Middle East

As co-penholders, Ireland and Norway strongly
support the use of all modalities to deliver aid to the
millions of Syrians in desperate need. We welcome
the completion of the sixth cross-line delivery, earlier
this month. We encourage continued progress on
cross-line missions and again commend the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and other
United Nations agencies for their significant efforts
in that regard. We reiterate the call for all parties to
support cross-line deliveries, including by providing
timely security guarantees.
Soaring food prices magnified by global inflation
rates and the economic crisis have exacerbated food
insecurity. It is extremely concerning that the World
Food Programme has been forced to reduce rations to
less than 1,200 calories per person in north-western
Syria and to below 1,000 calories in other areas.
Increased funding is urgent, not only to expand the
vital work of the United Nations and non-governmental
organizations, but to maintain the life-saving assistance
currently in place.
Soaring heat and critically low water supply are
placing lives at risk. Civilian access to water is curtailed
in numerous areas, and a lack of irrigation is threatening
crop production as well as seeds for next year’s yield,
exacerbating already significant food insecurity. We
knew that this season would come, just as we know that
winter will present further fatal challenges.
While resolution 2642 (2022) allows the vital
work of the cross-border mechanism to continue for
six months, it is imperative that the Security Council
confirms the decision to further extend its mandate.
The cross-border mechanism remains a critical,
irreplaceable lifeline for millions.
As co-penholders, Norway and Ireland will
continue to be guided by the deep humanitarian needs
of the people of Syria. The Council must work together,
with the addressing of these needs as our focus.
I will now focus on the political situation and make
a statement in my national capacity. First, I wish to
thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his briefing.
Ireland is seriously concerned about the continuing
escalation of hostilities in northern Syria. We are
appalled by the attack in Al-Hasakah on 18 August that
killed four women and girls, and injured 11 others, and
the attack on 19 August on a busy market in Al-Bab city

S/PV.9117

that killed at least 13 civilians, including four boys and
one girl, and injured dozens of others.
Ireland unequivocally condemns deliberate
attacks on civilians and the civilian harm resulting
from indiscriminate and disproportionate attacks.
International humanitarian law is clear: any attack
must comply with the principles of distinction,
proportionality and precaution. We continue to see
children in Syria paying a heavy price in the ongoing
violence. We remind all parties that civilians must
never be targeted, and we particularly deplore the
impact of the violence on children. We call on all
parties to exercise maximum restraint and comply with
their obligations under international law. There can be
no military solution to the conflict in Syria.
Conditions for the safe, voluntary, and dignified
return of refugees remain to be fulfilled in Syria.
Ireland believes it is imperative that host countries
continue to uphold the principles of refugee protection.
It is deeply regrettable that last month’s ninth round
of the Constitutional Committee did not go ahead,
following the decision by the Syrian Government not
to participate. We reject any attempts to undermine
the efforts of the Special Envoy to facilitate a Syrianled and a Syrian-owned political process. We maintain
that the Constitutional Committee should convene
in Geneva as agreed by the delegations. We urge the
Syrian Government to put the best interests of the
Syrian people first and engage constructively with the
Special Envoy and his efforts.
Ireland recalls the European Union’s position that
there will be no normalization with Damascus until
an inclusive political solution, in line with Security
Council resolution 2254 (2015) is firmly under way.
We know the pivotal role that women have to play in
building a sustainable, lasting peace for Syria; their full
and meaningful participation in the political process
must be enabled.
Ireland will continue to support all efforts to
pursue justice and accountability for crimes committed
in Syria. Lasting peace in Syria is not possible without
justice. Justice for Syrians includes the transparent and
verifiable release of all those arbitrarily detained, as
well as the provision of information on the fate and
whereabouts of missing persons. We look forward to
seeing the report of the Secretary-General on this very
important issue soon.

22-474749/22

S/PV.9117

The situation in the Middle East

In closing, I would like to acknowledge the work of
civil society actors in Syria and note the importance of
supporting and protecting them, particularly those who
continue to document casualties and violations.
Mr. Biang (Gabon): I have the honour to make this
statement on behalf of the three African members of the
Security Council (A3), namely, Ghana, Kenya and my
country, Gabon.
Allow us to start by expressing a warm welcome
to our colleague from Ireland. We look forward to
working together.
I thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and Assistant
Secretary-General Joyce Msuya for their briefings on
the latest developments in the political and humanitarian
situation in Syria. We also welcome the participation
of the representatives of the Syrian Arab Republic, the
Islamic Republic of Iran and the Republic of Türkiye in
this meeting.
The A3 welcomes the appointment of the new
Deputy Special Envoy for Syria, Ms. Najat Rochdi,
and wish her every success in her duties to support a
political solution in Syria.
We echo the Special Envoy’s appeal to the parties
and the key stakeholders in the Syrian conflict to
shield the country from undue external pressures
that could jeopardize peace and stability efforts. The
parties and the stakeholders must instead strive to
inject political life into the political process. They
should demonstrate political maturity and commitment
through constructive engagements and a return to the
ninth session of meetings of the Syrian-led, Syrianowned, United Nations-facilitated small body of the
Constitutional Committee.
On a positive note, we welcome the upcoming
meeting of the Syrian Women’s Advisory Board from
29 August to 2 September in Geneva. We continue to
commend the Special Envoy’s useful exchanges with
this critical group, which represents the perspectives of
the wide spectrum of Syrian women.
The A3 recalls the amnesty decree announced by
the Government on 30 April. Political will remains
an imperative for resolving the issue of detainees and
the forcibly disappeared, particularly women and the
elderly. Meaningful progress in this regard will build
confidence and create an environment for the political
process to move forward. It will also contribute
positively to the Special Envoy’s step-for-step approach.
10/22

29/08/2022

We are concerned about the security situation in
Syria. In fact, this country continues to be the scene of
military clashes, particularly in the north of the country,
in a context marked by a worsening humanitarian
situation exacerbated by the continuing effects of the
coronavirus disease pandemic. It also remains the
centre for peace-damaging rivalries and competition
for influence among major Powers. In this regard, the
A3 is alarmed by the worsening levels of insecurity as
demonstrated by incidents that include continued air
strikes and rocket attacks in the north-west, which have
resulted in civilian casualties.
Unfortunately, it is civilians who continue to pay
the heaviest price as violence continues to escalate in
the country. The Secretary-General’s eightieth report
on the parties’ implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions (S/2022/635) documents incidents
in which 87 civilians were killed, including 15 women
and 25 children. At the same time, at least 104 civilians
were injured, including 16 women and 33 children.
The rising levels and escalation of violence will
only undermine any peace efforts. We therefore
underscore the urgent need for de-escalation and
restraint by all parties as well as respect by all players
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria.
We note with interest that the Syrian conflict
continues to have a gendered impact, with significant
effects on women and girls. It is deeply worrying that
in addition to the reports of sexual violence being
perpetrated against women in the Al-Hol camp, as many
as 77 per cent of the 26 people murdered in the camp
this year were women. We therefore call for protection
that takes into account that difference in needs. The
economic crisis in the country is also making life
more difficult for Syrians, who face many challenges
in accessing water, health care and electricity and
are dealing with inflation and insufficient funding,
problems that often force people to adopt harmful and
irreversible coping mechanisms to survive.
The humanitarian situation in Syria remains
alarming, with more than half of the population in
need of assistance. The cross-border humanitarian aid
mechanism is still required to ensure the delivery of that
aid. In that regard, we continue to support the ongoing
cross-border operation, which remains a crucial lifeline
for humanitarian assistance. Similarly, we welcome the
fact that six convoys have delivered cross-line aid to
north-west Syria since the beginning of the year, as well
22-47474

29/08/2022

The situation in the Middle East

as the plan to include the delivery of medical supplies
in the cross-line operation in the north-east. We call for
more support for activities aimed at early recovery and
improving livelihoods as a key component in building
resilience and the longer-term peace that Syria and the
region need.
We reiterate that there can be no military solution
to the Syrian crisis. What is needed is a frank dialogue
aimed at finding sustainable solutions and involving all
components of society, including women. We therefore
reiterate our call to the parties to exercise restraint
and commit to settling their differences by peaceful
means, including through negotiations coordinated by
the Special Envoy. We welcome the efforts of regional
and international actors to achieve political stability
in Syria while respecting the country’s sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity. The A3 stands
in solidarity with the people of Syria in their quest for
lasting peace.
Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank Mr. Pedersen and Ms. Msuya for
their briefings, as well as the efforts that they and their
teams have made towards achieving peace and the
protection of civilians in Syria. I would like to highlight
three points.
First, the political process is being held hostage.
Russia is effectively continuing to paralyse the political
process by giving the Syrian regime an excuse not to
participate in the Constitutional Committee’s session,
owing to bizarre considerations about the venue. But the
terms of reference are clear. The Committee’s sessions
must be held in Geneva. After 11 years of conflict,
there seems to be no political solution emerging in line
with the provisions of resolution 2254 (2015), which
was adopted unanimously. Yet that is a prerequisite
for achieving any lasting peace in Syria. In that
context, the French and European positions on lifting
sanctions, normalizing relations and reconstruction
remain unchanged.
My second point concerns humanitarian assistance.
The renewal of the cross-border humanitarian
mechanism for six months, with a single crossing
point, remains largely inadequate in comparison
to the scale of the humanitarian needs. We will be
extremely committed to ensuring in January that this
vital mechanism is renewed for one year. We hope that
progress on cross-line access will continue. However,
we must recognize that even if cross-line convoys were

S/PV.9117

being sent on a regular basis, they would not be able to
replace the cross-border operations, which, as we heard
today, enabled the delivery of 1,200 truckloads of aid
in June and July. I also want to emphasize that all the
parties, in particular the Syrian regime, must protect
civilians and guarantee full humanitarian access.
Everyone must respect international humanitarian law.
My third point concerns impunity. France will
continue its tireless efforts to combat impunity in Syria.
The Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs has received
extensive documentation of possible crimes committed
by the regime’s forces during the Tadamon massacre in
2013. The acts alleged to have occurred, which are likely
to constitute the most serious international crimes,
have been reported to France’s national anti-terrorism
prosecutor’s office under the jurisdiction of the French
courts for crimes against humanity and war crimes. We
commend the human rights defenders whose courage
and determined work made it possible to collect those
documents. Their findings add to the unfortunately
abundant documentation of the violence that Syrians
have suffered, two examples of which include the
well-known Caesar file and the United Nations reports
that document the regime’s systematic use of sexual
violence. Those responsible for those crimes must be
held accountable — and that is also a condition for
achieving any lasting peace in Syria.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): I join others in thanking
Special Envoy Pedersen and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Msuya for their respective briefings. I also
extend a warm welcome to the new Irish Ambassador
on his first day in the Security Council.
It is disappointing that the small body of the
Constitutional Committee has not met this month. We
had hoped the three parties would engage constructively
and purposefully, with a sense of compromise, to
achieve credible progress in the meeting. Now it seems
there is a question mark on the venue as well. External
factors have proved detrimental to the overall political
process. The engagement so far has not been able to
bridge the trust deficit among the key stakeholders. The
cancellation of the ninth session of the Constitutional
Committee in July has further reinforced that view. As
the July negotiations for a renewal of the cross-border
mechanism on the humanitarian track demonstrated,
entrenched vested positions held by the primary
stakeholders can be counterproductive in the long run
and detrimental to the interests of millions of Syrians.

22-4747411/22

S/PV.9117

The situation in the Middle East

We reiterate that it is for the Syrians to decide what is
best for Syria and their own future.
The Special Envoy has been making efforts to
engage with all sides and facilitate the political process,
in line with resolution 2254 (2015). We believe that his
efforts should be supported, particularly his step-bystep approach. In that context, we welcome his recent
visit to Moscow and his meeting with Foreign Minister
Lavrov. We hope that he will be able to visit Damascus
soon and also engage with the Syrian Government.
We continue to believe that the success of his efforts
will also depend on actual relief to the people of Syria
provided by an easing of the measures affecting their
daily lives. There is also an urgent need for scaling up
assistance and ensuring that humanitarian agencies
receive the funding necessary to the full execution of
their plans.
India has been consistent in calling for support
to the regional efforts in finding a long-term solution
to the conflict. We have welcomed the progressive
normalization of Syria’s relations with its Arab
neighbours. Any acts compromising Syria’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity will have a negative impact on
the political process.
On the security front, we remain concerned
about the overall situation in Syria. As pointed out in
the Secretary General’s 60-day report (S/2022/635),
violence continued in the Idlib de-escalation area in
north-western Syria, including through air strikes,
mutual shelling and clashes. There is an urgent need
for serious attempts to achieve a comprehensive,
nationwide ceasefire in Syria. We believe that the
withdrawal of all foreign forces is essential to that.
India has consistently cautioned about the looming
threat posed by the resurgence of terrorist groups in
Syria. United Nations-designated terrorist groups such
as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Hayat
Tahrir Al-Sham continue to gain in strength not just
in Syria but in Iraq as well. The global fight against
terrorism cannot and should not be compromised
for narrow political gains. The credibility of the
international community’s collective fight against
terrorism can be strengthened only by ensuring the
accountability of terrorists and terrorist groups.
Turning to the humanitarian dimension, the
extension of the mandate for cross-border humanitarian
assistance in July 2022 was indeed a welcome
development. The fact that the Council was able to
12/22

29/08/2022

adopt a resolution on Syria is in itself a significant
development. It is also important to note that elected
Council members played an important bridging role
in finding solutions towards long-running problems
and conflicts.
Resolution 2642 (2022) reassured nearly 4 million
people in the north-west of Syria — 2.7 million of
whom are internally displaced persons, many of whom
are women and children — that the world remained
engaged with them and is concerned with their wellbeing. At the same time, we should not lose sight of
the fact that more than 14.5 million people across Syria
need humanitarian assistance in one form or another,
while essential food items and fuel continue to remain
in short supply. Food insecurity has reached historic
highs, and an estimated 60 per cent of the population
is food insecure, as per the United Nations, even as the
conflict enters its twelfth year.
India continues to call for enhanced and effective
humanitarian assistance to all Syrians throughout
the country — without discrimination, without
politicization and without preconditions. While crossborder operations are predictable and important,
they cannot continue to exist in perpetuity. Concrete
steps need to be taken to address the hurdles that are
obstructing the functioning of cross-line operations.
Humanitarian assistance cannot be a matter
of political expediency. Linking humanitarian
and development assistance with progress in the
political process will only exacerbate humanitarian
suffering. The international community also needs
to constructively look at promoting projects that will
bring much-needed jobs and economic opportunities
for the Syrian people.
In conclusion, let me underline India’s sustained
commitment to extending development assistance and
human resource development support to Syria to the
people of Syria. Our continued support to Syria in
its endeavour for seeking lasting peace and stability
remains steadfast and unwavering.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I make this statement
on the political situation in Syria in my national capacity.
I thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his briefing on
the latest updates.
We remain concerned by the troubling security
situation, in particular recent escalations in northern
Syria. The attacks on 18 August in Al-Hasakah and
22-47474

29/08/2022

The situation in the Middle East

on 19 August in the market in Al-Bab city resulted
in numerous civilians killed or injured, including
children. Those attacks are unacceptable and only add
to the immense suffering of the civilian population.
We urge all parties to demonstrate restraint and abide
by their obligations to protect civilians and civilian
infrastructure. Furthermore, we urge all parties
involved to contribute to lowering tensions.
Once again, we are reminded of the urgency of
a nationwide ceasefire and reinvigorated efforts to
find a political solution. It is therefore particularly
disappointing that the ninth session of the Syrian
Constitutional Committee has not been held. Progress
towards finding a sustainable end to the conflict must
be a priority for all. We urge all parties to cooperate
constructively with the Special Envoy and convene again
as soon as possible. Norway will continue supporting
the work of the Special Envoy, the implementation
of resolution 2254 (2015) and the Syrian-owned and
Syrian-led political process.
Finally, let me underline the importance of
making progress on the issue of detainees and missing
persons in Syria. So many Syrians and their families
are personally affected by this issue and do not know
what happened to their loved ones. We are therefore
troubled to hear that there has been little progress in
implementing the amnesty since April. We urge the
Syrian authorities to share more information and build
confidence on progress towards the implementation
of the amnesty. Movement on this file is essential for
breaking through the current political stalemate.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I thank Mr. Geir Pedersen and
Ms. Joyce Msuya for their thorough briefings.
Our meeting today comes at a time when the
political process in Syria is going through a state of
stagnation and as the humanitarian situation continues
to deteriorate, in addition to difficult security challenges
that raise many concerns and questions regarding the
next stage and the fate of the Syrian people, who have
suffered immensely for over a decade of conflict.
In the past few months, there was an opportunity
to make progress in the meetings of the Constitutional
Committee, marking an essential step forward on the
political track. However, we regret the events that
took place after the cancellation of the ninth round
of meetings due to geopolitical reasons. How long
will Syria remain a playground for settling foreign

S/PV.9117

political scores, of which the Syrian people are the
primary victims?
Therefore, we believe that the coming period is
critical to mobilize momentum and return to talks.
That first requires the international community to stop
linking the Syrian dossier to other political dossiers,
and secondly, to support the mediation efforts led by
the Special Envoy aimed at building confidence among
the parties. In that regard, we emphasize our rejection
of foreign intervention in Syria to preserve its unity,
sovereignty and territorial integrity. We reiterate
that there is no military solution to the Syrian crisis.
Reaching a Syrian-led, Syrian-owned peaceful solution
is the only way to end the crisis and address all its
humanitarian, economic and security ramifications
radically and in a sustainable manner that meets the
aspirations of the Syrian people to achieve stability,
security and prosperity.
We express our concern over the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in Syria, where women and
children bear the greatest burden. Millions of people
continue to suffer from a shortage of clean drinking
water. Furthermore, acute food insecurity has reached
unprecedented levels, affecting more than 12 million
Syrians. Providing electricity to Syrians also remains
an urgent need, which requires intensified efforts to
achieve that goal, in line with the recently adopted
resolution 2642 (2022). As the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2022/635) indicates, hundreds of thousands of
residents receive only one hour of electricity per day.
Electricity is provided in public service facilities, such
as hospitals and schools, for only eight hours a day in
half of the country’s regions, which greatly impacts the
living conditions of Syrians. In the light of the current
situation, how long will the Syrian people suffer from
those dire humanitarian conditions?
We welcome the passage of the sixth cross-line
humanitarian aid convoy to north-west Syria earlier
this month. We regret the development mentioned by
Ms. Msuya regarding the postponement of the crossline mission to Ras Al-Ayn, despite having all the
necessary approvals. As such, we continue to emphasize
the need to ensure the delivery of humanitarian aid
to all those in need, in all areas, without obstacles or
politicization. There is a need also to ensure that the
assistance responds to the specific needs of women and
girls, especially their health needs.

22-4747413/22

S/PV.9117

The situation in the Middle East

The continued delay in addressing the political
situation deepens the existing security vacuum that is
already exploited by terrorist groups in the country,
such as Da’esh terrorist organization. In addition to the
threats posed by other terrorist groups, the report of
the Secretary-General confirms that Da’esh continues
in its attempts to recruit fighters, mobilize weapons and
develop its combat capabilities to extend its influence
over Syrian territory. That constitutes a grave threat,
not only to the security and stability of Syria but also to
the entire region. Again, how long will terrorist groups
continue to exploit the Syrian crisis to spread their own
agenda in the region?
Ending the Syrian crisis and its security, economic
and humanitarian repercussions is not far-fetched. It is
possible if efforts are focused on breaking the current
stalemate on the political track.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I thank the briefers for
their presentations. My delegation would like to focus
on three points. The first is the humanitarian situation
in Syria, the second is the political process and the third
lies at the intersection between the humanitarian and
political aspects.
First, regarding the delivery of humanitarian
assistance, the cross-border mechanism authorized by
resolution 2642 (2022) has an expiration date, as was the
case with every prior authorization. The mechanism, a
temporary arrangement, was necessary to respond to
the urgent humanitarian needs of millions of vulnerable
Syrians. We now have five months ahead of us before
the latest cross-border authorization expires. The
Council must take advantage of that time to seriously
measure and document the results of the cross-border
mechanism. At the same time, a genuine assessment
of what is holding back cross-line deliveries is needed.
Brazil understands that cross-border humanitarian
assistance is not a long-term solution. Eventually, it
will have to be phased out in the context of a solution
that allows the Syrian Arab Republic to take full
responsibility for the provision of aid to its population.
In the meantime, we encourage efforts to increase
cross-line deliveries that are able to reach other parts of
the Syrian territory.
Secondly, on the political process in Syria, it is
deeply concerning that the United Nations-facilitated
dialogue under the auspices of the Constitutional
Committee has made virtually no progress in the past
few years. Brazil continues to believe in the importance
14/22

29/08/2022

of the role of the United Nations in facilitating the
necessary Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political
process for ending the conflict in Syria. While there
should be flexibility in terms of the format of the United
Nations facilitation efforts, including on the venues for
the talks, they should still be in line with the principles
set out in resolution 2258 (2015) and should leave it to
the Syrians to decide on their political future. Brazil’s
position remains unchanged. Only a Syrian-owned and
Syrian-led United Nations-facilitated political process,
with due regard for the preservation of Syria’s territorial
integrity and sovereignty, can offer a lasting solution to
the conflict.
Our third and final point relates to the interplay
between politics and the humanitarian crisis in Syria.
The sanctions imposed on the Syrian Government have
had grave consequences for the Syrian population,
despite humanitarian waivers. Such measures continue
to exacerbate the hardship of all Syrians, adversely
affecting the provision of humanitarian assistance
and restricting the restoration of basic infrastructure
and services in the country, including early-recovery
projects, whose importance resolution 2642 (2022)
acknowledged. Brazil reiterates the importance of
conducting a thorough assessment of the potential
deleterious consequences of unilateral sanctions on the
civilian population.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Special Envoy Pedersen and Assistant
Secretary-General Msuya for their briefings. We also
welcome the participation of the delegations of Syria,
Iran and Türkiye in this meeting.
Mexico has taken note of the joint communiqué of
the summit held in Tehran in July and recognizes the
importance of the dialogue between some of those major
players to resolving the situation in Syria. However,
my country regrets that the ninth meeting of the small
body of the Constitutional Committee has not yet taken
place. We agree with Mr. Pedersen on the importance
of ensuring that other conflicts do not negatively affect
those negotiations, which are vital to advancing a
credible and inclusive political process on the basis of
resolution 2254 (2016). That is essential to ending the
deep political and humanitarian crisis resulting from 11
years of conflict. We trust that the impasse can soon be
overcome, the meeting of the Constitutional Committee
can take place and substantive agreements be reached.
22-47474

29/08/2022

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.9117

As it goes hand in hand with the constitutional
process, priority attention must be given to the situation
of detained and disappeared persons, as Mr. Pedersen
mentioned. Above all, efforts must be redoubled to
clarify cases of forced disappearance and to continue
with the release of arbitrarily detained persons. To
achieve that goal, humanitarian organizations must
have access to detention centres. Efforts to ensure
accountability must also continue. In that regard,
we reiterate the importance of cooperation with the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian
Arab Republic since March 2011 in order to investigate
systematic violations of international law.

that 94 per cent of the population of Al-Hol are women
and children. The camp is clearly no place for children.
Mexico is concerned about the children who continue
to be deprived of their liberty and about the various
detention centres. In that regard, we reiterate our call
for giving priority to the repatriation and reintegration
of nationals from other countries.

My delegation notes with dismay that hostilities
have increased significantly in several areas of Syrian
territory, mainly in northern Aleppo, Manbij, Ayn Issa
and Tal Tamr. The situation inflicts even greater costs
on the civilian population, who have been trapped in this
reality for more than a decade. A nationwide ceasefire
is urgently needed to avoid further civilian losses and
damage to the existing fragile infrastructure.

Mr. Hoxha (Albania): First, let me express our
sincere condolences to the Government and the people
of Pakistan regarding the terrible death toll and
widespread destruction caused by some of the worst
flooding the country has experienced. We stand in full
solidarity with the Pakistanis and join their call for
international help and solidarity. We remain convinced
that climate change and its effects constitute a direct
security threat and deserve proper and continued
attention by the Security Council.

Against that backdrop, the situation is exacerbated
by the increasingly worrying state of food security, as
early warnings from the World Food Programme and
the Food and Agriculture Organization have indicated.
Crop projections are not encouraging, and as Ms. Msuya
said, that is being compounded by inflation, volatile
international markets and the energy crisis. In the
light of the increasingly critical food situation, it will
be crucial to maintain all modalities of humanitarian
access. In that regard, we welcomed the sixth crossline convoy providing humanitarian assistance, which
reached more than 43,000 people in the north-west in
addition to the more than 2.4 million people assisted
through the cross-border mechanism. And while
the cross-line modality should be strengthened, the
existing needs emphasize the importance of renewing
the cross-border mechanism in January, as those needs
will increase during the winter.
With regard to north-eastern Syria, we are
concerned about the violence that continues to prevail
in Al-Hol and which we condemn. In particular, we
note that it has a direct impact on the provision of
humanitarian assistance and services. The disruption
of health and humanitarian services in general makes
living conditions even less tolerable. We emphasize

In conclusion, we take note of military actions in
eastern Syria that have invoked Article 51 of the Charter
of the United Nations. We reiterate Mexico’s position
that based on that provision, invocations of self-defence
justifying the use of force against non-State actors in
a third State under the so-called unwilling and unable
doctrine are contrary to the Charter of the United
Nations and customary international law.

Were there a perfect situation for which we could
use the phrase “no end in sight”, it would certainly be
the situation in Syria, given the fact that, after 11 long
years, brutality, killings, the forced displacement of
civilians, the destruction of civilian infrastructure and
atrocities of all kinds continue unabated. In the past two
months alone, verified incidents have left more than 80
civilians killed and more than 100 civilians injured,
many of them women and children. The lack of respect
for basic norms and rights, especially the protection of
civilians, persists with impunity.
As we have heard, humanitarian needs throughout
Syria are at the highest level. Those huge and increasing
needs demonstrate once more the vital importance of
the cross-border mechanism that the Council renewed
last month. We urge the Council not to politicize that
humanitarian mandate and work towards its smooth
renewal in January 2023 in order to provide the
necessary conditions, certainty and predictability for
aid workers to do their job and reflect the real needs on
the ground in order to expand access to life-saving aid
across the country, as well as through all modalities,
including, of course, cross-line deliveries.

22-4747415/22

S/PV.9117

The situation in the Middle East

The humanitarian crisis continues to deepen
because the political transition is paralysed. We deplore
the actions of the Syrian regime and its supporters
that prevented the holding of the ninth session of the
Constitutional Committee in Geneva last month. Those
who derailed that process must know that they continue
to hold hostage the country’s future. We support Special
Envoy Pedersen and his efforts to produce tangible
results. His work is far from easy. Without general
goodwill and good faith, the political process will go
nowhere. We call on all actors involved to support the
transition and to exert the necessary pressure on the
parties to move forward.
Beneath the humanitarian catastrophe and the
political paralysis lies the mountain of atrocities
committed, mainly by the Syrian regime, and a cry
for justice. More than 130,000 people have been
arbitrarily arrested, are missing or have been forcefully
disappeared. The anguish of nearly every Syrian
family for loved ones continues to be ignored. We
support the creation of an independent mechanism with
a strong international mandate to clarify the fate and
whereabouts of missing people. We also expect full
clarity and accurate data on the amnesty.
As recalled by Ms. Msuya, the conditions in Al-Hol
camp, where 55,000 people live, 94 per cent of them
women and children, continue to deteriorate. This year
alone, there have been 33 murders — six of them in
June and July. A solution is urgently needed, including
through the repatriation of the detainees. Residents of
the Rukban camp continue to live in dire conditions,
with limited access to basic services. We support
efforts by United Nations agencies to obtain access to
reach those in the camp.
The protection of civilians, international law and
human rights law must be ensured by the parties to the
conflict. It is not an option; it is an obligation. Impunity
for serious violations and abuses of human rights and
of international humanitarian law remains a grave
concern. Accountability for serious violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law is crucial
to achieving sustainable peace, based on an inclusive
political solution, in accordance with resolution 2254
(2015). That will require credible justice and a genuine
reconciliation process. Lasting peace will be achieved
only if human rights are respected.
Let me end by highlighting that the people of
Syria need food, protection and security, but they
16/22

29/08/2022

also need a new perspective. We echo the calls for the
implementation of a nationwide ceasefire, which would
feed into efforts for a genuine political process to start a
new chapter for Syrians to build their future — a future
for all, with hope and freedom.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Envoy Pedersen and Assistant Secretary-General
Msuya for their sobering briefings.
Let me join others in welcoming our new Irish
colleague, Ambassador Fergal Mythen, to the Council.
The United Kingdom continues to stand with
the Syrian people in their desire for a sustainable
solution to the Syrian conflict. As we have said many
times, the only way to achieve that is through the full
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). That includes
a nationwide ceasefire, unhindered aid access, the
release of the arbitrarily detained, conditions for safe,
voluntary and dignified refugee return and free and fair
elections, pursuant to a new Constitution.
Special Envoy Pedersen’s ongoing efforts to deliver
on resolution 2254 (2015) have our full support. We are
disappointed about the fact that the regime continues
to stall discussions on political and constitutional
reform. We are also disappointed that Russia is further
undermining political progress in Syria by asserting
that Geneva should no longer be the venue for what
should be Syrian-led and Syrian-owned Constitutional
Committee talks.
While the Syrian regime continues to fail in its
responsibility to respect the basic rights of Syrians,
provide for their needs and engage in the political
process, the humanitarian situation continues to
deteriorate. Currently, approximately 14.6 million
Syrians require humanitarian assistance — more than
67 per cent of the population. Some 12 million face
acute food insecurity this year.
The United Kingdom recognizes that early
recovery is necessary for addressing humanitarian
needs. That is reflected in our support. Our funding
has helped with the rehabilitation of water networks,
provided agricultural training and inputs for livestock
and vegetable production and provided apprenticeships
and small business grants to help create jobs. But
humanitarian assistance, particularly cross-border
assistance, remains a lifeline for millions. By reducing
the United Nations cross-border mandate from 12 to six
months, resolution 2642 (2022) has caused uncertainty
22-47474

29/08/2022

The situation in the Middle East

for the United Nations and its partners, while
impacting humanitarian operations and early-recovery
programming — a priority avowedly shared by Russia,
as well as other Council members. We therefore call
on all Security Council members to work together to
ensure a renewed agreement in January to meet the
critical needs of the Syrian people. Further uncertainty
or the closing of that lifeline at the height of winter
would be catastrophic for millions of people.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.
I thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and Assistant
Secretary-General Joyce Msuya for their briefings.
I would like to make five brief points.
First, violations of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Syria must end. Respect for national
sovereignty and territorial integrity is an important
principle enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations
and a cornerstone of international relations. The
provisions of the United Nations Charter are not mere
quotations to which only lip service is paid. They are
not optional and should not be selectively applied. They
certainly do not lend themselves to misinterpretation
or misapplication.
There is no doubt that the recent United States
military operations in eastern Syria constitute a violation
of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria and
have nothing to do with the right to self-defence under
Article 51 of the Charter. The unlawful presence of
foreign forces and illegal military operations in Syria
must end.
Secondly, terrorists and all forms of terrorism must
be met with zero tolerance. Terrorist organizations
such as Da’esh, Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham and the Eastern
Turkistan Islamic Movement continue to run rampant
in Syria and pose threats to international peace and
security. It has repeatedly been reported that some
of the organizations that the Council has designated
as terrorist continue to enjoy access to various forms
of funding. Terrorism is terrorism, full stop, and any
contrivance aimed at shielding terrorist forces or
using them for political ends is analogous to raising
ferocious tigers and can only lead to further danger.
The international community must work together to
combat all forms of terrorism and terrorist activities.

S/PV.9117

Thirdly, we must stay the course in promoting a
Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political process. The
only path to a political solution rests in enabling the
Syrian people decide their country’s future on their own,
without external interference. China supports Special
Envoy Pedersen’s efforts to encourage and facilitate
continued consultations and to forge consensus among
the Syrian parties. We welcome the important messages
recently relayed by the Astana process with regard to
supporting the political process in Syria. We note the
announcement by the Syrian Government that local
council elections will be held in September, and we
hope for their successful outcome.
Fourthly, the transition from cross-border
humanitarian operations to cross-line deliveries must
be accelerated. Since the adoption of resolution 2642
(2022), only a single cross-line operation has been
completed in north-western Syria, with no significant
improvement in terms of either efficiency or scale. We
want to register our profound disappointment with that.
I would like to reiterate that the cross-border relief
was a temporary arrangement made under exceptional
circumstances and that the transition to cross-line
operations should shift into a higher gear, with a clearly
established timetable for the eventual termination
of cross-border relief. At the same time, it is vital to
vigorously promote early-recovery projects throughout
Syria, mobilize the international community to provide
adequate financial support with no strings attached,
promote the early operationalization of additional
projects and foster Syria’s domestic drivers of
economic development.
Fifthly, the unilateral sanctions against Syria and
illegal plundering of its resources must stop. Economic
recovery and development are the ultimate means by
which Syria can extricate itself from its humanitarian
crisis. However, unilateral sanctions have long been
disrupting the lifelines of Syria’s economic recovery
and development, and the illegal plundering of
resources crucial to the country’s economic recovery
and development has done incalculable damage to the
Syrian people. One case in point is oil. Eighty-three
per cent of Syria’s daily oil production is sold illegally
outside the country, with long lines of oil-smuggling
convoys forming at illegal border crossings. The
international community must not ignore such practices,
and the Security Council should unequivocally call for
an end to them.

22-4747417/22

S/PV.9117

The situation in the Middle East

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): As this is the first time that I am speaking
during China’s presidency of the Security Council this
month, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your successful leadership of its work. I would also
like to thank your predecessor, the Ambassador of
Brazil, for his successful and outstanding presidency
of the Council last month. My delegation has listened
to the briefings by Mr. Pedersen and Ms. Msuya, and
would like to make the following points.
The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic is
working diligently to promote national reconciliation,
create the conditions necessary for a dignified life
for its citizens, rehabilitate infrastructure and basic
services for the people and rebuild what has been
destroyed by terrorism. We are working to ensure the
conditions necessary for a voluntary, safe and dignified
return of refugees to their homes.
The adoption of resolution 2642 (2022) was an
additional step towards improving and promoting
the delivery of humanitarian aid to those in need and
providing support for basic services. The resolution
has also expanded the reach of humanitarian activities,
including through support to early-recovery projects,
especially in the area of electric power, which is a
vital sector and indispensable to other basic-service
sectors such as health, education and water. Almost two
months after the resolution’s adoption, my delegation
looks forward to seeing the Council guarantee its full
implementation and hold an informal and interactive
dialogue to review and monitor it, including progress
on early-recovery projects. We also hope that the
mechanism will be able to identify and determine the
underlying reasons for the flaws and gaps hindering
that implementation and that countries will work
constructively to take responsibility for ensuring that
it gets done.
The Syrian Government and its partners such as
the United Nations bodies and humanitarian agencies
continue to face great challenges and difficulties in
their efforts to improve the humanitarian situation
and the living standards of the Syrian people for the
following reasons.
18/22

29/08/2022

First, Western countries continue to politicize
humanitarian and development efforts and clearly
violate the guidelines that govern such work.
Secondly, some donor States have reneged on their
pledges to support humanitarian work and failed to
uphold their obligations to provide the funding for it,
including through the implementation of early-recovery
projects, as stipulated in resolution 2642 (2022). So
far the plan for the Syrian humanitarian response has
received only a fraction of the required funding.
Thirdly, the United States and its Western allies
continue to impose and increase unilateral coercive
measures that are inhumane and illegitimate and
cause suffering among the Syrian people, owing to the
severe shortages of food, medicine, fuel and other basic
supplies that affect every aspect of their lives.
Fourthly, the United States occupying forces
continue to plunder the Syrian people’s wealth,
including wheat, oil, gas and cotton. Almost 66,000
barrels of Syrian oil are being stolen every day, and
in the past few days more than 500 trucks laden with
stolen Syrian oil have left Syria for American bases
in Iraq.
As a result of its desire to ensure that humanitarian
aid reaches everyone in need throughout Syria without
discrimination, the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic has offered every means possible to help the
United Nations improve and promote the delivery of
humanitarian aid. However, the terrorist organizations
that are running rampant in north-western Syria and
their supporters continue to obstruct the delivery
of such assistance. Since the adoption of resolution
2642 (2022), attention has remained focused on the
cross-border mechanism. More than 1,000 trucks have
crossed the border in order to justify the continuation
of the mechanism and guarantee the continued flow of
supplies to terrorist organizations in that area.
Landmines and explosive ordnance left behind by
the terrorist organizations continue to pose a grave
threat to the lives of Syrians, especially children. The
lack of progress in the removal of those landmines
and explosive ordnance has prevented Syrians from
returning to their homes, farms, jobs and schools.
Moreover, it continues to obstruct the delivery of vital
humanitarian aid.
According to the Secretary General’s report
(S/2022/635), Syria is one of the countries with the
22-47474

29/08/2022

The situation in the Middle East

highest number of reported direct victims of landmines
and explosive ordnance worldwide. My delegation calls
on the United Nations to give this issue the importance
it deserves and to move from raising awareness of the
dangers of those landmines and explosive ordnance
to drawing up a comprehensive plan for field work
with a clear time frame in order to clear all areas in
Syria of those landmines and explosive ordnance in a
manner that would help save the lives of Syrians and
provide the necessary conditions for the safe return of
displaced persons and refugees to their homes so that
they can live normal lives. I would like to note that the
Syrian Government — thanks to its own efforts and
the support of allies and friends — has succeeded in
resettling more than 2.4 million Syrian citizens to their
places of permanent residence.
At the Tehran summit on 19 July, the Russian
Federation and the Islamic Republic of Iran reiterated
their firm commitment to Syria’s sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and unity, as well
as to the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations. They reiterated their rejection
of secessionist plots seeking to undermine Syria’s
sovereignty. They condemned the repeated acts of
Israeli aggression.
Moreover, the Tehran summit expressed
determination to continue working to combat terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations. The summit also
reiterated that the only solution in Syria is through
a Syrian-led and -owned political process that is
facilitated by the United Nations.
Putting an end to the illegitimate foreign presence
on Syrian territory, along with terrorist organizations
and secessionist militias affiliated with them, as
well as ceasing the repeated and systematic Israeli
attacks against the sovereignty of Syria and putting an
end — immediately and unconditionally — to the policies
of economic terrorism and collective punishment
imposed by the United States and the European Union
on the Syrian people is the only way to guarantee
respect for Syria’s sovereignty, independence, territorial
unity and integrity. It is the only way to eliminate the
remnants of terrorist organizations and related entities
and groupings. It is the only way to put an end to all
forms of displacement and demographic change. And
it is the only way to give Syrians back their national
economic resources.

S/PV.9117

Syria demands from the States that sponsor armed
groups and separatist militias and those that plunder
Syrian wealth to pay reparations to the Syrian people,
because looting those national resources is a violation
of international law.
Before I conclude, I would like to respond to the
representative of the United States of America and his
attempt to justify the attacks launched by his country’s
forces in Deir ez-Zor governorate. I would like to clarify
for the members of the Security Council that the presence
of the United States forces on Syrian territory is illegal
and without the request or consent of the Government
of the Syrian Arab Republic. Therefore, their presence
is illegal, and that in itself is a blatant violation of the
Charter of the United Nations, international law and
relevant Security Council resolutions that underline
the need to respect the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Syria. The justification made
by the representative of the United States occupying
forces and the pretext of Article 51 of the Charter
and what he called the right to self-defence is a legal
misrepresentation and political insolence. The United
States justification can be described as an excuse,
which is worse than the action itself.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Ms. Ershadi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I thank
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General and the
Assistant Secretary-General for their briefings.
The humanitarian situation in Syria remains dire,
and the country’s economic crisis continues to affect the
people across the country. The provision of humanitarian
aid is essential, and political circumstances should not
be allowed to prevent humanitarian aid from reaching
the people in need. However, that must be done with
full respect for Syria’s sovereignty, territorial integrity
and national unity.
We welcome the adoption of resolution 2642 (2022)
and consider it an important step towards addressing
Syria’s urgent needs. The resolution expressly calls
for early-recovery projects and greater transparency
in relief efforts. Furthermore, it emphasizes the
critical importance of increasing cross-line delivery
throughout Syria.
The first report of the United Nations on the
implementation of the resolution emphasizes the

22-4747419/22

S/PV.9117

The situation in the Middle East

importance of early-recovery projects and claims
that the lack of electricity has made it more difficult
to access necessary basic services. According to the
report, limited access to electricity has also hampered
the provision of essential humanitarian services and
other response activities, including the provision
of hospital and clinic services, food production and
water distribution.
Given the severity of the situation, early-recovery
projects, such as electricity projects, are critical in
re-establishing access to essential services and must
not be affected by unilateral sanctions. In that regard,
the resolution’s provisions and content are explicit,
leaving no room for arbitrary interpretation or selective
reading. We demand that the resolution be fully
and effectively implemented. We also demand that
unilateral sanctions against Syria be lifted, as they are
impeding the resolution’s implementation.
We trust that the special report of the SecretaryGeneral requested by resolution 2642 (2022) will
include general trends regarding unimpeded and secure
United Nations cross-line operations, which should
reach all of Syria, as well as early-recovery projects
and accurate information on humanitarian assistance
provided through United Nations humanitarian crossborder operations, including their transparency, and the
distribution mechanism.
Furthermore, an informal interactive dialogue of the
Security Council, as set out in the resolution, to review
and monitor the implementation of that resolution on
a regular basis could be an appropriate mechanism to
allow the Council to keep track of how the resolution is
being implemented effectively and fairly.
With regard to the political process, we would like
to reiterate our steadfast position that the Syrian crisis
must be resolved peacefully and in accordance with
the principles of international law, particularly the full
respect of national sovereignty and territorial integrity
of States. In order to achieve this goal, the occupation
must end, and Syria’s full sovereignty must be restored.
We highlight the Constitutional Committee’s
crucial role in the political resolution of the Syrian
crisis, and we commend and support the United Nations
Special Envoy’s efforts aimed at interacting with the
Syrian parties in order to facilitate the work of the
Committee’s ninth session. In this regard, we highlight
the tripartite summit held within the framework of the
Astana format in Tehran on 19 July 2022, where the
20/22

29/08/2022

presidents of the Astana format guarantor countries
emphasized their unwavering commitments to the
Syrian Arab Republic’s sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity and the advancement of
a sustainable political process led and owned by the
Syrian people in accordance with Security Council
resolution 2254 (2015). They also emphasized the
Constitutional Committee’s critical role and reaffirmed
their willingness to support ongoing interactions
between Committee members and the Special Envoy
for Syria as a facilitator in order to ensure long-term
stability and the effectiveness of the work of the next
sessions of the Committee.
The Israeli regime continues to violate Syria’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity and carry out
terrorist attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure
within Syrian territory. According to the report of the
Secretary-General, the Damascus International Airport
was forced to close owing to the damage caused by
Israeli terrorist attacks on 10 June. All flights for the
United Nations Humanitarian Air Service, which is
run by the World Food Programme and is the primary
enabler of access for humanitarian operations in
the country, have been cancelled as a result of this
criminal act. We strongly condemn the continuing
Israeli military attacks in Syria, including on civilian
infrastructure, and recognize Syria’s legitimate
right to self-defence under international law and the
United Nations Charter. The continuation of such
criminal acts will destabilize and exacerbate tensions
in the region. The Security Council must abandon its
double standards and unequivocally condemn Israeli
aggression and terrorist attacks on Syria’s territory that
are being pursued in flagrant violation of the United
Nations Charter and international law, particularly
the principle of a sovereign State’s territorial integrity
and independence.
Finally, my delegation categorically rejects the
unfounded accusation made by the representative of
the United States against my country at this meeting.
Indeed, the United States presence in the north-east of
Syria under the pretext of combating terrorism is a clear
violation of the United Nations Charter, international
law and the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria.
It is the United States that is working with the terrorist
groups in Syria and destabilizing peace and security in
the region. The United States must cease its violation
of international law and the United Nations Charter
by ending its continuing support of terrorist groups
22-47474

29/08/2022

The situation in the Middle East

and occupation of the north-eastern part of Syria. The
Security Council should live up to its mandate under
the United Nations Charter and demand that the United
States honour its international obligations.
As a responsible State and in line with its
international obligation, Iran continues its efforts to
assist the Syrian Government to combat terrorism.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Türkiye.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Türkiye): I thank Special Envoy
Pedersen and Assistant Secretary-General Msuya for
their briefings.
Let me start by emphasizing that it is vital to
accelerate efforts in favour of a political solution
in Syria. For its part, and from the very beginning,
Türkiye has been supporting every effort towards a
political solution that will ensure a united, free, safe
and democratic Syria. We have played a constructive
and leading role in all initiatives that aim to reach a
lasting solution as soon as possible. At the forefront of
these efforts is the political process based on resolution
2254 (2015). As we have underlined time and again,
there is no way to end the Syrian conflict and offer a
lasting settlement other than a political solution to be
agreed upon by all segments of the Syrian people.
Our longest land border is with Syria — 911
kilometres in length, to be exact. The protection of
the territorial integrity and unity of Syria is therefore
indispensable for us. Equally vital is the elimination
of the threat posed by terrorist organizations to both
Syria and Türkiye. It is also crucial that Syrians are
able to return to their homes in safety and peace, play
a role in the future of their country and contribute to
its redevelopment and to the establishment of lasting
peace. We believe that a political solution based on
these elements is not impossible if all segments of
Syrian society make sincere and constructive efforts.
Türkiye will not withhold its support for efforts made
in this direction.
The Syrian opposition has so far acted in good
faith to contribute to the success of the political
process. We will continue to encourage the opposition
in this direction. Throughout the eight rounds of the
Constitutional Committee, the opposition’s positive
approach was clearly seen and appreciated by the
United Nations and other observers. However, progress
can be made only if a similar approach is displayed by

S/PV.9117

the regime. We hope that the ninth round will be held as
soon as possible under United Nations facilitation with
a results-oriented approach.
Eliminating the threat posed by terrorist
organizations in Syria, primarily the Kurdistan
Workers’ Party/People’s Protection Units (PKK/
YPG) and Da’esh, requires joint efforts. The terrorist
organization PKK/YPG continues to attack Syrian
civilians as well as our own citizens within our
borders, using the very weapons provided to them to
fight Da’esh. The so-called Syrian Democratic Forces
(SDF), which is actually nothing but PKK/YPG, carries
out on average a hundred terrorist attacks every month
in northern Syria. In the last two years, around 500
Syrians have lost their lives in these attacks.
Türkiye’s borders have been targeted more than
10 times in the last two years. Most recently, on
16 August, two Turkish soldiers were killed as a result
of a mortar attack on our border province of Şanlıurfa,
launched from an area under the control of the SDF.
No one should expect us to remain indifferent to these
attacks. The countries that support the PKK/YPG/SDF,
including those in this Chamber, should understand that
the main purpose of these terrorist organizations is not
to fight Da’esh, but to support separatist terrorism in
Syria and Türkiye. The images the SDF has shared on
its social media accounts are not those of their fighting
Da’esh, but rather of attacks on Turkish security forces,
accompanied by expressions full of hatred and hostility.
These images are unfortunately no surprise to us, but
we wonder if and how the supporters of PKK/YPG/SDF
are responding to them.
Let me repeat once again: the real fight against
Da’esh can and must be carried out only with legitimate
actors. The mentality that a terrorist organization could
be fought with the so-called help of another terrorist
organization is fundamentally flawed and doomed
to fail.
As I have said time and again in this Chamber,
Türkiye will continue its resolute fight against all
terrorist organizations threatening its national security
in exercise of its inherent right of self-defence, as
embodied in Article 51 of the United Nations Charter
and in accordance with relevant Security Council
resolutions on the fight against terrorism. Our
determination in this regard is also a guarantee for
Syria’s territorial integrity and political unity. Our past
operations against the PKK/YPG terrorist organization

22-4747421/22

S/PV.9117

The situation in the Middle East

have made us ready to cooperate with all actors that
have a genuine interest in and determination to preserve
the unity of Syria as well as an interest in the fight
against terrorism.
The humanitarian crisis in Syria continues unabated,
and other conflicts have also had a negative impact
on the already dire situation. It was disappointing,
to say the least, that despite the strong calls from the
United Nations and the humanitarian community for
a 12-month extension, the Council had to settle for a
six-month renewal of this lifeline operation (resolution
2642 (2022)). We are glad that 4.1million people living
in north-west Syria are safe for now. But when the
mandate of the cross-border mechanism comes to an
end, on 10 January 2023, it will be in the depths of
winter. That is literally the worst time one can think
of to reconsider life-saving humanitarian support. It is
critical that the cross-border mandate be extended once
again in January, as foreseen in resolution 2642 (2022).
We call on all relevant parties to act responsibly
and support the Syrian people without discrimination.
On our part, we will maintain our support to the
United Nations and the international humanitarian
community in providing cross-border assistance to
Syria. As seen with the six cross-line aid deliveries
to Idlib so far, Türkiye provides the greatest support
to the implementation of the resolution. We will
continue to do so. However, we are against the arbitrary
implementation of the resolution. The cross-line
modality should continue, but it cannot be the ultimate
aim. The ultimate aim should be to deliver humanitarian
aid. Ignoring cross-border deliveries in other parts of

22/22

29/08/2022

Syria cannot be justified by increasing the number of
cross-line deliveries.
We also expect the United Nations to officially
report that the most important obstacle to cross-line
activities to Idlib is the non-stop ceasefire violations by
the regime and its backers in the region — just like in
Ras Al-Ayn, where the negative attitude of the regime
and its backers prevented planned cross-line deliveries.
We also have difficulty in understanding why both
the United Nations and some donor countries are hesitant
in extending aid to the opposition-controlled areas
in Syria and implementing humanitarian assistance
projects. Inaction in that regard cannot be justified
by any of the excuses put forward. Selectivity and
discrimination have no place in delivering humanitarian
aid. In that regard, I would like to know the reasons that
there are no cross-line deliveries to Rukban camp. We
would like once again to request detailed information
on the cross-line missions to north-east Syria. Finally,
we want to see real progress on the water issue in
Al-Bab, which has been left unaddressed for too long.
The promise of access to Ayn Al-Baida came very late.
We will follow that issue closely.
Türkiye will continue supporting all segments
of the Syrian population without discrimination on
humanitarian issues. We call on all other responsible
actors to do the same.
Our support for a political solution in Syria in line
with resolution 2254 (2015) that is acceptable to the
people of Syria will continue unabated.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

22-47474
