S/PV.9290

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9290th meeting

Wednesday, 22 March 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Afonso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mozambique)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. Parga Cintra
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Montalvo Sosa
Mr. De Rivière
Ms. Bongo
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Shino
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Hauri
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-08328 (E)
*2308328*

S/PV.9290

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.

On 27 December, Israeli settlers took control of
a parcel of agricultural land leased by a Palestinian
family from the Greek Orthodox Church since 1931
in the Silwan area of occupied East Jerusalem. The
settlers maintain that they had purchased the land from
the Church, a deal the Church rejected as fraudulent.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Israel to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in the meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Tor
Wennesland, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Wennesland.
Mr. Wennesland: Before turning to the SecretaryGeneral’s report, I would like to note the beginning of
the holiday period, when the holy month of Ramadan
coincides with Passover and Easter. I extend my good
wishes to those who are observing these upcoming
holy days. At the outset, I remind all that the status
quo at the holy sites in Jerusalem must be respected.
This should be a period for safe and peaceful religious
reflection and celebrations for all. I urge all sides to
refrain from unilateral steps that escalate tensions. I
call on all leaders to engage to this end and refrain from
provocative actions and messages at this sensitive time.
I ask for calm.
I turn now to the Secretary-General’s twentyfifth report on the implementation of resolution 2334
(2016), covering the period from 8 December 2022 to
13 March 2023. Resolution 2334 (2016) calls on Israel
to immediately and completely cease all settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, and to fully respect all of its legal
obligations in this regard. Settlement activities have,
nevertheless, continued during the reporting period.
2/21

22/03/2023

On 2 January, the Israeli Government informed the
High Court of Justice that it intends to legalize, under
Israeli law, the outpost of Homesh, built on private
Palestinian-owned land, including by repealing part
of the 2005 disengagement law. Relevant legislation is
currently being advanced in the Knesset. On the same
day, the Court gave the Government 90 days to explain
why the outpost should not be evacuated.
On 12 February, the Israeli Government announced
that it authorized nine outposts in the occupied West
Bank and that the Higher Planning Committee would
convene within days to advance settlement housing
units. The Committee subsequently advanced plans for
over 7,200 settlement housing units, with approximately
4,000 located deep in the occupied West Bank. Nearly
1,000 of these are in outposts that are in the process of
legalization under Israeli law.
Following multiple postponements, a meeting of
the Higher Planning Committee’s Subcommittee for
Objections on sensitive E1 settlement plans has been
rescheduled for 12 June.
Demolitions and seizures of Palestinian-owned
structures continued across the occupied West Bank,
including East Jerusalem. Israeli authorities, citing the
lack of Israeli-issued building permits, which are almost
impossible for Palestinians to obtain, demolished,
seized or forced people to demolish 331 structures.
These actions displaced 388 people, including 89
women and 197 children. A total of 61 structures were
donor-funded.
On 7 February, Israel’s High Court of Justice gave
the Government until 2 April to submit its response
to a petition to implement demolition orders for Khan
al-Ahmar. The deadline was subsequently extended to
23 April. A hearing is set for 1 May.
On 7 February, Israeli authorities postponed
the demolition of a multi-story building housing 74
Palestinians in Silwan in occupied East Jerusalem.
Resolution 2334 (2016) calls for immediate steps to
prevent all acts of violence against civilians, including
all acts of terror, as well as all acts of provocation
23-08328

22/03/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.

and destruction. Unfortunately, daily violence increased
significantly during the reporting period.
Eighty-two Palestinians, including one woman
and 17 children, were killed by Israeli security forces
during demonstrations, clashes, security operations,
attacks against Israelis and other incidents. In all, more
than 2,680 Palestinians, including 123 women and
320 children, were injured. Of that number, 308 were
injured by live ammunition, while 2,100 became injured
from tear gas inhalation. In addition, 4 Palestinians
were killed and 89 injured, including 14 women and
12 children, in a growing number of attacks by Israeli
settlers, who also caused damage to Palestinianowned property.
Thirteen Israeli civilians, including one woman,
three children and one foreign national were killed,
and 49 Israelis, including two women, seven children
and six Israeli security forces personnel, were injured
by Palestinians in shooting and ramming attacks,
clashes and other incidents. The majority of them
were stone-throwing attacks against Israelis, including
settlers, which resulted in injuries or damage to Israeliowned property. One Israeli security forces personnel
was shot and killed by a fellow soldier in the context of
a stabbing attack by a Palestinian.
Israeli security forces carried out 1,084 searchand-arrest operations in the West Bank, resulting in
906 Palestinians arrested, including 133 children. Israel
currently holds 967 Palestinians in administrative
detention — the highest number in over a decade.
The high number of fatal incidents during the
reporting period precludes us from detailing all of
them, but allow me to highlight a few.

S/PV.9290

In occupied East Jerusalem, six Israelis, including
a child and one foreign national, were killed in a
Palestinian shooting attack outside a synagogue on
27 January, the highest death toll in an attack against
Israelis since 2005, and three Israelis, including
two children, were killed in a ramming attack on
10 February in occupied East Jerusalem. Shooting
attacks by Palestinians killed three Israelis, including
one dual national, in other parts of the West Bank on
26 and 27 February and seriously injured three others,
one of whom later succumbed to his wounds, in Tel
Aviv on 9 March.
In separate incidents, two Palestinians were shot
and killed by Israeli settlers in the course of carrying out
stabbing attacks on 11 and 21 January. On 11 February,
a third Palestinian was shot by an Israeli settler at close
range in a confrontation on the edge of a Palestinian
village near Salfit. Following the 26 February killing
by a Palestinian of two Israelis from the Har Bracha
settlement in Huwwara, hundreds of settlers descended
on the West Bank town and neighbouring villages,
carrying out, with Israeli security forces present, arson
and other attacks. Amid the violence, one Palestinian
man was shot and killed, 387 others, including 137
women and 89 children, were injured — one with live
ammunition and 377 with tear gas — and extensive
damage to Palestinian private property was reported.
In the aftermath of fatal incidents in the West
Bank, Palestinian armed groups launched seven rockets
from Gaza towards Israel. One fell short within the
Strip, one landed in an open space inside Israel, and
five were intercepted by the Israeli air defence systems.
In retaliation, the Israel Defense Forces conducted two
air strikes against what it said were militant targets in
Gaza, with no reported injuries.

In four Israeli search-and-arrest operations in
Palestinian cities in Area A — on 26 January in
Jenin, 6 February in Jericho, 22 February in Nablus
and 7 March in Jenin — 33 Palestinians, including a
woman, an elderly man and four children, were killed by
Israeli security forces amid armed exchanges. Of those
killed, Palestinian militant groups have claimed 21 as
members. The death toll in Nablus, with 11 Palestinians
killed, was the highest recorded by the United Nations
in a single West Bank incident since 2005.

Resolution 2334 (2016) calls for the parties to
refrain from acts of provocation, incitement and
inflammatory rhetoric. Unfortunately, such acts
continued and intensified.

The reporting period has also been marked by
a spate of violence against civilians, including acts
of terror.

An Israeli minister conducted an inflammatory
visit to Jerusalem’s holy sites. Several Members of
the Knesset praised the attacks by settlers against

Some Fatah officials and social media pages, as
well as those from Hamas and Palestinian Islamic
Jihad, praised and glorified perpetrators of attacks
against Israelis and called for additional attacks. One
senior Fatah official called Israel a fascist enemy that
loves to murder and spill blood.

23-083283/21

S/PV.9290

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.

Palestinians and their property in Huwwara, and an
Israeli minister said Huwwara should be wiped out by
Israeli authorities. Another Member of Knesset called
Israeli-Arab colleagues supporters of terrorism and
vowed to ban them from the Knesset, while another
said they were inhuman and likened them to livestock.
Resolution 2334 (2016) reiterated calls by the
Middle East Quartet for affirmative steps to be taken
immediately to reverse the negative trends on the
ground that are imperilling the two-State solution.
Notwithstanding some positive steps, negative trends
on the ground continued.
On 6 January, the Israeli Government approved a
series of measures against the Palestinian Authority
(PA), including the transfer of some $39 million in
Palestinian Authority tax revenues withheld by Israel
to families of Israelis killed in Palestinian attacks. That
measure was in response to the 30 December adoption
of General Assembly resolution 77/247, requesting an
advisory opinion by the International Court of Justice
relating to Israel’s occupation of Palestinian territory.
On 16 January, 39 members signed a joint statement
reconfirming support for the International Court of
Justice and noting deep concern regarding the Israeli
Government’s punitive measures.
The Israeli Government announced, on 29 January
and 12 February, that following acts of terrorism by
Palestinians against Israelis, it would take steps in
response, including reinforcing security forces and
broadening operations, strengthening and expanding
Israeli settlements and taking punitive measures against
the perpetrators and their families.
Following a 1 February announcement by Israel’s
National Security Minister of new restrictions on
Palestinian security prisoners, prisoners launched a
mass civil disobedience campaign and announced their
intention to begin a hunger strike from tomorrow if
restrictions were not eased.
On 2 February, Israel’s Finance Minister
announced that Israel would double — to approximately
$30 million — the monthly deductions from tax
revenues that it withholds based on its law mandating
the withholding of what it says the Palestinian Authority
pays to perpetrators of attacks against Israelis and their
families. The PA’s difficult financial situation has
resulted in ongoing cuts to public sector salaries. Since
early February, Palestinian teachers have conducted
4/21

22/03/2023

strikes demanding salary increases to compensate for
the rising cost of living.
On 15 February, the Knesset-approved legislation
enabling the revocation of citizenship of Israeli citizens
or residents imprisoned for terrorism-related offences
who have received money from the Palestinian
Authority connected to those offences.
On 23 February, the Israeli Prime Minister’s Office
announced an agreement between Defence Minister
Gallant and Finance Minister Smotrich on the division
of responsibilities between them. That agreement
reportedly grants Smotrich expanded authority over
settlement-related activities and civil affairs in the
occupied West Bank.
In Gaza, the United Nations continued to deliver
vital humanitarian and development assistance to
Palestinians in Gaza and remains engaged with all
parties in order to reduce access restrictions to support
the Gaza economy and basic service delivery. During
the period, a higher flow of people and goods through
the Erez and Kerem Shalom crossings was witnessed,
with Israeli-issued worker and business permits
standing today at more than 20,500 — the highest
number in years. As at 9 March, the Israeli authorities
had enabled 44 previously restricted commodities to
enter Gaza without special coordination.
In its resolution 2334 (2016), the Security Council
also called upon all States to distinguish, in their
relevant dealings, between the territory of the State
of Israel and the territories occupied since 1967. No
such steps were taken during the reporting period.
Resolution 2334 (2016) also called upon all parties to
continue, inter alia, to exert collective efforts to launch
credible negotiations.
On 12 February, the League of Arab States
convened in Cairo a high-level conference on
Jerusalem, on the theme “Resilience and development”.
In its final communiqué, participants called for the
establishment of a committee of legal experts tasked
with helping to bring justice to the Palestinian people
and financing a mechanism to support small and
medium-sized enterprises.
On 26 February, senior Jordanian, Egyptian,
Israeli, Palestinian and United States officials met
in Aqaba, Jordan. In a joint communiqué, Israeli and
Palestinian participants reaffirmed their commitment
to all previous agreements between them and to work
23-08328

22/03/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.

towards a just and lasting peace. The parties committed
to steps to de-escalate the situation on the ground,
pause unilateral measures and prevent further violence,
including through upholding the status quo at the
holy sites.
On 20 February, the Security Council adopted
a presidential statement reaffirming, inter alia, its
commitment to the two-State solution; its opposition to
unilateral actions, including settlement expansion, and
its condemnation of violence against civilians, including
acts of terrorism (S/PRST/2023/1). On 4 and 8 March,
respectively, five European Union (EU) countries, plus
the United Kingdom, and all 27 EU member States
issued statements condemning the increasing violence
on the ground and calling for de-escalation.
In conclusion, I would like to share the SecretaryGeneral’s observations concerning the implementation
of resolution 2334 (2016):
“I remain deeply troubled by continued
Israeli settlement expansion, including the recent
authorization of nine illegal outposts and the
advancement of more than 7,000 settlement
housing units, as well as the potential settlement
advancement in the E1 area, which is crucial
to the contiguity of a future Palestinian State.
Settlements further entrench the occupation, fuel
tensions and systematically erode the viability of
a Palestinian State as part of a two-State solution.
Israeli settlements have no legal validity and
constitute a flagrant violation of international law
and of Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions. I call on the Government of Israel to
cease all settlement activities immediately, in line
with its obligations under international law. The
demolition and seizure of Palestinian structures,
including the significant increase of such activity
in occupied East Jerusalem, entail numerous human
rights violations and raise concerns about the risk of
forcible transfer. I call on the Government of Israel
to immediately end that practice, in line with its
obligations under international humanitarian law.
“I am deeply disturbed by the intensifying cycle
of violence that threatens to plunge Palestinians
and Israelis deeper into deadly crisis, while further
eroding any hope for a political solution. I condemn
all acts of violence against civilians, including
acts of terror, which have led to an increase in the
tragic loss of life. I reiterate that the perpetrators

S/PV.9290

must be held accountable and swiftly brought to
justice. There can be no justification for terrorism
or glorification of such acts, which should be
clearly condemned by all. I call on leaders on all
sides to help calm the situation, avoid spreading
inflammatory rhetoric and speak up against those
seeking to incite and escalate the situation.
“Israeli security forces operations in the
occupied West Bank and subsequent clashes have
led to a staggering number of Palestinians killed
and injured. I reiterate that the security forces must
use lethal force only when strictly unavoidable to
protect life, and must promptly and thoroughly
investigate all instances of death or injury resulting
from its use, holding those responsible to account.
I am particularly appalled that children continue to
be killed and injured in large numbers. Children
must never be the target of violence, used or put
in harm’s way. I remain deeply concerned by the
increase in levels of settler-related violence in the
occupied West Bank, sometimes in the proximity
of the Israeli security forces. I am particularly
appalled by the recent brutal sequence of events
in Huwwara. All perpetrators must be held
accountable. I urge Israel, as the occupying Power,
to abide by its obligations under international law
to protect the Palestinian population against all
acts or threats of violence.
“It is critical to de-escalate the situation and
move towards re-establishing a political horizon.
The statements made by European Member
States, the presidential statement and the joint
communiqué from Aqaba are welcome calls for
calm. If implemented, the steps outlined in Aqaba
could be an important start to reversing negative
trends on the ground.
“I am also particularly concerned about steps,
incitement and provocations that could escalate
tensions in and around the holy sites in Jerusalem.
I call upon all to refrain from such actions and to
uphold the status quo, in line with the special and
historic role of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
as custodian of the holy sites in Jerusalem.
“In Gaza, a fragile calm continues, but the
risk of escalation persists. Despite improvements
in access and movement, much more remains to be
done to alleviate the dire humanitarian situation
and improve the economy, with the ultimate goal

23-083285/21

S/PV.9290

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.

22/03/2023

of lifting the debilitating closures, in line with
resolution 1860 (2009).

The President: I thank Mr. Wennesland for his
important briefing.

“The absence of intra-Palestinian unity
continues to undermine Palestinian national
aspirations. I call upon all factions to take concrete
steps towards reuniting Gaza and the occupied
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, under a
single, democratic Government. Gaza is and must
remain an integral part of a future Palestinian State
as part of a two-State solution.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

“I am concerned by the critical condition of
the Palestinian economy, which is affecting the
Palestinian Authority’s ability to deliver services
and pay public sector salaries. The implications of
Israel’s announced increase in monthly deductions
from Palestinian clearance revenues add to an
already very difficult situation. I urge the parties
to work together to find urgent and sustainable
solutions. I call on the international community
to redouble efforts to strengthen the Palestinian
Authority’s fiscal and institutional health.
“I call on all Member States to support
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East with
sustainable funding sources to protect the delivery
of vital services to millions of Palestine refugees.
That is crucial for stability throughout the region.
“I remain committed to supporting Palestinians
and Israelis in resolving the conflict and ending
the occupation in line with international law, the
relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions and bilateral agreements in pursuit
of the vision of two States — Israel and an
independent, democratic, contiguous, viable and
sovereign Palestine — living side by side in peace
and security within secure and recognized borders
on the basis of the pre-1967 lines, with Jerusalem
as the capital of both States.
“Lastly, there is no substitute for a legitimate
political process that will resolve the core issues
driving the conflict. Efforts to manage the conflict
are not a substitute for real progress towards
resolving it. I urge Israelis, Palestinians, the
States of the region and the broader international
community to take steps to re-engage on meaningful
negotiations and, ultimately, peace.”
6/21

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Special Coordinator Wennesland for
his briefing.
The United States remains deeply concerned about
the sustained violence in Israel and the West Bank.
Last year was the deadliest since the second intifada,
and 2023 is on track to surpass that staggering level of
violence. The United States is troubled by the escalation
of violent attacks on Israelis by Palestinians and violent
attacks on Palestinians by Israeli settlers in the West
Bank. We reject all such acts of violence as well as
incitements to violence. Let me also underscore that
accountability and justice should be pursued with equal
vigour and resources in all cases of extremist violence.
We continue to urge the parties to de-escalate
and to refrain from unilateral actions and unhelpful
rhetoric that serve only to inflame tensions, especially
as we approach the confluence of religious holidays in
April. That is why the United States joined the meeting
in Aqaba on 26 February, as well as the follow-on
meetings in Sharm El-Sheikh on 19 March with Israel,
the Palestinians, Jordan and Egypt. We applaud the
commitments of the parties and the steps taken to
restore calm. Those meetings are an affirmation that
both sides can seek calm and find a way forward. The
United States will continue supporting those efforts and
all efforts to restore calm and promote peace. We call
on the members of the Security Council and on parties
in the region to join us. As the holy month of Ramadan
and the Passover and Easter holidays approach — a
time of heightened religious sensitivity — we urge all
the parties to maintain peace. This should be a time
of fellowship and observance of faith, not a moment to
fuel conflict.
The United States continues to believe that a twoState solution remains the best way to ensure that
Israelis and Palestinians can live side by side in peace
and security. And even though the prospects for a twoState solution feel remote at the moment, we must
preserve our horizon of hope. The road ahead will not
be easy. But if the parties commit to peace and dialogue,
a brighter future is possible — one of equal measures of
freedom, security and prosperity for all.
23-08328

22/03/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.

S/PV.9290

Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I thank Special
Coordinator Wennesland for his account of the events.
I would like to start on a positive note and commend
the parties for the understanding reached at the meeting
in Sharm El-Sheikh last Sunday. We are encouraged
by the level of participation, which has not been seen
in nearly a decade. We are hopeful that the meetings
in this kind of format will continue and will help to
ensure de-escalation and lower the tensions on the
ground, especially now that the region is approaching
the period of religious festivals. We further commend
the United States and Jordan for their role in facilitating
the meeting, as well as that of Egypt in organizing and
hosting. We hope that the engagement of the parties
under the Aqaba format will help them to refrain from
taking action that would only worsen the situation.

expand them will not contribute to the desperately
needed revival of the prospects for a political horizon.
That is what the parties need — a political horizon for
peace and an avenue for dialogue. And as the parties
themselves agreed on Sunday, we welcome their
intention to cooperate with a view to consolidating a
basis for direct negotiations between the Israelis and
Palestinians aimed at achieving a comprehensive, just
and lasting peace. We therefore call on the parties to
refrain from taking unilateral steps and to focus on
confidence-building measures. While the whole region
is preparing for celebrations, we reiterate the vital
importance of peaceful coexistence between the three
Abrahamic religions. The status quo of the holy sites
must be upheld as agreed, and with respect for Jordan’s
custodianship and special role.

Besides the commitment of the Israelis and
Palestinians to engaging in lowering tensions, there is
also another reality. The situation in the West Bank,
East Jerusalem and Gaza remains an issue of great
concern. The events in Jenin and Nablus have affected
many civilians. The sad reality is that in the course of
the past three months we have witnessed an increase
not seen in years in the death toll of civilian victims
from both of the parties. We are deeply disturbed by
the fact that children have been also innocent victims
of the increasing violence and call for such trends to be
stopped immediately.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm Albania’s
full support for a negotiated two-State solution in which
a secure and safe Israel lives side by side in peace and
security with a democratic Palestinian State, and with
Jerusalem as their future shared capital. We believe that
only a solution based on two States for two peoples will
ensure that both sides, the Israelis and the Palestinians,
are able to live as neighbours in safety and security.

The protection of civilians is an obligation under
international humanitarian law, and it must be fully
observed by all and in all circumstances. Albania
strongly condemns the terrorist attacks on Israel and all
acts of terror against civilians, which are unacceptable
and should not be tolerated. Since the beginning of
2023 we have witnessed an alarming increase in
the number of terrorist attacks on synagogues in
Jerusalem and Tel Aviv, including on civilians. Those
acts must be condemned and the perpetrators brought
to justice. Nothing can justify terror or terrorist acts,
and we will support Israel’s right to self-defence using
proportionate measures.
Albania is also deeply concerned about the violent
attacks committed by settlers in the West Bank.
Demolitions and acts of violence against private
properties must be stopped and those responsible must
be held accountable. People cannot and must not be
allowed to take the law into their own hands. We reiterate
our principled position that settlements are illegal
under international law, and that any decision to further

Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Tor Wennesland, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for
his briefing on the implementation of resolution 2334
(2016), on Israeli settlement activity in the occupied
Palestinian territory. We listened with concern to
Mr. Wennesland’s assessments regarding the continued
stagnation of the Middle East peace process as Israel
intensifies its unilateral steps to create irreversible facts
on the ground, expanding illegal settlement building
while continuing to forcibly evict Palestinians, destroy
their homes and expropriate their property, alongside
the decisions by the Israeli leadership to legalize
outposts in the occupied territory.
Since the beginning of the year, we have witnessed
violent raids by the Israel Defense Forces in Jenin,
Jericho, Nablus and Huwwara, resulting in the killing
of more than 150 Palestinians, including 18 minors.
Against that backdrop, there has been a sharp increase
in attacks by settlers and cases of the disproportionate
use of force, which is resulting in deaths and injuries
among civilians on both sides. Mass arbitrary detentions
are being reported on a daily basis. The situation in the
Old City around Jerusalem’s holy sites continues to be

23-083287/21

S/PV.9290

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.

extremely tense, particularly now for Muslims in the
context of the holy month of Ramadan.
At the same time, we also reaffirm Israel’s right to
ensure its security. In the context, we call on the parties
to refrain from using provocative and hateful rhetoric,
which can only make the situation more difficult. In
particular, we consider the recent remarks made in
Paris by Israel’s Minister of Finance, Bezalel Smotrich,
to be extremely dangerous and irresponsible, as well as
insulting to the Palestinian people.
We cannot help but be concerned also by the
Knesset’s adoption of laws that deprive Israeli Arabs of
citizenship, leading to their subsequent deportation to
the occupied Palestinian territories for alleged terrorist
activities, and that deny medicine and medical care to
Palestinian prisoners.
The ongoing violence in the occupied Palestinian
territories and the erosion of the international legal
basis for settlements as a result of Israeli unilateral
actions are a reminder of the danger of a continued
vacuum in the negotiation process. We must
acknowledge that the situation will remain volatile
until the parties reach mutually acceptable agreements
on all final status issues, based on the universally
recognized international legal basis of the Middle
East peace process and the two-State formula, which
we have consistently supported. In that context, we
would like to reaffirm our position of principle that the
establishment of Israeli settlements in the Palestinian
territory occupied since 1967 constitutes a violation of
international law and is one of the main obstacles to the
resumption of direct Palestinian-Israeli negotiations,
to which there is simply no alternative. We also attach
key importance to overcoming the division among the
Palestinians, which is among the key reasons that the
peace process continues to stall.
Recently, it has become clear that among the factors
preventing a just peace for the Palestinians are the
actions of the United States, which seeks to monopolize
the peace process and reformat it as it sees fit in order
to impose an economic peace on the Palestinians rather
than meet their legitimate aspirations to establish their
own independent State. That confirms once again the
harm of the back-room schemes that Washington is
advancing, in circumvention of the Security Council and
without regard for internationally recognized solutions,
and then imposing them on the parties to the conflict.
8/21

22/03/2023

In conclusion, I would like to stress once again
the need for the continued comprehensive support for
Palestinians in the West Bank, the Gaza Strip and
neighbouring countries that is provided by international
humanitarian agencies, led by the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, whose activities have not just humanitarian, but
also political dimensions with an important stabilizing
effect on the countries in the Middle East.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing.
We commend Israeli and Palestinian officials for
their engagement in Aqaba, Jordan, on 26 February
and in Sharm El-Sheikh, Egypt, on 19 March, and we
thank Jordan and Egypt for hosting those events. The
commitments to desist from provocative unilateral
actions and to pursue further actions in support of
de-escalation are critical ahead of the convergence of
Easter, Passover and Ramadan in the coming weeks. It is
also critical that both parties abide by the commitments
made and take forward the promised confidence-building
measures, including the commitment to support the
historic status quo governing Jerusalem’s holy sites and
all those who worship there. Let me make four points.
First, the Palestinian Authority must resume
security cooperation with Israel, fight against terror
and incitement, and maintain security in Area A. We
also condemn indiscriminate rocket fire from Gaza.
While Israel has a legitimate right to self-defence,
unilateral incursions that result in the deaths of
innocent Palestinians only escalate tensions. Israeli
security forces must operate in accordance with
international law, show restraint in the use of live fire
and conduct thorough investigations into the deaths of
Palestinian civilians.
Secondly, Israel must also cease the approval of
settlements and the legalization of outposts, as well as
the evictions of Palestinians in the occupied territory,
particularly in East Jerusalem. The United Kingdom
opposes the repeal of the disengagement law by the
Knesset, which is a unilateral measure that further
undermines prospects for a two-State solution and
damages any renewed efforts at de-escalation.
Thirdly, settler violence has gone unchecked for
too long. The United Kingdom condemns all forms
of violence by settlers, including the fatal attacks
perpetrated against innocent Palestinians in Huwwara.
We urge the Israeli security forces to provide appropriate
23-08328

22/03/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.

protection to the Palestinian civilian population, as they
are obliged to under international law, to investigate
and bring to justice perpetrators of settler violence, and
to end the culture of permissiveness and impunity.
Fourthly and finally, the inflammatory rhetoric and
the incitement to violence on the part of certain Israeli
political leaders only serves to drive settler violence.
The United Kingdom condemned the Israeli Finance
Minister’s comments calling for the Palestinian village
of Huwwara to be wiped out and his recent comments
that deny the existence of the Palestinian people,
their right to self-determination, and their history and
culture. The United Kingdom extends its full support
for Jordan and its sovereign territory. All Israelis and
Palestinians deserve peace and security, particularly
during the holy festivals of Easter, Passover and
Ramadan. That will require political will, good faith,
strong cooperation and meaningful actions by both
Israelis and Palestinians.
Mr. Parga Cintra (Brazil): I thank Mr. Wennesland
for his briefing and would like to express Brazil`s
gratitude for his efforts aimed at restoring calm and
promoting dialogue among all parties, always having
peace as the ultimate goal.
Brazil remains deeply concerned about the
situation in Israel and Palestine. We are especially
worried about the upcoming religious holidays, as
the holy month of Ramadan will coincide with Easter
and Passover. In an already tense scenario, without a
genuine commitment from all parties to create the
conditions for the celebrations to take place in peace
and tranquillity, we truly risk seeing an escalation
of violence. Peaceful celebrations are in everyone’s
interest. All parties must exercise maximum restraint
and avoid provocations, including extremist rhetoric.
We welcome the emphasis in the joint communiqué of
the 19 March meeting held in Sharm El-Sheikh, Egypt,
on the necessity of the active prevention by both parties
of any actions that would disrupt the sanctity of the holy
sites. We also stress the importance of the commitment
made to maintain unchanged the historic status quo at
the holy sites in Jerusalem, and of the recognition of the
relevance of the Hashemite custodianship.
Brazil thanks Egypt, Jordan and the United States
for the diplomatic efforts to bring together Israeli and
Palestinian authorities to reflect on ways and means to
de-escalate tensions and pave a way forward towards
a peaceful settlement. The meeting held in Sharm

S/PV.9290

El-Sheikh following the Aqaba, Jordan, meeting is
a welcome development against a grim backdrop.
As recognized by the parties, the need to pursue
confidence-building measures in order to enhance
mutual trust, create a political horizon and address
outstanding issues through direct dialogue cannot be
overemphasized. We welcome the fact that a followup mechanism has been established. We will pay
close attention to those commitments, and this time
around we expect them to be indeed implemented. An
assessment of their impact involves the de-escalation
of violence, which has affected civilians, including
children. All violations of international humanitarian
law must immediately stop. The principle of making
a distinction between civilians and combatants must
be upheld. Terrorism is deplorable in all its forms
and manifestations.
Israel must immediately cease all settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, in compliance with resolution
2334 (2016). As one of the main obstacles to peace,
the continued expansion of settlements, in flagrant
violation of international law, threatens the viability
of a future Palestinian State and is a constant source
of violence and hatred. We also call on Israel to stop
the continued demolitions and seizures of Palestinian
structures, as well as the displacement of Palestinian
families. All forms of settler-related violence must also
immediately cease.
Brazil considers the agreement on the establishment
of a mechanism to take the necessary steps towards
improving the economic conditions of the Palestinian
people and to significantly enhance the fiscal situation
of the Palestinian National Authority to be another
important element of the of the Sharm El-Sheikh
joint communiqué. Intra-Palestinian reconciliation,
together with the improvement of living conditions in
the West Bank and Gaza, which will only be possible
with sustainable economic growth, are important steps
towards peace.
We once again emphasize the role played by
poverty, food insecurity and the lack of hope in
providing the perfect breeding ground for extremist
forces. Peace depends — and we emphasize this — on
the commitment to the promotion of human rights for
all. The situation in Gaza is particularly concerning,
as the blockade continues to aggravate humanitarian
conditions and hinder development efforts. Brazil
also remains worried about the chronic financial

23-083289/21

S/PV.9290

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.

challenges faced by the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), which has been providing much-needed
humanitarian assistance to Palestinian refugees. We
must not undermine the role that has been played by
UNRWA throughout the years to maintain stability on
the ground.
Before concluding, I would like to reaffirm Brazil`s
long-standing commitment to the two-State solution,
with Palestine and Israel living side by side in peace and
security, within mutually agreed and internationally
recognized borders. We remain committed to the idea
of peace and to the achievement without delay of a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East on the basis of international law and relevant
United Nations resolutions. In that regard, we are ready
to support all initiatives that aim to open up a horizon
for sustainable peace.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland remains extremely concerned about the
high level of violence and the deteriorating security
situation in the Middle East. The number of civilian
casualties on both sides continues to rise. One month
ago, the Security Council adopted presidential statement
S/PRST/2023/1, calling on the parties to create the
necessary conditions for bringing about peace. That
call was reiterated on 19 March in Sharm El-Sheikh,
Egypt. Switzerland welcomes the efforts to de-escalate
the situation and urgently calls on the leaders of all
parties to resolutely commit to achieving that.
The statements of the Israeli Finance Minister
denying the existence of the Palestinian people are
unacceptable. We call on Israel to abide by previous
agreements towards the establishment of a two-State
solution, as well as the 1994 peace treaty with Jordan,
as it has just committed to do. Hateful provocations and
speech by all parties must stop immediately.
The protection of the civilian population is
imperative. Switzerland is concerned about the
operations of the Israeli security forces in the West
Bank, which frequently result in a large number of
Palestinian casualties. We condemn the acts of violence
committed against Palestinian civilians by settlers,
including in Huwwara. We also condemn the acts of
violence committed by Palestinians against Israeli
civilians, including the 9 March incident in Tel Aviv.
Violence must be unequivocally condemned by Israeli
and Palestinian leaders.
10/21

22/03/2023

Moreover, 16 children have been killed since
the beginning of the year. Children should never be
targeted for violence or put at risk. We recall that the
allegations of the disproportionate use of force and
acts of violence by all parties must be investigated and
not go unpunished. We urge the parties to uphold their
obligations under international humanitarian law and
international human rights law.
Switzerland notes with concern the expansion of
the Government’s authority over settlement-related
activities and civil affairs in the occupied territory.
Under international humanitarian law, Israel must
refrain from taking measures that would introduce
permanent changes, in particular demographic and
administrative changes in the occupied territory.
Switzerland condemns the repeal of several provisions
of the disengagement law, which run contrary to
the commitments made in Sharm El-Sheikh. The
settlements are illegal and create a major obstacle
to peace based on a two-State solution, as resolution
2334 (2016) also states. In that regard, Switzerland is
concerned about the developments in Khan Al-Ahmar,
Masafer Yatta and East Jerusalem, which are likely to
further fuel current tensions. We call for the restoration
of Palestinian political unity. Indeed, the continued
weakening of the Palestinian Authority and the loss
of legitimacy of its institutions are obstacles to peace.
In that context, we observe with concern the increased
activity of armed groups.
With the approach of the religious holidays,
Switzerland calls for restraint so that everybody can
celebrate in peace. We urge the relevant authorities
to minimize the risk of tensions around the holy sites
and to ensure respect for the status quo on the Haram
Al-Sharif/Temple Mount, including by preventing
any action that would violate their sanctity. We also
take note of Israel’s announcement to ease movement
restrictions in preparation for Ramadan. We call
for their effective and sustainable implementation.
Switzerland encourages the parties to pursue the path
of dialogue and the resumption of meaningful peace
talks by addressing the root causes of the conflict. We
remain at their disposal.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): We are grateful to Special
Coordinator Tor Wennesland for his briefing to the
Security Council on the overall situation in the Middle
East, with emphasis on Israeli settlements in the
Palestinian territories occupied since 1967, including
East Jerusalem. We also thank the Special Coordinator
23-08328

22/03/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.

S/PV.9290

for highlighting the detailed measures being undertaken
to restore calm in the region.

militias has been raging for almost a year, and in Gaza
and East Jerusalem.

Ghana has followed with keen interest the recent
positive developments in the Middle East, in particular
the first in-person high-level talks between senior
Israeli and Palestinian officials for some years, which
were held in Aqaba, Jordan, on 26 February and
subsequently in Sharm El-Sheikh, Egypt, last Sunday,
aimed at encouraging dialogue, the de-escalation of
violence and the defusing of tensions in the region. We
welcome the commitment of the Israeli Government and
the Palestinian Authority to working closely together
without delay to prevent further violence and restore
security cooperation in the occupied West Bank, which
the Palestinian Authority had suspended last month
in the aftermath of the deadliest attacks in recent
history by the Israeli army. We also note the positive
developments in the relations between Saudi Arabia
and Iran and encourage a rapprochement between those
two countries in order to reduce regional tensions and
promote regional stability. We are grateful for the roles
that the Governments of Jordan, Egypt and the United
States, as well as the Government of China, have played
recently in the region.

As we approach the holy month of Ramadan,
which this year coincides with Passover, we appeal to
both the Israeli and Palestinian parties to respect the
commitments that they made in Aqaba and Sharm
El-Sheikh to establish a mechanism that will prevent
violence, incitement and any disruptive action at
Jerusalem’s holy sites. We urge Israel to respect its
commitment to refraining from establishing new West
Bank settlements for four months, as well as to halting
the authorization of outposts for a period of six months.
We call on both parties to show maximum restraint and
refrain from further unilateral actions by establishing
a joint civilian committee that works to promote
confidence-building economic measures.

Notwithstanding the positive developments, there
are situations of concern. The first is the repeal by
the Israeli Parliament of certain clauses in the 2005
disengagement law, which ordered the evacuation of
Jewish settlements, thereby allowing for Jewish residents
to return to four settlements in the occupied West Bank.
The second concerns statements made by notable and
high-ranking Israeli politicians that undermine and
threaten the prospect of the widely accepted two-State
solution. The third is related to the escalation of settlerrelated activities and the fact that violence persists.
Fourthly, the destruction of infrastructure and property
in both the occupied Palestinian territories and in
East Jerusalem continue unabated. Those drivers of
instability have worsened the security situation and
the already dire humanitarian situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories and beyond.
We deplore the high level of violence perpetrated
against civilians and children on both sides. Ghana is
particularly concerned about the near daily raids in the
Palestinian refugee camps, the human rights abuses,
the violations and the detentions without charge or
trial in Palestinian cities and villages, especially in the
north-western part of the West Bank, where fighting
between the Israel Defense Forces and Palestinian

We wish to reaffirm our demand that all parties
to the conflict fully comply with international
humanitarian law, including the protection of the
civilian population, the Charter of the United Nations
and the many relevant United Nations resolutions,
including resolution 2334 (2016).
In conclusion, we reiterate our position that the
paths for lasting peace and stability in the Middle
East can be achieved only through the internationally
negotiated two-State solution, with Israel and Palestine
living side by side on the basis of the 1967 borders.
However, the realization of the goals of the Middle
East peace process require the Security Council and
the wider international community to sustain the
engagement of the parties, whose good-faith efforts are
required to resolve this decades-long conflict.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Tor Wennesland for his briefing. I will
make four points.
First, France is extremely concerned about the
ongoing deterioration of the situation on the ground
and the continuing violence, which is reaching an
unprecedented level. France strongly condemns all
violence against civilians. It has cost many Palestinian
civilians their lives since the beginning of January.
France firmly condemns the indiscriminate violence
committed by Israeli settlers against Palestinian
civilians. We strongly condemn the terrorist attacks
that claimed the lives of at least 14 Israelis this year.
We reaffirm our commitment to the security of Israel
and its citizens. France expressed its deep concern
following the recent Israeli army operations in the West

23-0832811/21

S/PV.9290

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.

Bank. We call on Israel to protect Palestinian civilians
in accordance with its international obligations.
Secondly, the cycle of violence must end. France
calls on all actors to exercise the utmost restraint at
the start of this period of religious holidays. France
welcomes and supports the efforts of the United States,
Egypt and Jordan, which enabled the parties to meet for
the first time in many years in Aqaba and Sharm ElSheikh. We note the commitments made by the parties
to de-escalation. It is crucial that those commitments be
followed up on the ground not only in terms of halting
the settlements, demolition and evictions, but also in
terms of tax transfers and the Palestinian Authority’s
security rights. We recall the importance of respecting
the historical status quo of Jerusalem’s holy sites and
Jordan’s particular role in that regard.
France recalls its commitment to the treaties
concluded by Israel with its neighbours, in particular
the Treaty of Peace between the State of Israel and
the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, signed in Wadi
Araba, as well as to the vision of two States, Israel
and Palestine, living within secure and recognized
borders on the basis of the 1967 lines, with both having
Jerusalem as their capital.
Thirdly, a lasting de-escalation can take place only
if the settlement policy stops. That policy is contrary
to international law, as recalled in resolution 2334
(2016). In that regard, we are particularly concerned
about the amendment of the Israeli 2005 disengagement
law, which could pave the way for the legalization of
unauthorized settlements in the northern West Bank.
The demolition of Palestinian structures continues
in Jerusalem and the West Bank, as do evictions of
Palestinian families. France calls on the Israeli authorities
to review their decision to expel Palestinians from
Sheikh Jarrah, Silwan and the Old City of Jerusalem.
In the Palestinian territories, as elsewhere, France will
never recognize the illegal annexation of territories or
the legalization of unauthorized settlements.
Fourthly, such unilateral measures, which are
in violation of international law, make the prospect
of a two-State solution increasingly remote. They
serve the momentum for annexation, thereby further
destabilizing the situation on the ground.
The Security Council has the duty to uphold the
two-State solution. It has a responsibility towards
the parties. Previous agreements must be respected,
12/21

22/03/2023

particularly with regard to the provisions relating to
Area C. A political horizon must be restored. That is
the only way to implement the two-State solution. Both
Israelis and Palestinians deserve to live in peace and
security. France remains fully committed to that goal.
Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank Mr. Tor Wennesland for his briefing this
morning. We reiterate our full support for his efforts
to reduce tensions and bring the parties together in an
increasingly complex environment, which continues to
concern us.
In presidential statement S/PRST/2023/1, which we
adopted a month ago, the Security Council condemned
all acts of violence against civilians, including acts
of terrorism, and called on the parties to refrain from
provocative actions and incitement and from making
inflammatory statements. Since then, acts of violence
against civilians regrettably again took place in Nablus,
Huwwara, Jenin and other places. It is imperative that
such acts be investigated, and that all perpetrators
be brought to justice and be held accountable. We
recall that there is no justification whatsoever for
non-compliance with the obligations under international
humanitarian law.
We have also witnessed further provocative acts
and gross statements of incitement to violence. We
know that the leaders’ conduct and statements influence
the actions of other individuals. We therefore call on
them to show responsibility, restraint and a genuine
commitment to peace.
We make a special call for caution during
the sensitive period of the religious holidays. We
particularly call for respect for the status quo of the holy
sites of Jerusalem and Jordan’s role as their custodian.
Acts of provocation at those sites should be prevented
at all costs.
We welcome the high-level meetings that took
place at the end of February in Aqaba, Jordan, and
this past Sunday in Sharm El-Sheikh, Egypt, with
the participation of Israel, the Palestinian Authority,
Jordan, Egypt and the United States. It is particularly
encouraging that, according to the joint communiqué
issued after the most recent meeting, the parties agreed
to establish a mechanism to curb and counter violence,
incitement and inflammatory statements and actions,
which will present a report at an upcoming meeting in
April. We thank those who facilitated the meetings,
and we look forward to the implementation of the
23-08328

22/03/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.

agreements reached so as to defuse tensions and prevent
violence. We call on the parties to show consistency
between their stated intentions and actions.
Finally, we hope that those meetings can thereby
serve as a basis for the beginning of a path leading to
a political, peaceful, lasting and just solution for the
parties, in accordance with international law, with the
existence of two States, Palestine and Israel, on the
basis of the 1967 borders.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): I thank the Special Coordinator, Mr. Tor
Wennesland, for his briefing and his continuous efforts.
I would like to begin by noting Sunday’s meeting
in Sharm El-Sheikh following the Aqaba summit. We
hope that the constructive engagement between the two
parties at this critical time will contribute to reducing
the alarming levels of escalation across the occupied
Palestinian territory. While last year was the most
violent year in two decades, the beginning of this year
unfortunately suggests that the worst is yet to come.
To truly de-escalate the situation on the ground,
the parties must commit to the Sharm El-Sheikh joint
communiqué and fully implement its parameters,
especially putting an end to unilateral measures, before
the situation gets out of control. We commend the
tireless efforts of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan,
the Arab Republic of Egypt and the United States of
America to build trust between the parties and help
reduce tension. Such steps are important as we enter
the holy month of Ramadan, which coincides with the
period of important Jewish and Christian religious
observances. Even in the absence of the current unrest,
this critical period of the year has in the past often been
marked by high tensions that can and must be avoided.
That also makes it even more important to maintain the
ceasefire in the Gaza Strip following recent clashes.
This cycle of violence is not new; rather, it is the
outcome of a series of illegal practices and attempts
to manage the conflict rather than work towards its
resolution. It is the responsibility of the international
community to refuse the normalization of this ongoing
escalation. We must also send an explicit message
underscoring the importance of fully implementing
relevant Council resolutions in order to create an
environment conducive to relaunching a serious and
credible peace process.

S/PV.9290

With regard to our discussion today, we emphasize
the need for Israel to reverse the recent passing of a
bill that allows settlers to return to four settlements in
the northern area of the occupied West Bank. We also
underscore the importance of compliance in relation to
Israel’s recent commitment to not discussing any new
settlement units for four months and to stopping the
authorization of any settlement outposts for six months.
It is imperative for Israel to fully cease all settlement
activities, since they constitute flagrant violation of
international law and Council resolutions.
We further demand that Israel immediately stop
all settler violence and hold perpetrators to account
to deter further attacks, which have escalated and
tripled over the past two years. The situation has grown
increasingly alarming following the heinous attacks
carried out by settlers against the people of Huwwara
village in Nablus, causing significant damage. The
United Arab Emirates, as part of its humanitarian effort
to assist the brotherly Palestinian people, recently
announced the allocation of $3 million in support of
efforts to reconstruct the village.
Israel must fulfil its responsibilities in accordance
with international law and international humanitarian
law. Its repeated raids of Palestinian cities and villages,
such as its recent storming of Jenin and Nablus, must
end. Those raids have resulted in numerous deaths and
injuries, whose numbers have risen sharply since the
beginning of this year.
We also reiterate the need to stop the demolition of
Palestinian property, whose rate this year as compared
to the same period in 2022 has increased by 68 per cent.
That increase has serious implications, foremost of
which is the forced displacement of people, particularly
in East Jerusalem.
We also stress the need to maintain the existing
legal and historical status quo of Jerusalem and its holy
sites as well as respect the Hashemite custodianship
over the Islamic and Christian holy sites in East
Jerusalem. Further, we call on all parties to refrain from
provocative rhetoric and statements that could incite
hatred and violence. The United Arab Emirates rejects
all practices that contradict humanitarian values and
principles. In that regard, we condemn inflammatory
statements, including those by the Israeli Minister
of Finance, who called for the village of Huwwara to
be wiped out and denied the history and existence of
the Palestinian people. We also condemn his use of a

23-0832813/21

S/PV.9290

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.

map of Israel that includes lands from the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan and Palestine.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates stresses
its continued support for the two-State solution, which
establishes an independent Palestinian State based on
the 1967 borders with East Jerusalem as its capital,
living side by side with Israel in peace, security and
mutual recognition. We hope that calm and harmony
will prevail in the upcoming holiday period.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): I thank Special Coordinator
Tor Wennesland for his briefing.
The perpetual cycle of violence and instability in
Palestine has continued unabated and even intensified
since the beginning of this year. Japan is seriously
concerned by the recent violent attack that occurred
in the Jenin refugee camp on 7 March, which resulted
in several deaths and injuries. This follows a series of
attacks, including the one in Jenin this January and in
Nablus recently.
Moreover, Israel’s continued settlement activities
in the West Bank remain deeply disturbing. The
Israeli Government must stop its settlement activities,
demolitions and evictions, as these constitute violations
of international law and go against relevant Security
Council resolutions.
At the same time, we condemn terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations, including the killing of
two Israelis in Huwwara on 26 February, as well as
shootings of Israelis in several cities. We also condemn
the rampage against Palestinians in Huwwara carried
out by some Israeli settlers. This pattern of violence
must not continue.
Japan calls for an immediate cessation of violence
and for all parties to exercise maximum restraint and
avoid any unilateral actions that could escalate the
situation further, in accordance with presidential
statement S/PRST/2023/1 and the Aqaba joint
communiqué, both adopted in February. In this context,
Japan is seriously concerned and disturbed by the Israeli
Finance Minister’s provocative remark on Sunday, and
resolutely rejects it.
The international community has been making
intensified efforts to ease tensions. Japan welcomes the
holding of last weekend’s five-party meeting in Sharm
El-Sheikh and appreciates the continuing efforts made
by the parties concerned to stabilize the situation.
For Japan’s part, Prime Minister Kishida expressed
14/21

22/03/2023

concern over unilateral measures taken by both sides
and conveyed Japan’s readiness to contribute to the
easing of tensions toward the realization of a twoState solution in his telephone conversation with Israeli
President Herzog on 14 March.
Japan has consistently supported the peaceful
coexistence of Israelis and Palestinians living side by
side in peace and security. Japan calls on all parties
to engage in meaningful constructive dialogue. Direct
negotiations remain the only viable path towards peace
and stability in the region.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I begin by thanking Special
Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing.
A little over a month ago, the Security Council
adopted presidential statement S/PRST/2023/1, the
first such product since 2016, which underlined, among
its key points, opposition to unilateral measures that
impede peace, condemned all acts of violence against
civilians and underlined the elements set forth in
resolution 2334 (2016). Regrettably, in recent weeks,
we continue to witness alarming patterns of violence,
terrorism and loss of life, disregarding the provisions of
both the resolution and the presidential statement and
threatening further escalations.
Malta is deeply concerned about the persistent
negative trajectory of developments and we are
particularly appalled by the number of child victims on
both sides of the violence. In that context we deplore
the casualties resulting from the Israeli operations in
the West Bank, which left several Palestinians dead,
including children. We urge the Israeli authorities to
exercise restraint in the use of live ammunition and
search-and-arrest operations. We once again underscore
the fact that targeting unarmed non-combatants and
children is unacceptable.
We also remain disturbed by the increasing
incidence of acts of terrorism, including most recently
the terrorist attack that took place in Tel Aviv on 9 March
and for which Hamas has claimed responsibility.
Malta unequivocally condemns any act of terror or
incentivizing of terrorism, for which there can be no
justification, and recalls the obligation of the Palestinian
Authority to renounce and confront terrorism. We
strongly condemn but also express concern about the
acts of terrorism carried out by young Palestinian
teenagers. Along the same lines, Malta condemns the
horrific settler violence within the occupied Palestinian
territory. We are profoundly concerned about the
23-08328

22/03/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.

S/PV.9290

increase in such behaviour. Escalations such as the
retaliatory arson attacks that terrorized the town of
Huwwara on 26 February should not be repeated and
those involved must held accountable.

opportunity to extend my best wishes to all my Muslim
friends. I also sincerely hope that Muslims in the
occupied Palestinian territory can celebrate Ramadan
in peace and tranquillity.

Malta reiterates that Israel’s continued construction
and expansion of settlements, demolition of homes
and displacement of Palestinians within the occupied
territory are concerning. Such acts constitute unilateral
actions that violate international law and Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016),
and obstruct the viability of an independent, contiguous
Palestinian State. We also underscore that any
indiscriminate firing of rockets into Israel by armed
groups in Gaza is a violation of international law and
completely unacceptable.

I thank Special Coordinator Wennesland for his
briefing. I would like to make three points.

In the face of those troubling developments, Malta
remains convinced that dialogue is the key foundation
for de-escalation. We commend the parties involved
in the communiqué of the Al-Quds Conference on
Resilience and Development held in Aqaba, as well
as the Sharm El-Sheikh communiqué, and call on the
parties to abide by the positive agreements made. That
is of paramount importance as the period of religious
festivities approaches. And especially during that
period, we underscore the urgent need for parties to
refrain from unilateral actions or incitements through
attempts to alter the status quo of the holy sites in
Jerusalem. The special role of Jordan as custodian
must be respected as crucial to upholding the peaceful
coexistence of all three monotheistic religions in
the region.
Malta would like to recall the most recent joint
statement on behalf of the 27 European Union member
States, issued on 8 March, stating that we need to
consider new perspectives for peace. In that regard,
we welcome the constructive commitments made with
our partners and the Arab League to revive the Arab
Peace Initiative.
Malta’s position on the Palestinian question remains
clear. A just and comprehensive resolution to the Middle
East conflict must be based on a two-State solution,
along the pre-1967 borders, addressing the legitimate
aspirations of both sides, with Jerusalem as the future
capital of the two States, living side by side in peace
and security, in line with the relevant Security Council
resolutions and internationally agreed parameters.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Ramadan is around the corner. I would like to take this

First, we should oppose violence and incitements
to violence and end the conflict and confrontation.
The security situation in the West Bank has been
deteriorating for some time and violent conflicts
have been escalating. China is concerned about those
developments. We condemn all violence against
civilians and support the Special Coordinator in
maintaining close communication with Palestinians
and Israelis and in his efforts to facilitate peace talks
and ease tensions. We call on the parties concerned to
avoid provocations and incitement in order to prevent a
further escalation of tensions. As the occupying Power,
Israel should fulfil its obligations under international
law to protect the people in the occupied territory,
prevent its security forces from using excessive force,
curb settler violence, thoroughly investigate related
incidents and hold the perpetrators accountable. At the
same time, Israel’s legitimate security concerns should
also be taken seriously.
Palestine and Israel are permanent neighbours.
The two sides can and must break the cycle of violence
and achieve common security through dialogue and
cooperation and achieve common security. Recently,
thanks to the efforts of Jordan, Egypt and other countries
of the region, Palestine and Israel have reached some
consensus, while reaffirming their commitment to
easing the situation on the ground, preventing the
escalation of violence and realizing a just and lasting
peace. We hope the consensus will be translated into
responsible and constructive policies and actions that
improve the situation on the ground.
Secondly, we should abide by international law
and cease unilateral measures that aggravate tensions.
China is deeply concerned about Israel’s decision in
February to legalize nine settlements in the West Bank,
after which it approved the construction of more than
7,000 new settlement housing units and yesterday
amended legislation to allow Israeli settlers to return to
four settlements. We urge Israel to fulfil its obligations
under the relevant Security Council resolutions and
stop its settlement expansions, forced demolitions
of Palestinian homes, threats of evictions against the

23-0832815/21

S/PV.9290

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.

22/03/2023

Palestinian people and unilateral changes to the status
quo in the occupied territory. China calls on the parties
to work earnestly to safeguard the historical status quo
of religious sites in Jerusalem and respect Jordan’s
custodianship of the sites. During religious festivals
in particular, they should remain calm and exercise
restraint to prevent violence, threats and provocations
against Muslim believers and further bloodshed.

The 26 February settler attacks against Huwwara,
which led a Palestinian death and the destruction of
Palestinian property, are unacceptable. Similarly,
the 9 March terrorist attack in Tel Aviv, which led to
injuries and claimed the life of a young Israeli, and the
clashes in Jenin on 16 March, where four Palestinians,
including a teenager, were killed by Israeli fire, are
real tragedies.

Thirdly,
we
should
honour
international
commitments and advance a two-State solution. The
situation on the ground remains volatile and clashes
between Palestinians and Israelis continue. The
fundamental reason for the entire situation lies in
the stalled Middle East peace process and the delays
in implementing a two-State solution. Last month
the Council issued its first presidential statement
(S/PRST/2023/1) on the Palestinian-Israeli question in
nearly nine years, while reaffirming its firm support
for the vision of a two-State solution. The international
community should move with a sense of urgency
and take practical steps to promote such a solution,
including by convening a larger, more authoritative and
influential international peace conference and pushing
for a swift resumption of peace talks between Palestine
and Israel. Countries with influence on the parties
should assume their responsibility to play a constructive
role. For its part, the Council should also be poised to
take meaningful action to discharge its duties under the
Charter of the United Nations.

My country deplores all of this violence, which
has persisted for too long. No cause can or should
legitimize recourse to terror. We reiterate our position
on the right of Israel to security, but insist that it be
exercised pursuant to international humanitarian law.

In conclusion, I want to reiterate China’s firm
support for the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State with full sovereignty, on the basis
of the 1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its
capital. We are ready to work with the international
community to make unremitting efforts to achieve a
swift, comprehensive, just and lasting settlement of the
Palestinian question.
Ms. Bongo (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland for his briefing
and reiterate my delegation’s support. I welcome the
presence among us of the Permanent Representative of
Israel and the Permanent Observer of Palestine.
My country expresses its deep concern about the
status quo observed on the ground during the period
under review, which does not ease tensions between
Israelis and Palestinians, despite numerous calls,
particularly by the Council, for de-escalation and the
launch of a dialogue by the international community.
16/21

At the same time, the pursuit of the settlement
policy and bellicose rhetoric do not ease, but instead
harden tensions and fuel divisions. We therefore call on
all parties to show restraint and to take all necessary
measures to restore of confidence. The involvement of
the countries of the region and of those with influence
over the parties is critical.
In that regard, my delegation welcomes the
19 March meeting, in Sharm El-Sheikh, of Jordanian,
Israeli, Palestinian and American political and security
officials, under the auspices of the Arab Republic of
Egypt, within the framework of the agreement reached
on 26 February in Aqaba, Jordan, aimed at restoring
calm in the Palestinian territories and in Israel. We
urge the parties to respect the commitments made
and will continue to follow closely the process of
those negotiations.
Gabon reiterates its commitment to the two-State
solution, Palestinian and Israeli, living side by side,
on the basis of the 1967 borders, with Jerusalem as
its capital.
We also draw the Council’s attention to the
particularly worrisome economic situation of the
Palestinian Authority, which has been aggravated by the
freezing of tax funds collected by Israel from Palestinian
Authority workers on behalf of the Authority. Urgent
measures must be taken for its economic recovery.
There can be no prosperity in the region unless it is
shared by the Palestinian Authority. That is also a factor
for peace that must be taken into account.
At the same time, we should all be concerned about
the humanitarian consequences of this conflict. Its
destabilizing impact on the countries of the region calls
for a more resolute mobilization of the international
23-08328

22/03/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.

community, particularly in favour of financial support
for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
In conclusion, the international community
must not allow, on either side, growing despair and
acceptance of violence, in all its forms, as inevitable.
The history, complexity and longevity of this conflict
must not lead to fatalism.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Mozambique.
Mozambique expresses its appreciation to Mr. Tor
Wennesland, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, for his valuable update on the situation
in Palestine and for his efforts to reach a settlement on
this important issue.
We are deeply concerned about escalating violence
carried out by Israel against innocent and unprotected
civilians in the Palestinian occupied territories. On
the other hand, we are witnesses to the establishment
and expansion of settlements and to all unilateral
measures taken by Israel with the aim of altering the
demographic composition, character and status of the
Palestinian territory. We reiterate our position that
those measures are contrary to international law and
to General Assembly and Security Council resolutions.
We believe that Israel’s compliance with the
relevant United Nations resolutions, particularly
those calling for a two-State solution, is crucial as a
condition for the two peoples to live side by side in
peace and security. We believe in negotiated solutions
for the current Israel-Palestine conflict. Both Israelis
and Palestinians are called to refrain from unilateral
initiatives and actions that could further aggravate the
prevailing tensions and violence.
The humanitarian situation in the occupied
territories continues to be worrisome and deteriorating.
Civilians continue to be the main victims of the cycle of
violence unfolding following recent decisions to settle
and seize land, as well as to demolish civilians’ homes.
Mozambique is concerned about the growing
insecurity, death and injuries among Palestinian
civilians. The most vulnerable, mainly young people
and women, must urgently be protected. We believe
that the Council has a responsibility to act collectively
in order to help settle this conflict.

S/PV.9290

In that regard, we welcome the efforts of
international partners to exert positive influence to
encourage respect for the rule of law and democracy in
Palestine by creating the necessary conditions for the
holding of presidential and legislative elections in the
Gaza Strip and the West Bank.
We call for increased, predictable and sustainable
support for the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and for
the World Food Programme.
In conclusion, we encourage the parties to pursue
the path of dialogue, working together in a constructive
manner towards a lasting peace, in full respect of the
right to self-determination of the Palestinian people and
in promotion of coexistence and the two-State solution, in
accordance with resolutions 242 (1967) and 2334 (2016).
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the Permanent Observer of the
Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): Allow me, at the outset,
to commend the brotherly nation of Mozambique for its
able leadership of the Security Council and for holding
this important meeting.
Allow me also to stress that the report of the
Secretary-General presented by Special Coordinator
Wennesland demonstrates once again persistent
breaches of the Charter of the United Nations and
of Council resolutions, notably in relation to the
unlawful acquisition of Palestinian territory by force
through settlements and their associated regime and
its continued denial of the fundamental rights of the
Palestinian people, including their right to life.
We, the Palestinian people, do exist. We, the
Palestinian people have existed on that land for a long
period of time. We, the Palestinian people, will continue
existing on that land. We have thrived and suffered; we
have lived and died; and we have witnessed joy and
heartaches. We have accumulated personal memories
and endured collective tragedies. We were, we are and
we will be the Palestinian people. We have endured
dispossession, displacement, discrimination and the
denial of our most fundamental rights and our very
existence, but we have not and we will not disappear.
It took a lot of bloodshed and suffering for us and
for the Israelis to move from reciprocal rejection to

23-0832817/21

S/PV.9290

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.

mutual recognition. It took decades. It took effort and
commitment. It took sacrifice and courage. We thought
we had charted a new path — and yet, 75 years after
the Nakba, an Israeli Minister is yet again denying our
very existence. The statement by the Israeli Minister
was not about the past — which would have been grave
enough — but about a vision for the future, which is
infinitely more dangerous. He denies our existence in
order to justify what is to come. That statement was
not made in a vacuum. It was not part of a theoretical
exercise. It was made as the unlawful annexation is
more clearly under way than ever. It was made as more
Palestinians are being killed every day. Last year was
the deadliest year in the West Bank in more than 15
years, and yet somehow the past three months were
even worse.
How does one justify killing Palestinians in the
streets? How does one justify keeping 2 million of them
under an inhumane blockade for more than 15 years?
How does one justify colonizing their land, demolishing
their homes and forcibly displacing families and
communities? How does one justify burning their
villages and humiliating their elders and their children?
One has to dehumanize them in order to justify such
acts. Not all Israeli officials go as far as denying our
existence. Some are content with denying our rights.
Some are content with denying our humanity. Some are
content with denying our connection to the land that
we love.
Again, it took us decades to move from reciprocal
rejection to mutual recognition. Everything we have
accomplished, collectively, is being undone and
destroyed before our very eyes. We must respond
collectively. The Palestinian side has decided to leave
no stone unturned to try and prevent things from going
down a path that we all know only too well. We are
being unreasonably reasonable in order to try and
prevent the bloodshed and to try and find a way back
towards a different horizon — one where hope is still
possible. That is not a sign of weakness, but a sign of
wisdom that has been acquired at great cost. In that
connection, we express our appreciation to all those
regional and international actors making efforts to
shape such a horizon. Again, our people exist, and there
is no force on Earth that will deny us our existence and
our connection to our beloved homeland of Palestine.
They deserve freedom. They have waited and suffered
long enough. It is time to move forward, to live and let
18/21

22/03/2023

live, to end the occupation, and to all live in freedom
and peace and security.
The holy month of Ramadan is upon us, as is
Easter. We welcome it with families and communities
holding funerals and with thousands of Palestinian
prisoners entering a hunger strike to ensure their most
basic rights and respect for their human dignity. Some
worshippers turn to Haram Al-Sharif in their tens
of thousands — and on Fridays in their hundreds of
thousands — while others turn to the Church of the
Holy Sepulchre around Easter time. They are unsure
if they will be able to access those holy sites and pray
in peace there, free from assault and provocations. Our
people — the Palestinian people — need the Council’s
solidarity and support to preserve them from more
agony and loss. As we approach the religious holidays
for the three monotheistic religions, we are reminded
of what makes that land holy. Its story, its significance
and its identity lies in its diversity. It cannot tolerate
exclusiveness or exclusion, monopoly or intolerance. Its
vocation is to serve as a model for humankind and as
a beacon of freedom, justice and peaceful coexistence.
Let us live up to that vocation.
I came to the Council a few months ago (see
S/PV.9174) with a warning about where we believed
things were heading on the ground. We came again and
again, asking for protection for our people, long before
what happened in Huwwara and what happened in Jenin,
Nablus and Jericho. We came asking for international
engagement, saying that on the ground the two-State
solution is becoming an illusion and annexation is the
only reality. We came with a warning about what that
would mean, not only for our people but for all peoples.
We came to say that an apartheid had emerged instead
of peace, and unfortunately the subsequent events
confirmed our statements every time.
I tell Council members today that every effort must
be mobilized to stop annexation, the violence against
our people and all other provocations. We should all
fear the fire that we cannot extinguish. We all have
a duty not to wait, but to act now with all means at
our disposal in order to prevent a fire that will devour
everything it encounters.
Seven years ago, the Council adopted resolution
2334 (2016). If it had been implemented, we would
have achieved peace. The Council, guided by the
Charter of the United Nations, has adopted resolutions
grounded in international law. It is the responsibility of
23-08328

22/03/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.

the Council — and also of every State Member of the
United Nations — to actively pursue the implementation
of those resolutions, first and foremost resolution 2334
(2016). The trends identified and condemned in that
resolution have continued unabated. They must be
stopped and reversed. The alternative is more pain,
more blood and more hate. No one can afford that.
There are many who say that what it would take to
achieve justice and peace is just too much to ask. We
call on them to think about what failing to do so would
entail. The price is infinitely higher — it is whatever
political capital is needed to uphold international law
and the resolutions of the United Nations in order to
advance a just and lasting solution. Freedom is worth it.
Peace is worth it.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Erdan (Israel): A disturbing pattern seems
to have developed here. Over the past months, closed
debates on the situation in the Middle East have been
opened at the request of the Palestinians, and numerous
emergency meetings have been held at their behest.
It seems that the quarterly debates focused solely on
condemning Israel are not enough for the Palestinians.
Just as they have rejected every single peace plan ever
put on the table because 100 per cent of their absurd
demands were not met, here, too, the Palestinians wish
to exploit 100 per cent of the debates, including those
they are not invited to, in order to bash Israel.
Despite the incessant falsehoods that the members
of the Security Council hear from the Palestinian
representative and his constant distortions of reality, I
would like to make one thing very clear to everyone.
Israel is unquestionably the most vibrant liberal
democracy in the Middle East. No democracy is
perfect, and people may make mistakes, but there is no
denying that when any acts of violence are committed
or laws are broken, the State of Israel acts to bring
those responsible to justice. That is how a democracy
that is committed to liberal values, human rights and
coexistence functions. Those who take the law into
their own hands are brought to justice. That is the
reality in Israel.
That being said, I ask each of the members of the
Council to look at the Palestinian representative and
think about the terror authority that he represents. The
Palestinians truly have no shame. They distort every
occurrence in Israel — events that do not represent

S/PV.9290

Israel’s values or norms in the slightest — and falsely
portray them as a widespread phenomenon. Sitting here
and regurgitating fabrications is not going to solve the
conflict. On the contrary, these repetitive lies and open
debates — for the media, of course — serve only one
objective, to perpetuate the conflict. That is the sole
purpose of the Palestinian Authority — eternalizing
the conflict in order to delegitimize the very idea of
the Jewish State and its existence. That is why the
Palestinians have rejected every peace plan and why
they rejected the partition plan back in 1947. That
has been and continues to be the Palestinians’ only
goal. Just look at what happens on the ground. While
Israeli law enforcement investigates acts of violence,
the Palestinian Authority glorifies terrorists who spill
innocent Israeli blood.
To the Palestinian representative, I say shame on
him for his audacity in daring to condemn the words of
an Israeli Minister who apologized and clarified what
he meant. Meanwhile, his own President and the rest
of the Palestinian leadership regularly incite terrorism,
never condemn the murders of Israeli civilians, praise
Palestinian terrorists and actively attempt to rewrite
facts and the truth by erasing Jewish history. Let me
give one or two examples, because they are never
mentioned here. In honour of International Women’s
Day earlier this month, Laila Ghannam, the Governor
of Ramallah and Al-Bireh, visited the mother of Nasser
Abu Hamid, a terrorist responsible for the murder
of 10 Israelis. Ms. Ghannam called her a living role
model for Palestinian women and a proud symbol of
sacrifice. Mahmoud Al-Aloul, Vice-Chairman of
the Fatah Central Committee and President Abbas’s
deputy, justified the recent terror attack in Huwwara
in which two Israeli civilians, the brothers Hillel and
Yagel Yaniv, were murdered at point-blank range by a
Palestinian terrorist. He called that atrocity a natural
reaction. There is nothing natural about murdering
innocent civilians.
Only a month ago, President Abbas himself decided,
not for the first time, to erase historical facts, claiming
that the only people with any historical rights to the
Temple Mount and the Western Wall — yes, that is what
I said, even the Western Wall — are the Palestinians. Of
course that is a sick lie that completely distorts history.
The Temple Mount, as everyone here knows, was the
site of a Jewish temple long before the Al-Aqsa Mosque,
and the Western Wall was the western wall of our holy
temple. Those are the facts, and they are indisputable.

23-0832819/21

S/PV.9290

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.

But I have never heard anyone here condemn President
Abbas — or perhaps condemnations are reserved only
for Israeli ministers.
While Israel’s leadership condemns incitement
from all sides, the Palestinian Authority incentivizes
terror through its despicable pay-for-slay policy. In
2021 alone, the Palestinian Authority paid more than
$175 million — money donated by many of those
here — to terrorists and their families. That sick practice
still continues. By the way, President Abbas has said
many, many times that if he had only a dollar left he
would pay it to the terrorists who murder Israelis. But
the Council’s silence is deafening. While Israel mourns
victims of terror, masses of Palestinians celebrate the
murders of innocent Israelis in the streets. Following the
terror attack in Tel Aviv a week and a half ago in which
three Israelis were shot — and one of whom tragically
succumbed to his wounds yesterday — candies were
distributed in many Palestinian cities. It can be seen
on television, no need to wait for Tor Wennesland to
report it.
The Holocaust denier President Abbas and the rest
of the Palestinian leadership not only refuse to condemn
terror attacks on innocent civilians, they praise them.
Do Council members not see the correlation between
the Palestinians’ words and the escalating attacks and
violence? The Council was just briefed on yet another
biased anti-Israel resolution — resolution 2334 (2016).
But even though the resolution singled out Israel, it
could not ignore the facts of terrorism and incitement.
Even those who drafted that biased resolution
understood that reconciliation is impossible while the
Palestinian leadership’s calls to murder innocent Israeli
civilians continue. Those two things cannot happen
simultaneously. Is that not obvious? So why does the
Security Council never address that crucial issue?
Over the past three and a half months, 15 innocent
Israelis have been murdered and 70 injured, and the
Palestinians have perpetrated more than 1,000 terror
attacks. Yet that is not the focus of today’s debate,
just as the Palestinian Authority’s incitement and its
glorification and funding of terror are never the focus
of such debates. And the Palestinian Authority does not
just play an active role in the rising wave of terror, it
plays a passive role as well. New terror groups such
as the Lions’ Den have sprouted up in Palestinian
cities such as Nablus and Jenin, and yet the Palestinian
Authority has decided that when violent terrorism
grows, it is acceptable not only to stoke the fire, but also
20/21

22/03/2023

to sit back, do absolutely nothing and watch it burn. But
Israel will not remain idle, as the Palestinian Authority
does. Israel takes action against those who choose the
path of violence to threaten our citizens. That is why
Israel is forced to carry out defensive measures in those
Palestinian cities. That is the only reason. Israel must
do the work that the Palestinian Authority refuses to do
to thwart terror attacks.
Yet, as the Palestinians are dead set on encouraging
more violence and allowing it to ensue, Israel has
shown its willingness to sit down at the table and
even to take significant steps. In order to de-escalate
the current situation, senior officials from Israel and
the Palestinian Authority met in Aqaba, Jordan, in
February and once again in Sharm El-Sheikh, Egypt,
on Sunday. Israel is at the height of a wave of terror.
In fact, the Palestinian terrorist who murdered Hallel
and Yagel Yaniv in Huwwara carried out that brutal
attack on the very same day that the meeting in Aqaba
was being held. Those meetings resulted in mutual
commitments, which Israel is dedicated to upholding.
But there are two sides to every agreement, and we
expect the Palestinians to do the same. The Palestinian’s
terror campaign against Israelis must be stopped. It is
the Palestinian Authority’s responsibility to halt the
violence, just as it is their responsibility to end the
incitement. Those commitments must be upheld.
Regarding Israel’s decision to repeal the
disengagement law in northern Samaria, we do not see it
as an act of provocation. It is the righting of a historical
wrong. The new law in Israel merely permits Israelis
to enter areas of northern Samaria, the birthplace of
our heritage —a place we unilaterally decided in the
past to bar ourselves from entering. Israelis can now
once again visit the cradle of our religion. Nonetheless,
the State of Israel has no intention of building any new
communities there.
Moreover, as the month of Ramadan is upon
us, Israel, as it does every year, has also taken steps
to safeguard the freedom of worship for Palestinians
and joint family celebrations. Palestinian worshippers
can pray freely on the Temple Mount, and Palestinian
families can visit their relatives in Israel and abroad.
The State of Israel understands the importance of
this holy month and is taking all possible measures to
ensure that this year, as in all other years, hundreds of
thousands of Palestinians and Israeli Arabs can pray on
the Temple Mount in peace. That is something that the
Palestinian representative always omits.
23-08328

22/03/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.

The supposed focus of these meetings is the
situation in the Middle East, and as surprising as it
may seem when listening to these debates, the Middle
East extends far beyond the borders of Israel, and
the region has become a powder keg on the verge of
being ignited. As we speak, an axis of evil is being
strengthened. The most violent terror organizations
across the Middle East — Islamic Jihad, Hamas and
Hizbullah — are holding meetings in order to discuss
how to work together to fulfil their ultimate goal of
destroying Israel. In recent days, Hassan Nasrallah,
Hizbullah’s leader, sat down with delegations from
Hamas and Islamic Jihad in Beirut. The focus of those
talks was how to expand terror in Judea, Samaria and
Jerusalem throughout the month of Ramadan. While
pious Muslims spend this holy month fasting, those
terror armies plot the murder of Jews. Yet the world
is silent.
However, those terror organizations are not
acting alone. Each of those murderous groups is
backed, funded and armed by the most threatening
and destabilizing entity in the region — the Ayatollah
regime of Iran. Beyond being the world’s number one
State sponsor of terror, Iran is galloping forward with
its dangerous nuclear programme at an unprecedented
speed. It pays no heed to the international community’s
calls and condemnations, and it does not care about the
demands of the International Atomic Energy Agency.

S/PV.9290

The Ayatollahs do whatever they please. Everyone
now knows that they want nuclear weapons, and they
are on the verge of attaining them. The regime has
enriched uranium to 84 per cent, and it does not hide its
intentions. The Iranian goal is to annihilate the State of
Israel — but that, as we all know, will be only their first
step. That ruthless regime oppresses women, murders
protesters in the street, destabilizes the region, funds
and arms terror and supplies attack drones to be used
in Ukraine. Yet look at this debate. Council members
should open their eyes and open their ears. This is a
debate on the situation in the Middle East — the whole
Middle East. Then why are we not talking about the
radioactive Shiite elephant in the room? Why have
we allowed these discussions to get hijacked by the
Palestinians while the region is about to explode?
I beg Council members to think deeply about my
words — to think, but also to act — because one day
it will be too late. This cannot continue. Iran’s crime
cannot continue. The alarm clock has been ringing for
years, but the international community has been hitting
the snooze button for far too long. The time has come to
wake up and kick into high gear. The Ayatollah regime
and their terror proxy armies must be stopped. Do not
allow the true threats to the region to be sidelined with
Palestinian lies. The time to act is now.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

23-0832821/21
