General Assembly-Eleventh Special Session

III.

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORT OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE
OF THE ELEVENTH SPECIAL SESSION

Measures to meet the critical situation in the
least developed countries
The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned at the gravity of the deteriorating
economic and social situation of the least developed
countries and the dismal development record of those
countries during the past two decades, as well as at
their bleak development prospects for the 1980s,
Also deeply concerned at the continued critical lack
of basic infrastructure in the least developed countries,
Recalling resolutions 62 (Ill) of 19 May 19726 and 98

(IV) of31 May 19767 of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development, as well as other relevant
resolutions and decisions of the United Nations system which have remained largely unimplemented,
Recalling also resolution 122 (V} of 3 June 19798 of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, by which it adopted, as one of its major
priorities, a Comprehensive New Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries in two phases,
an Immediate Action Programme, for 1979-1981, and
a Substantial New Programme of Action for the 1980s,
Recognizing that primary responsibility for their development rests with the least developed countries
themselves,
Recalling its resolution 34/210 of 19 December 1979,
in which it endorsed the Comprehensive New Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries,
Recalling further its resolution 34/203 of 19 December 1979, in which it decided to convene the United
Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries
in 1981,
Noting the concern expressed by the international
community at the desperate plight of the least developed countries,
Noting with appreciation that some developed
countries have taken positive steps towards the implementation of resolution 122 (V} of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
Regretting that, even more than one year after the
adoption of the Immediate Action Programme for
1979-1981 contained in resolution 122 (V} of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, very limited progress has been made towards its
implementation,
Emf!hasizing the particular importance of the contribution that economic co-operation among developing countries can make, inter alia, to the development
of the least developed among them,
Reaffirming that there is an immediate need for a
greatly expanded increase in the transfer of resources
to meet the critical needs of the least developed countries and to help promote their rapid and self-sustained
socio-economic development,
l. Urges all developed countries, developing
countries in a position to do so, multilateral development institutions and other sources to take urgent
steps to implement without any further delay, on a
priority basis, the commitments undertaken in the

5 Ibid., Thirty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 3 (N35/3/Rev .1),
chap. II, paras. 7-28.
6
See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, Third Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.73.11.D.4), annex I.A.

7
Ibid., Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes ( United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.II.D.IO and corrigendum), part
one, sect. A.
8
Ibid., Fifth Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.79.II.D.14), part one, sect. A.

S-11/3.

Suggestions by the Secretary-General to
overcome the critical economic situation of
many developing countries

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that the economic situation of the
large majority of developing countries has increasingly
deteriorated during the past decade,
Deeply concerned at the gravity of the deteriorating
economic and social situation of the least developed
and other developing countries, particularly those in
the special categories, where development needs and
problems are greatest,
Conscious of the unprecedented economic problems
faced by those countries, for the solution of which the
assistance of the international community is indispensable,
Emphasizing the imperative need for simultaneous
and parallel action to resolve the short-term,
medium-term and long-term problems of developing
countries,
Noting with great interest the suggestions made by
the Secretary-General in his address to the Economic
and Social Council at its second regular session of
19805 for overcoming the critical economic situation of
many developing countries,
l. Requests the Secretary-General to elaborate
further his suggestions, in consultation with the concerned organizations of the United Nations system,
and to submit them to the General Assembly at its
thirty-fifth session;
2. Decides to consider and to take appropriate action on the matter at its thirty-fifth session.
21st plenary meeting
15 September 1980
S-11/4.

3

4

General Assembly-Eleventh Special Session

Immediate Action Programme for 1979-1981 contained in resolution 122 (V) of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development;
2. Also urges donor countries to make equitable
and all possible efforts with a view to doubling, at the
earliest possible time within the first half of the 1980s,
the flow of official development assistance to the least
developed countries, in accordance with the commitments undertaken in paragraph 13 of resolution 122 (V)
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, and to give serious consideration to this
end to the proposal that such a doubling should be in
real terms, taking into account the relative performance of donor countries;
3. Further urges donor countries, in the context of
the over-all increase of official development assistance, to give serious consideration, not later than at
the United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries to be held in 1981, to the proposals for
further measures to provide an adequate minimum
flow of official development assistance, including,
inter alia, those proposals for tripling the net disbursement of concessional assistance by 1984 and
quadrupling it by 1990 at 1977 prices on a predictable,
continuous and assured basis;
4. Urges an developed countries to provide official
development assistance to the least developed countries as a general rule in the form of grants, which
should normally be untied;

5. Calls upon the international community and the
organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations system to take all necessary measures to ensure
the success of the United Nations Conference on the
Least Developed Countries, which will, inter alia,
finalize, adopt and launch the Substantial New Programme of Action for the 1980s, as called for in resolution 122 (V) of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development;
6. Requests multilateral development agencies, including international, interregional, regional and intergovernmental funds, to accord priority to the least
developed countries in the programming and allocation
of their resources;
7. Urges all developed countries, developing
countries in a position to do so, multilateral development institutions and other sources to extend substantial assistance to the least developed countries for the
development of their energy resources;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to monitor implementation of the measures adopted in favour of the
least developed countries, including those of the Immediate Action Programme for 1979-1981, and to report thereon to the Economic and Social Council at its
second regular session of 1981 and to the General
Assembly at its thirty-sixth session.
21 st plenary meeting
15 September /()80
