I

TWENTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

MEETING:

NEW

11 OCTOBER

1973

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/ 1745)

Adoption

of the agenda

.. , . . , . . . . . , .. . . . . . . . . . . ... . . .

.. . . . . ,, .. . . . . . . . .

1

. .. . . . .. . . . . . ... . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 7 October 1973 from the Permanent Representative of the United
States of America to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/l 1010) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

fqPV.1745

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEEN HUNDRED AND FORTY-FIFTH MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 11 October 1973, at 6.45 pm.
I3’CSi&‘t2t: Sir Laurence McINTYRE (Australia).
finest:
The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.

Provisionalagenda (S/Agenda/l 745)
1. Adoption

of the agenda,

2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 7 October 1973 from the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America to
the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/l 1010).
The meeting was called to order nt 7 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The ngcwda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 7 October 1973 from the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/l 1010)
1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken at the 1743rd meeting, I propose now, with the
consent of the Council, to invite the representatives of
Egypt, Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic lo take their
places at the Council table in order to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote.
At the invitation of’ the Psesident, Mr. M. H. El-Zayyat
(I&~pc), Mr. A. Eban (Israel) nnd Mr. M. Z. Ismail (Syrian
Arab Republic) took places at the Council table.
u.
7 The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of
tile C’ouncil that, in addition, I have received a letter from
the representative of Nigeria containing the request that
Nigeria be invited to participate without the right to vote in
the Councit’s
discussion of the item inscribed an the
agenda, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
C’ounci]‘s provisional rules of procedure. The letter states
tllat Nigeria will be represented by Mr. Arikpo, the ComIJ-,~SS~~HWIfor Externat Affairs. lf hear no objection, I shall
take it thar the C’OWIC~I agrees to invite him to participate
iI1 12~ discussion without the right COvote, and 1 shall ask
Jlil)l to lake the place reserved for him at the side of the

Council chamber, on the understanding that he wil] be
called upon to take a place at the Council table when it is
his turn to address the Council.
At the invitution of the President, Mr. O.Arikpo (Nigeria)
took the place reserved for him at the side of the Council
chamber.
3. The PRESIDENT: I call on the Secretary-General, who
has asked to make a brief statement.
4. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
Mr. President, this
afternoon I asked you to circulate a statement by me
relating to the Middle East conflict. I made that request on
the basis of information that there would be no meeting of
the Council today. Now, since the Council has been
convened at the request of a member Government, I should
like simply to draw the attention of the members of the
Security Council to that statement (see S/11021/. I wish
only to repeat the conclusion of this statement.
5. I have no illusions about how difficult it is for countries
in conflict to turn from war to peace. I have no wish to
deflect any Government from what it believes to be its
legitimate sovereign aims. I do, however, question whether
the continuation of the war can possibly achieve those aims
permanently for any of the parties. I am also deeply
concerned at the wider threat to international peace and
security which this situation may create.
6. I therefore earnestly appeal to the conflicting Governments to consider alternative courses, before it is too late,
so that fighting and bloodshed may cease. 1 also hope that
the members of the Security Coun.cil, as well as other
Member States, will’redouble their efforts to seek an end to
the fighting and an immediate and determined resumption
of the quest for a just and lasting settlement in the Middle
East.
7. The PRESIDENT: The first name inscribed on the list
of speakers is that of the representative of Egypt, on whom
I now call.
8. Mr, EL-ZAYYAT (Egypt): I wish to make a very short
statement. First, however, having just heard the SecretaryGeneral, I should like to assure him that we are going to
study his statement, which I am sure he made as the
Secretary-Genera] within the framework of the Charter of
the United Nations and United Nations resolutions.
9. I have asked to speak because I have a message to give
the Security Council from my Government. Before doing
SO, however, I would like to say that during the last meeting

those raids, appealed for a halt to these bombings of civilian
targets and the civilian populations. On 10 October-that is
to say, yesterday-the Israeli Air Force resumed its raids on
civilian targets and the civilian population in the very heart
of Syria, ignoring the appeal made by the International Red
Cross one day earlier. The civilian targets attacked this titne
include: the city of Tartus, the city of Latakia, the workers’
city in the suburb of Horns, the sugar refinery in Horns, the
power stations in Damascus and Horns, and other civilian
targets. Civilian loss of life as a result of those raids totalled
several hundred. I do not have the exact numbers, but tllc
list of the dead is growing longer with every passing hour.
Most of the victims were workers, women and children.

of the Council, I received a telegram which mentioned air
attacks on Cairo. This was a flash which was followed later
on by a full telegram saying that these attacks had been on
airports near Cairo. I wished to make this correction-and 1
wish it were a correction that changed the situation.
Unfortunately
it does not. For, since the receipt of that
telegram and since these attacks on airports near Cairo, the
Israeli Air Force has carried out other attacks on Delta
towns and villages. The Nile Delta, as everyone knows, is
one of the most densely populated areas of the world.
10. The toll from those attacks has been increasing. In the
morning there were 113 civilians killed and 307 wounded.
By about 2 o’clock New York-time, the number had risen
to a total of 500. In addition, 67 inhabited houses have
been completely destroyed by these air attacks. Perhaps we
shall be given the following explanation: that these attacks
were against military targets-as has been said in the case of
Damascus; that these innocent people were killed as a result
of these attacks on military targets; and that the responsibility lies with Egypt because it has decided to liberate
Egypt from the occupation of Israeli forces, who have never
said that the part they are occupying is part of Israel, but
still go on repeating that we are attacking Israel. If that is
going to be the explanation, then I should like to have an
additional explanation of the fact that many of those
killed, maimed or wounded were killed, maimed or
wounded by picking up a transistor radio, a pen, a watch, a
box, and so on, booby traps thrown from Israeli planes,and
picked up-not by soldiers; soldiers are trained not to pick
up these things in time of war-but by innocent people in
villages of the Nile Delta.

16. These acts of barbarism by the Israeli Air Force prove
that, having lost hope of a quick victory on the battlefield,
Israel chooses to take its revenge against civilian installs.
tions and against innocent civilians, which is a brutal
violation of the Geneva Conventions on the protection of
civilians in time of war and cynically defies world public
opinion.
17. I must offer my apologies for taking up the time of
the Council once again to draw to its attention the barbaric
acts of the Israeli leaders. I do so on the instructions of my
Government because these cowardly and irresponsible acts
have been repeated and are being repeated in Syria snd in
Egypt and everything indicates that the IsraeIis are determined to continue with them. I am also drawing this to the
attention of the Council because a new element appears in
Israeti savagery. Now the Israelis are using napalm bombs.
That does not surprise us because many Syrian children
died during past attacks against our urban agglomerations as
a result of these terrible bombs. Let the Israelis not try
to deny this revolting aspect of their crimes. The fact is
reported by United Nations observers. Allow me to read the
text of a telegram from United Press International dated
today:

11. I conclude my statement by repeating two lines from
my statement at the last meeting. I wish I could say that
those lines had been premature or useless, since they were
based on the flash that the attacks had been carried out
against Cairo and the report has now been corrected to
“attacks against airports in Cairo”. But now, with 500
Egyptians killed-the houses are not really as important as
human lives-1 must solemnly say again that if these air
raids on civilian targets and peopIc in our countries
continue, the Government and Command will do their best
and make every effort to dissuade the military leaders of
Israel from continuing these raids.

“The United Nations Truce Supervision Organization
reported today that Israeli planes had carried out at least
three air attacks with napalm in the Israeli-Syrian sector
of the Middle East fighting front.“’
18. The list of victims among the civilian population grows
longer. I have just learned that the number of victims
exceeds 100. If Israel believes that by this barbarism it cat1
break our determination to continue the battle, it is
seriously mistaken. General Yariv, who has pledged to fight,
to bomb, to punish, can rest assured that his inhuman
rancour, when it is unleashed against Syria and Egypt, wi]]
not and cannot have any effect other than to make us
firmer in our determination and more resolute to wage our
fight for liberation to the end. Freedom is too precious for
it not to be protected and acquired with great sacrifices.
This we know, this we recognize.

12. That is the message my Government wishes to convey
to you, Mr. President, to the Secretary-General of the
United Nations, to every person sitting at this tablewhether a permanent member, a member or a representative invited to sit at the table.
13. The PRESIDENT: 1 call next on the representative of
the Syrian Arab Republic.
14. Mr. ISMAIL (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation
from French): I have already read out in this Council
chamber, on instructions from my Government, a communication on the bombing in Damascus of civilian populations and targets by Israeli aircraft. These raids were
carried out on 9 October.

19. The PRESIDENT:
Israel.

I call on the representative

of

20. Mr. EBAN (Israel): My Government will study with
interest the statement by the Secretary-Genera] concerni%

1s. On the same day, after the raids, the International Red
Cross, after having noted the terrible damage caused by

1 Quoted

2

in Enslish by the spcakcr.

the terrible war which, as he points out, started more than
five days ago. In the meantime I offer some observations on
the statements that have just been made on behalf of the
two Governments which started that war, the Government
of Egypt and the Government of Syria.

25. But of course once the war began at the most drastic
rhythm and at the moment of Israel’s minimal preparedness
it was obvious that the war would have its victims. Israel’s
policy is to direct its air action to military targets, such as
those attacked on 9 October, namely, the military headquarters of the Syrian army and the air force headquarters
and military airports, and in the south the Sukhoy 20 air
bases from which assaults have been launched across the
cease-fire line. But let everybody understand in full and
lucid humility that there is no way of selecting military
targets with complete assurance that non-military personnel
will not be the victims.

21. We have just lived one of the most extraordinary half
hours in international history. On 6 October the Governments of Egypt and Syria wantonly, unnecessarily, without
provocation, decided to end the cease-fire and to wage
all-out war against Israelis, soldiers and civilians, wherever
they could find them and wherever they could reach them.
They chose the moment of maximal peace and serenity in
Israel in order to add blasphemy and sacrilege to the crime
of unprovoked aggression and thus they have changed a
position of cease-fire, with concrete and early prospects of
negotiation, into an inf@rno of war and affliction and
suffering, for Israelis, for Egytians and for Syrians.

26. And thus we must come back to the problem of
originaI responsibility. If you want to know why people are
being killed, ask yourselves who started the war on
6 October, and those who started the war have the deadly
responsibility for all its consequences.

22. NOW the extraordinary thing about the statements by
the representatives of Egypt and Syria is their conviction
that they have the right to attack Israelis and yet to seek
international protection against any Israeli response. They
not only want to make war but they want it to be
unilateral. They would like Israel to have its hands tied
behind its back so that they can shoot it accurately in the
head, just like the 11 Israeli sportsmen under the protection
of the Olympic flag at Munich, whose brutal murder in just
that fashion was so fervently applauded by the official
spokesmen of Egypt and of Syria, Is it not obvious that
those
who take the responsibility for launching a war
assume the terrible responsibility for its consequences?
Anybody who watched television in this country today was
able to see the Israeli ambulance destroyed by Syrian
shellfire.

27. Since, however, instead of discussing how to bring an
end to the war by restoring the cease-fire structure that was
violated on 6 October, the representatives of Egypt and
Syria have chosen to speak about episodes of war. I will not
ask them for I know the answer. But I ask any man of
enlightened spirit and of equitable mind why it is heinous
to bomb, for example, the air bases in Syria, but, in the
opinion of the representatives of Egypt and Syria, it is
perfectly all right to direct ground missiles with warheads
of 500 kilos, namely, Frog missiles, on Israeli towns and
villages? It is all right to send missiles of this kind into
Migdal-Haemek, it is all right to bombard Gevat, it is
legitimate to rain destruction on Kfar Batch, it is all right
to bombard Nahalai, it is all right to send missiles into the
villages of the Hula valley, it is all right to bomb and to
murder in the Druse villages at Buk’ata and Masada, it is all
right to send missiles into Majdal Shams killing villagers,
including women and children, and causing additional
caau&.ies. It is all right to send a Kelt missile in the direction
of the most populated area of Tel Aviv, as on 6 October,
and only by an act of aerial virtuosity was an air pilot able
to divert it from its course. This is all right. This requires no
protest and no indignation.

23. We must say in all frankness to both neighbouring
Governments: “You started a war on 6 October and you
are responsible for all its tragic victims, its Israeli victims,
Who
are tragically numerous”-perhaps in proportion to our
population
more tragically numerous than any other
casualties described here today-“and you are also responsible for the death and the disaster suffered by Egyptians
and Syrians and by all those who are caught up in the
fearful alternation of war”. But the doctrine of unilateral
war, a right unprovokedly to kill Israelis and to be immune
from all response, that is what makes these two utterances
unusual, even in the liistory of war.

28. It is to this that I refer in calling attention to the
extraordinary
character of these pronouncements. NOW
surely what the Governments of Egypt and of Syria should
be considering is how to stop the whole of this sequence by
the only just and rational method, which is to think back to
the relative serenity of 5 October, to restore that serenity,
to restore the cease-fire, to restore the cease-fire in its full
structure, and from that starting-point to proceed to the
negotiation of a peace treaty. Surely that is not only the
logical but almost the universal response to war. First of all,
to stop it, to honour the framework accepted for the arrest
of the war, namely, the Security Council cease-fire resolution, and also the Egyptian-Israeli cease-fire accord
negotiated in August, and thereafter to find ways and
means and, above all, attitudes whereby all future wars can
be avoided and all the States and peoples of the Middle East
can enter their inheritance of peace.

24. Every few days the representatives of Egypt and Syria
come here with fictions which later turn out to have no
foundation: the fiction about the invisible nava! battle at
Sukhna and Zaafarana which, I must say, in our contacts
with foreign Governments nobody seems to take seriously.
And now, a few days ago, a statement by the Foreign
Minister of Egypt about an air raid on Cairo to which his
own Government responded that it was nonsense to say
that there had been an air penetration of Cairo. And then
deeply distressing reports about alleged casualties at an
embassy, followed’ by Syrian statements that there were no
such casualties in any such embassy or and that no such
embassy was either the target or the victim of any air
action. With this record behind us we have no reason to
believe anything that we are told from these sources, unless
there is independent evidence.

29. We do not know what it is that Egypt and Syria want
if they continue to refuse this normal course-the restoration of the cease-fire structure in all its elements, and
3

thereafter at an appropriate time the negotiation of an
appropriate peace.

supported by five other members, was nothing less than M
encouragement given to the aggressor.

30. Mrs. Jeanne Martin CISSE (Guinea) (interpretation
from French): Mr, President, may I be allowed, before I
address my remarks to the item on our agenda, to address
to you the congratulations of my delegation on your
accession to the presidency of the Council for the month of
October. I am happy with the high quality of the
relationships of frank co-operation which link us, and I
want also to pay a tribute to your qualities as an
experienced diplomat. Your wisdom, which is so familiar to
the Council, augurs well for the .good conduct of our work
during this month of October, so burdened and so replete
with events of the most painful character.

35. Quite
recently, at Algiers, the non-aligned GC)LIRIr%.:
reaffirmed their unconditional support of the jUSt StnQ&
of the Palestinian and Arab peoples, after having recalkf
that the end of the hostilities in the Middle East meant 1%?*
recognition of the fundamental rights of the Palestiniaw%
and the restitution of the ravished Arab lands.
36. Today, guns are thundering over Sinai, over the ~hb~
Ijeights. Bombardments continue, and they are hlfi:
intensified against Syria. They are directed against &!t,::
objectives, economic units; they strilie women and cllildrer:
The enemy ignores international conventions apphibti:
t:
war-time. In Damascus diplomats and internationnl
cihrl
servants became victims of Israeli raids. WorkCrS’
xl&,
ments, which are the most peaceful social units, have &e?
attacked by surprise. My delegation condemns these alla&c
against civilian objectives and populations, ;md renews @,g
of !Rc
expressions of condolences of the Government
Republic of Guinea to the people of Syria, and WC wttfff i-,
assure our brothers, the peoples of Egypt and Syria. ~bfo:.”
unconditional support for the struggle they arc waging 2~lihcrate their usurped territories.

31. To your predecessor, Ambassador Mojsov of Yugoslavia, we want to pay a tribute and to tell him how much
we valued his competence, his tact and his good will during
his presidency in the month of September. He is an eminent
jurist and a skilled diplomat, and we have appreciated his
talents and his long experience with international problems.
The sensitivity which he demonstrated during the month of
September was certainly equal to the expectations of the
Security Council.
32. The repetition of the tragic violence of June 1967,
which we had wanted to prevent directly after the
hostilities ended ocdurred on 6 October 1973. The Security
Council is meeting under the pressure of events to attempt
to extinguish a conflagration of which none can foresee the
consequences today.

37. If the situation has become explosive now, it is IW! -pbbi
much because of the legitimate response of the AC&
peoples, but it is rather because those who for a long lirr-g
have been the victims of the Zionist occupation, and oltva!, 4
to the benefit of the aggressor, have realized that no othrt
alternative exists to reconquer their rights other tlzan tt$c
use of force; that is, the use of the very means which fim.9
it possible for their lands to be usurped.

33. If efforts made by the Security Council over the
period of a quarter of a century have not been able to pave
the way to real peace in the Middle East, we believe that
this is due largely to the fact that the solutions offered were
mainly make-shift accommodations, and the international
community was not in a position to shoulder its full
responsibilities. Resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November
1967 appeared for the moment to be most appropriate in
the sense that its effective implementation would have been
a decisive step towards the progressive settlement of the
conflict. But as in the case of many other resolutions
related to conflicts, it became a dead letter.

38. It must be admitted that any atkmpt
to recuI)c”r;~&
from the usurper what belongs to you is a SLNI~LX a,f
legitimate action. In view of this reality, can one, (Iii: V?
respect for human values and logic, recommenct 2% a,
pre-condition to a just settlement of thr: conflict a return 6,:
the belligerents to the lines of June 1067 which were tB”;1
result of the usurpation of Arab territories?
In so &ri:?g
victims and aggressors would be treated on a fooling t#x+
complete equality.
39. During these many debates on t!te Middle East. ~1%
delegation has always stated that any peaceful solutira~ E*:
the Middle East must impose the evacllatirJn by Israel (L? ~br
occupied territories. To preserve peace and security ir: tkxr
critically sensitive part of the world, the Srcurity Cournril v
general, and the permanent members .II particular,
~i:i$?
make this view prevail.

34. Europe and the United States had offered alternatives
which did not prove conclusive. Africa, realizing that peace
and security are indivisible, affected in the northern part by
this conflict, adopted, at the end of the tenth session of the
Organization of African Unity, a special resolution and gave
the mandate to seven of its Ministers for Foreign Affairs to
indicate most clearly before this Council, at its meetings in
June last, that any search for peace in the Middle East
necessarily involves the establishment of the rights of the
Palestinian people and the restitution to the Arab countries,
parties to this conflict, of their occupied territories. A clear
solidarity was demonstrated with our brothers the people
af Egypt, but, above ail, it was a message of truth, a message
of peace, a message that a continent, Africa, addressed to
Israel. But our disappointment was great when this appeal
to peace met with the United States veto. The rejection of
the draft resolution of 24 July 1973 [S/10974/ submitted
by eight member States of the Security Council, and

40. Indeed, we are concerned. We read this mornirrg. IF
the news disseminated by Agence France Presse, IL!:
according to a Cyprus government newspaper, 57 A~x++x~
Phantoms landed at the Akrotiri base on Saturday, and als;~:
25 of them then left the island of Cyprus, it is s~j,l. 6;*
Turkey; that much traffic is observed in the air 1~: the
British base in Cyprus. That is why my delegation WC)IK~CI*
and asks the Security Council-whose
Ip-sential vclcntivn 35
the preservation of peace and interna~iolml security .- - ~“7 fab.c
up to its responsibilities, because otherwise it runs tlzc a&
of seeing our world carried away toWari.r:.: a third world wa;
4

41. Thousands of innocent people, including women and
children, are falling under the bombs, victims of the
blindness and of the arrogance of Israel. The responsibility
OF the United States acquires, in our view, considerable
significance in the present phase of this struggle.

50. Mr. PEREZ de CUELLAR (Peru) (interpretation fbn
Spanish): Mr. President, may I start my statement by
expressing to you my congratulations for the skill and
wisdom with which, since the beginning of this month, YOU
have conducted the always complex business of’ this
Council.

42. The PRESIDENT: In view of special considerations
that have arisen, and with the agreement of the next
speaker on my list, the representative of Peru-for which I
am grateful-I now call on the Foreign Minister of Egypt in
exercise of his right of reply.

51. I also wish to express my high esteem to Ambassador
Mojsov for the skill, effectiveness and complete impartiality
with which he presided over the Council during the month
of September.

43. Mr. EL-ZAYYAT (Egypt): Mr. President, 1 thank you
very much for your courtesy and I thank my colleague the
representative of Peru for allowing me to speak now. I am
taking the floor for one minute because I have to leave the
representative of Egypt in my place for a few minutes.

52. First of all, I should like to state that Peru deplores
the resumption of hostilities in the Near East and that we
are profoundly
concerned over the rate at which the
conflict has already spread, as it appears to be leading to an
uncontainable escalation.

44. I wanted to reply to Mr Eban. He has asked this
question: What does Egypt want? It wants and it intends
to get the foreign soldier of occupation off its territory, all
its territory. Mr. Eban knows, or should know from his stay
in Egypt during the Second World War, that Egypt has
always wanted to get the foreign soldier of occupation off
its territory, all its territory and has always succeeded in
doing so. I did not think that he really needs to know this.

53. Our concern is all the greater when we recall that the
Council, in June and July last, had an opportunity to set in
motion once again the diplomatic channels open to it to
seek a just and lasting peace in the region. The meetings of
June and July are now filed away in the melancholy
archives of lost opportunities. How can we not think that if
the machinery of the Council had not then been paralysed,
we might perhaps have prevented the conflict which now
causes us to meet in an atmosphere of tension and anguish?

45. That is the first point. The second point is this: The
theory that the cease-fire was in effect this October really
needs some queries.

54. But at this stage we believe that it would be
unproductive for the Council to be carried away by a
torrent of recriminations or if it were to devote itself to
apportioning blame and responsibility, But it can be
affirmed, on the other hand, that just as the prevailing
situation until a few days ago was legally untenable, it was
also politically untenable from the point of view of the
security of the States of the region. In the specific case of
the occupied territories of Egypt, Jordan and Syria, the
presence of IsraeI is in itself a source of insecurity rendcrcd
more serious by the measures which it adopts to make its
occupation permanent.

46. I do not want to go into a detailed discussion; I have
done that before. I think he knows very well that the
August 1970 United States-initiated cease-fire was for 90
days. I think he knows very well that it was extended
several times and then ended and that there is no United
States-initiated cease-fire.
47. Regarding the Security Council cease-fire in June
1967, it is closely linked with withdrawal from occupied
territories. The strange theory that this or any cease-fire is
far an unlimited time obviously means that the occupation
is unlimited, Should we accept that the cease-fire must be
observed until both parties-the occupier and the OCCUPied-agree to put an end to it, then we would accept that
the occupying Power can be evacuated only by its own
consent. Such a thesis makes resistance a virtue, revolution
a duty and a national struggle for liberation both a national
obligation and an international obligation.

55. It is therefore necessary for the Council now to
discharge the functions which are incumbent upon it under
the Charter, in conformity with the commitment it
undertook
when it unanimously adopted resolution
242 (1967). For six years tliis resolution has provided a
framework for a solution, and it is unfair to try to divert
responsibility towards the Council or the United Nations
and make them the scapegoats of those who obstructed the
implementation of the resolution.

48. To conclude, I wish also to remind Mr. Eban or
anyone around this table that the war started on 5 June
1967. I am sure the Secretary-General did not say in his
letter that the war started in October. If he did, I would
certainly ask him to correct that. The war started in June
1967, and an end to the war is an end to the war which
started in June 1967.

56. In the present situation, it is therefore up to the
Council to make an appeal for the fighting to end. But this
appeal must be couched in terms which will facilitate and,
if possible, give an advance indication of the complete and
long-term solution of the problem.

49. Lastly, and I take no pleasure in saying this, I wish to
announce here to everyone-because this may be a tragic
mistake-that
Egypt finds no serenity in military occupation. There was no serenity before our struggle for
liberation and there is never going to be serenity for Egypt
or the Egyptians, for Syria or the Syrians, or for anyone
around this table if their land is occupied. That is not
serenity. It is humiliation; it is domination.

57. Peru was present at the summit meeting of the
non-aligned countries in Algiers, where we affirmed full and
effective support to Egypt, Jordan and Syria in their
struggle to recover by every means the occupied territories+
Thus, it is inconceivable to equate the struggle for recovery
of Egypt and Syria with the determination of Israel to
maintain its presence on Egyptian and Syrian soil.
5

58. Consequently, and in conclusion, Peru considers that
the Council should not adopt a proposal which involves
approval by the Council, however tacit, of the occupation
of territories by force, because this would be counter to the
principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of
territory by force, which is the basic premise of any
negotiation seriously directed towards a just and lasting
peace.

passed which Israel did not heed. When it suited it, or
rather its representatives, they wantonly said: “The Arab
States can always tnuster votes”. Muster votes? I tllust
remind Mr. Tekoah-who, I believe, was in Shanghai at the
time, in 1947-I do not know where he was, but I was
present in Lake Success. We, muster votes? What did t]le
Zionists do at Lake Success? It is better to ask it in revcrsc:
what did they not do to bring pressure to bear ot1 [he
United Nations, which counted only 51 or 52 Members
then?

59. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of
the Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Saudi Arabia containing a request that
Saudi Arabia be invited to participate in the Council’s
discussion of the item inscribed on the agenda without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.

66. What I have quoted from the records of historians
need not be repeated here, but suffice it to say that t/key
even marshalled a prelate-a cardinal--to go and visit Latirl
America to ask certain Governments to vote for the
partition of Palestine. And only the other day, I rca(l
excerpts from Colonel Edde’s record of what happened ill
Washington, and I succinctly draw your attention to what
Mr. Truman said---and I am paraphrasing: “Tell tne: how
many Arabs do I have in my constituency? The Zionists
are more important to me.” It was a question of votes. I
quoted this at that time; it was a matter of democracy by
subscription and contribution. He who pays the piper calls
the tune.

60. If 1 hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
agrees to invite the representative of Saudi Arabia to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote.
61. Since I have no more names inscribed on my list
except for those of representatives who have asked to
exercise the right of reply, and as I understand that the
representative of Saudi Arabia would wish to speak at this
meeting, I shall invite the representative of Saudi Arabia to
take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.

67. It is high time that we were candid and frank and weat
to the genesis of the case, and did nor beguile ourselvesby
treating the question as if tomorrow, were peace to be
established, the whole situation would be cleared up. Let as
not fool ourselves: it is my humble duty to take the floor
and tell you that this last link is not the final Iink it1tllc
chain of events.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. J. Buroody (Saudi
Arabia) took a place at the Caurzcil table.
62. Mr, BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Thank you, Mr. President and members of the Council, for granting me
permission to speak on the item before you. I wish
Mr. Eban were in the room, but, of course, Mr. Tekoah is
our colleague, and I am sure he will convey every word I
have to say, not only to the Zionists but to those who
support them.

6X. If all those who are parties to the conflict were to stop
fighting today, there is not the least assurance or guaranlee
that the Arab people, from Morocco to the confines oi
Iran, and from the north-from Syria and Iraq--down to the
Sudan, will not take issue-not with Syria or Egypt, but
with their Governments-to see to it that the Arab world
will not be made the laughing stock of the Zionists and
those who support them.

63. It is immaterial to ascertain which party started the
present conflict. In replying to Mr. Eban in the General
Assembly I mentioned that certain Syrian towns in the
north of Syria, far from the cease-fire line, had been
bombed and that there were many casualties. Israel cannot
pretend that the bombing of those cities in the north was
necessary to maintain peace and serenity on-the cease-fire
line. That took place on 12 or 13 September.

69. The Zionist movement, as I have mentioned time and
again, is not native to the Middle East: it is a political
movement started in Central and Eastern Europe by peu@
descended mostly from the Khazars, who came origiaalh
from the northern tier of Asia on the outskirts of the
Caspian Sea, and who settled, in the i”irst century, itI whal
today is southern Russia.

64. We have an Arabic proverb which says: “He who starts
the evil bears the greatest responsibility”. But now suffice it
to say that the present situation is only the latest link in a
long chain of events; and here I would like to address
myself to every one of you members of the Council and, if
the mass me+a of information allow my voice to carry
beyond this chamber, to the people of the United Statesbecause I am not talking only to you; you receive
instructions from your Governments, and many of you are
in the strait-jackets of instructions; and as if sometimes the
strait-jackets of instructions were not enough, many of you
put on the tight pants of procedure and we engage in a lot
of talk without any action,

70. There was a confrontation in the eighth ccntuq
between Christianity and Islam, Byzantium-Islam
ilad
spread in the area. There was a gentleman’s agreement Illfit
those tribes which came from the nortllern tier of Syria rlld
settled in what is today southern Russia would not be
converted either to Christianity or Islam. There acre
certain rabbis around and it was agreeable to the Christian
and the Muslim States of those days I!.) have those p$all
tribes converted to Judaism.
71, It was in Eastern and Central Eurtrpe that the ideaof a
State for the ingathering of the JeMc from al1 over 111,:
world grew and flourished. One of the things that helpedit
at that time was the Dreyfus affair in Frlcnce, whence HelLI

6.5. HOW do I know this? I participated “umpteen” times
in the Assembly and in this Council, where resolutions were
6

discrimination against the Jews in Europe; let us say so.
Therefore they said “national home” and tried things out
to see how they would succeed, or fail.

completed his Zionist manifesto and put the last touches in
the Rue Cambon behind the Ritz, in a small hotel. I walked
there last summer to see if the plaque was still there. I think
they are reconstructing the hotel; there will be a larger
plaque to commemorate the Zionist Manifesto of Herzl,

78. Then the war started and in Versailles-I was a young
man then-there
was a big argument about Woodrow
Wilson’s 14 points and whether the principle of self-determination should be respected. Mark you, at that time there
were only 6 per cent of the Jewish faith in Palestine and 94
per cent were Muslims and Christians-but they were all
Semites. They were our Jews, mostly Sephardim. Some
from Europe had settled there because the Rothschilds gave
money in the eighties in order to have certain vineyards.
They liked wine; they had wine from Palestine but I cannot
remember the name.

72. There is nothing wrong with a dream. But, as I have
mentioned and 1 now repeat, that dream turned into a
nightmare. They thought it would have become a Utopia.
But Jews and Gentiles are being sacrificed because that
dream has turned into a nightmare.
73. And now, my good friend from the United Kingdom, I
did some research in the City of London about the Balfour
Declaration. I must mention it-2 November is not too far.
After the Zionists found out that Kaiser Wilhelm II, who
made a trip to Istanbul in 1898, could not persuade Sultan
Abdul Hamid, on the request of his Jewish friends, to give
an enclave in Jerusalem to the Zionists, and when the
Kaiser told the Zionists that he had not succeeded-of
course the Kaiser went, not as an emissary for the Zionists;
he went to negotiate the Berlin-Baghdad railroad and the
British Empire was in jeopardy, our British friends thought:
“Good Lord, how will those Germans skirt through the
Gulf, the Suez Canal, and send their goods to India and
other regions of the British Empire? ”

79. And, then, what happened? The United States did not
join the League of Nations, and amongst those who
prevailed on them not to do so was the father of one of our
erstwhile colleagues, Mr. Henry Cabot Lodge-hc used to sit
here during the Korean war, my good friend Malik will
remember.
80. I shall not go into the politics between certain
European States and what happened to certain international arrangements that were made. But Hitler came on
the scene and I still believe that, inadvertently, they paved
the way for the emergence of Hitler-two of them: Lloyd
George and Clemenceau. But lest WC digress, I will come
back to the point. They were also instrumental in turning
the tide of the Second World War. Mr. Roosevelt sent
Sumner Welles on a trip in 1937 to ascertain the intentions
of Germany vis-&vis the United States. I was in London in
the thirties. I was tipped off by an Englishman to get out of
London, because I was for peace. He said “You have no
place here. You leave.” And I came to this country in 1939.

74. And when the Jews who sat at the Kaiser’s table
started to conspire against Germany they turned all their
efforts to England. How do I know that they sat at the
Kaiser’s table? May God rest the soul of Sharaf &Din
Effendi-which
means prince; they did not call themselves
prince-the nephew of Abdul Hamid, who told me.
75. Then the entente cordiale came in 1903. And the
entente cordiale-thanks to, inter alia, Edward VII, who
brought it into being-which
Tsarist Russia joined-my
good friend Ambassador Malik knows that-in a sense
indirectly, through the so-called friendship-really intereststhat existed between the French and the Russians of those
days. 1 think that the friendship with Russia is now being
revived. Nothing has changed in the world-balance of
power.

81. I remember the communique? of Sumner Welles, and I
stand to be corrected, Hitler assured him that he had no
ambitions here. But still the Zionists played a part in
railroading the United States into the Second World War, I
leave aside Pearl Harbour. I am not going to digress into
that.
82. I am glad to see that my good friend Mr. Scali is back
here, because I have a great deal of respect for his
sincerity -although sometimes he has to use words to
express the policy of his Government. We are all servants of
our Governments. But I am adducing the facts of hjstory,
and I am sure my good friend Mr. Bennett and Mr. Scali’s
other colleagues will convey what I have said, about how
the United States was railroaded into the First World War
by the Zionists, and to a large extent also into the
Second-not wholly, because there was Pearl Harbour and
there were other things, But, as 1 said, I am not digressing
into history here, though there is an interconnexion.

76. I must set the record straight here. The present events
are not the only link. They began to seize an opportunity.
Who’? Those Zionists. They began to conspire with the
United Kingdom against Germany and in 1917 they pushed
the United States of America into the war when both the
Democratic Party of Woodrow Wilson and the Republican
Party were isolationists; they did not want to get involved
in a European war. But how did they get them involved?
There is a romantic story about Woodrow Wilson but I do
not want to go into that here. In 1917 the Allies, meaning
prance and the United Kingdom, were losing heavily and
the United States was brought into the war to help them
out against the Kaiser. They did help them out, they did
beat Germany, and the price was the Balfour Declaration

83. But why did the British, and now our American
friends, want to maintain Israel in the midst of the Arab
world?
Is it necessary for them? 1 think the most
prosperous segment of the population in the United States
are Jews, and they do not want to leave for Israel-except,
probably, for a few of them upon whose scntimcnts
political Zionism has played.

77. But the Rothschilds were afraid that they might be
told that they would have to ni::@iate. I found that out
through my research. They did not want the word “State”
to appear, so they used “national home”, Icst they say:
Now that you Jews have a State get out of here. There was
7

“ ‘We will soon be back home’, one of the Arabs
volunteered, ‘where water is scarce. When we are in the
desert and our throats are parched we will turn on tile
faucets and get all the water we need.’ ”

84. One has only to read Fortune and Business Week and
other statistics to see that the Jews here are among the
most prosperous, if not the most prosperous, in relation to
their numbers, and that is why they do not want to go to
Israel. But they bring pressure to bear on your Government,
my good friend Mr. Scali.

How idiotic. He wants to picture the Arabs as idiotic. They
turn on the faucet and get water from them like that.

85. How do I know? What about those 78 senators who
decided that the President should beware of giving to
Russia-or call it the Soviet Union; I call it Russia still-the
“most favoured nation” clause because it does not allow
the Jews who happen to be Soviet citizens to leave?

89. That is from the sermon of Rabbi Alexander Alaa
Steinbach. Do not think it is a fabrication. Baroody dws
not fabricate. The mass information media fabricate here.
“Lawrence upbraided them: ‘Those faucets, unless they
are attached to pipes, and pipes are worthless until they
are connected with a reservoir. Nothing will come out if
there is not a well spring to supply the water’.”

86. What are you, the United States? The torch-bearers of
people who want to leave or do not want to leave? There
are Christians who might want to leave any country. Why
do you not sometimes help them? You do not help them
because 3 per cent of the population is Jewish. There are
6 million, I believe. I do not like round figures, unlike
Mr. Tekoah, who talks about those who lost their lives-but
6 million more or less. What do they do? They own most
of the mass media of information. I wish I had the list with
me; I have looked but unfortunately I have not. I would
have named those at the head of the television and radio
companies. The Jews-more
power to them. They are
Americans. First and foremost they should be Americans.
But should they use the mass media of information to
brainwash the American peopIe saying, “Here is a poor
Jewish people. We shouId help them.“?

That is Professor Lawrence of Arabia.
“This amusing anecdote”-1 am continuing from tllc
sermon-“bears
a special relevance for our Kol Nidrei
contemplation.
“Some Jews seem to believe that all one has to do asan
adherent of Judaism is to wait until some pressing,
desperate need arises, turn on the faucet and find water
of salvation spurting out. With a flick of the wrist, open
the spigot and, presto, there will be nothing to worry
about. Need I point out that such thinking stems froma
tragic fallacy? It represents a preposterous juvenile
religious attitude. When we find ourselves trapped in the
desert in which life periodically enwebs us, ‘faucet
Judaism’ is pathetically inadequate. Faucets are utterly
useless without reservoirs.”

87. And they disseminate all kinds of falsehoods under the
guise of freedom of information. I want to tell you what
kind of falsehood they disseminate in synagogues. I have
Jewish friends who go to synagogues, and they tell me these
things. I want to show you how the propaganda goes.

And so on and so on. If 1 read from that sermon of a
distinguished rabbi, it was to show you how the Arabs arc
pictured, as if they are so simple-minded that they take a
faucet and hang it in the air, and they drink water. Thisis
part of the propaganda, brainwashing the Jews who are nol
necessarily Zionists.

88. This is from a sermon about “Faucet Judaism”, in
1964. I took this from my files this morning. It is from a
sermon in 1964 by Rabbi Alexander Alan Steinbach, senior
Rabbi of Temple Ahavath Shalom, the largest reformed
congregation in Brooklyn: Chapter 6, the sermon for Kol
Nidrei-Yom
Kippur:

90. I warn this Council: any makeshift arrangements iel
this Council that may be brought about by the pressure of
major Powers to pave the way for a Status qlto arzte-and 1
mean by the status
quo
ante
the so-called cease-fire-will
not work out. Believe me, I am not talking off the top of
my head. I have seen the Arab youth. I have talked to
them. I have counselled patience. They are inflamed. And
by the youth, I mean those between the ages of 18 and 15.
And do not think they are Palestinians. They arc Arabs oi
many nationalities. They are all inflamed against this
artificial State that was created by two major Powers in the
First World War, and later by none other than the late
Harry Truman, the President of this great country. You
only have to read volume II of the paperback edition of his
memoirs to see what pressure the Zionists brought to bear
on Truman in order that they would be given Palestine.

“To those whose memory goes back to World War I the
Day of Atonement of Arabia will strike a familiar chord.
He was a spectacular,
adventurous British soldierarchaeologist and writer who helped organize the Arab
revolt against Turkey. Passionately devoted to the Arab
cause, he brought five uncouth Arabs to New York for
propaganda purposes and put them up at the Waldorf
Astoria.”
I believe he meant Lawrence, the so-called Lawrence of
Arabia. He was not for Arabia any more than I am for
people living on the moon.
“When the time arrived for the return journey he
noticed a suspicious bulkiness in the Arabs’ luggage. He
ordered them to open their suitcases and, to his amazement and chagrin, he discovered they were filled with
faucets taken from the hotel rooms.”
Now we know
faucets.

91. What I have said about the idea of Palestine being
given the Zionists by God may become hackneyed, but it
bears repetition. The Zionists used to say time and agaia~II
the early years-not since they have consolidated tllnn.
selves -“God gave us Palestine”. 1 spoke with them about

you have to bring in plumbers to take out

8

this in the thirties in London, and later in New York; the
last time I appeared was on a platform in Town Hall in
1944. I had private talks with Zionists. One could not go to
the Middle East in those war Years. I do not know how the
American friends brought them here to Town Hall. I was
asked to address an audience in Town Hall in 1944. Do you
know where it is? It is off Sixth Avenue, the Avenue of the
Americas. I think they still have meetings there. There were
1,500 people present, and when they found out J was an
Arab, they booed me. And then someonewho happenedto
be a Jew from Aleppo, and who spokeArabic, said“Give
the man a break, let him speak”. That wasthe first time I
found out that “a break” meansL‘achance”.

balanceof power. Let us not fool ourselvesI feel sorry for
every innocent Jew who might suffer; my heart would
bleedfor them as it would bleedfor any Arab, or for that
matter, any human being, regardless
of hisnationality.

92. There were14 Zionists brought over hereto brainwash
the American people. And now they do not have to do it
again. They contribute to the campaignof Senators-Jam
not interfering in your domestic affairs. It seemsthe
Kennedys havenot learnedanything from the past.The late
Kobert Kennedy during the six-day war, and your Governor, Mr. Rockefeller, coming from Genevato this Council
on the 11th-one was a Democrat and oneis a Republican,
the Governor-said, accordingto The New York Times,that
the best thing hashappenedby the victory of the Jewsovel
the Arabs; they will bring civilization to the Arabs.
Civilization to the Arabs! Who is that Kennedy? And now
his brother takes off, as if they have not had enough
tragedy. Ne is egging on the American people to bring
pressure on the President to help. To help whom’?The
Arabs? To help Israel. And who is this Jiockefellcr? 1
knew his father. J-tewas a good man. I knew him in the
forties. Read the author Tarbell to find out how he made
his fortune. When they made money they becamerespectable. And they want to bring civilization to the Arab world
through establishmentof a Zionist State amongstUS,andits
consolidation in the Arab world.
93. For 25 years, and even before, 1 warnedthe Council
and I warnedthe United Nations that there will be no peace
as long as this foreign element is amongstus, a festering
wound that hascausedthe abscess
and the high fever. And
there will be no peaceunlessthe pus is drainedfrom the
body politic andthe body socialof the Arab world.

95. If Baroody has spoken, it is not to talk about this
latest link; it is to take into account the whole chain of
events, to take the historical background.And beware,
United States of America, you will beonly 200yearsold in
1976. J hope I will be alive to celebratewith you your
independencefrom the erstwhilecolonialPower,although
you are friends now and you are membersof NATO
together. My good colleaguefrom the United Kingdom
understandswhen I quote the Arabic proverb: “Praisebe to
God who changesother peoplebut He never changes.”We
have been there in the areafor 6,000years.Forgetthat WC
are Arabs; we arc the Semites of the area and the
ScphardimJews are our brothers.They areSemites,and we
would accept the Khazar Jewsto be our brothers,but not
asour lords. Far be it from us that weshouldacceptthem
as our lords. We will fight and fight and fight, not to hurt
others but to preserveour freedom,our dignity.
96. So do not talk about the status quo arzte. With all due
respect to the Secretary-General,I amtalking to him about
that report of his. Please,Mr. Urquhart, 1 want to address
myself to the Secretary-General.I love what he wrote in his
report; who cannot praise what he wrote? But, my dear
Sir--and I am talking to you not only in your oFficia1
capacity but as a human beinglike all of ushere,let UScast
asideour titles-1 know in what a critical positionyou are. I
rememberhow Mr. Hammarskjijldgot himselfinto trouble
in the Congo affair, and I adviseyou not to take stepsthat
may involve you with Jew or Gentile. I am addressing
myself to you, and I do not want to embarrass
you andask
you to comment-becauseI couldif 1wanledto. Then you
might say, “No comment”, and then you would become
Americanized. This is no laughingmatter, although it is
sometimesgood to break the tensionwith somelaughter.

97. Even if the war ends tomorrow, it will be recommenced at a future date, either by lsraelor by the Arab
States, by the Arab people. Or we may haveanarchy, and
our interests and those of the United Statesand of any
94. Sir, the Council has a responsibility not to treat the
other country will go with the wind. Now, do not saythat
question piecemealbut to take it asa whole.That is why I
Baroody did not warn you: they will go with the wind.
have gone into the genesisagain and again.And I begyou,
Who can assureus that there will not be a world conflict’?
Sir, to bear with me. Of courseyou all have engagements, Why should the Zionists be the causeof this world
but a war is going on here. And if tomorrow it stops,there
conflict? BecauseGod gavethemPalestine?As I said,God
will be anotherwar. As J saidin the Assembly,thisis only a
doesnot parcel out land.
round. Do not think 1 am not sorry about the lossof lives,
whether of Jewsor of gentiles. After all, I alwayssay that
98. We will protect even our enemies,
in our tradition. We
the Jews are human beingslike everybody else--although will not do asyou did, WesternPowers,in Nuremberg.e
J do
now power hasmadethe Zionists arrogant.J standfor their
not know. Von Paulusyou kept in a villa, you the Soviet
Union. Once our enemiesstretch out their handsto live as
human rights asindividuals, but not at the expenseof the
human beings without a flag, we will acceptthem in our
Arab pcoplc. Arab Governmentsare expendable,but the
midst, but not under a flag.
Arab people arc one. I know what I am talking about. This
is not an oratorical speechJ am making.Do you want to
tonight, and I amnot through, but
make the Middle East a checkerboardfor the greatPowers 99. This is my message
knowing that it is almost 9 o’clock I shall respectyour
to play their chessgamc-not with woodenpiecesbut with
ts- you have beenworkinghard andthe human
the destiny of nations. includi:~;: the Jewish people‘? human rig11
rights of others who should perhapsgo and rest after an
Bcca~lsc the Jewish people will be sacrificed. By US?No:
arduous day but on how many occasionson other subthey will be sacrificed, when the tide turns, by the great
jects, nol ncccssarily on Palestine,haveWCstayedtill aftcl
I’owcrs if they pursue their policy of power politics’and
9

privilege of Lebanonto be the target of Israeli bombing.I
shallreadparagraph1:

midnight, till 3 a.m.‘! L am not sure whether there will be
enough courage on the part of the major Powers to set their
petty interests aside, and those who help Israel, not to play
with fire, because the fire might spread and then miscalculations may throw us all into a world conflict.

“...

100. The PRESIDENT: I now give the floor to the Vice
Foreign Minister of the Syrian Arab Republic in exercise of
his right of reply.

“CO~&ZHS the premeditated air attack by lsracl on
villagesin southern Lebanonin violation of its obligations
underthe Charter and Security Council resolutions;“.

101. Mr. ISMAIL (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation
from French): I have listened attentively to the statement
made by the Foreign Minister of the other side. That
statement calls for the following comments.

107. 1believethat those resolutionsare irrefutable.
108, Thirdly, the other party insistson accusing US of
vi:)lations of the cease-fire.I have madea lengthy statement
before the Council on this subject. In that statement1 said,
to summarize,that when the 1967 war broke out the
Security Council adopted resolution 235 (1967) of 9 June
1967.I shallnow read out that resolution:

102. First of all, he has omitted giving the Council any
explanation as to why the air force of his country uses
napalm bombs. Why? He has not replied. This omission
should be considered as an admission of the facts reported
by the United Press International -and that is to say that 1~
admits that the Israeli Air Force is usingnapalmbombs.
103. Second, as regards the denial of the other sidethat
civilian targets and the civilian population in my country
were subjectedto attacks by the Israeli Air Force, I would
simply wish to say that at present in Syria there are still
United Nations observerswho can report the facts. The lalc
Norwegian captain who was a member of the United
Nations observation team, who met death tragically with
his wife and his daughter, waskilled in his home, in hisown
apartment. Now could I ask, are apartments of United
Nations staff military targets for Israel? So it would seem.

“Recalling its resolutions 233 ( 1967) of 6 June
234 (1967) of 7 June 1967,

and

“Noting that the Governmentsof Israel and Syria have
announced their nluCual acceptance of the Council’s
demandfor a cease-fire,
“Noting the statementsmade
Syria and Israel,

by the representativesof

“1. CimJi’rnzs
its previous resolutionsabout immediate
104. The International Red Crossdid not makeits appeal
cease-fireand cessationof military action;
of 9 October without having observed on the spot the
gr:lvity of the situation. Furthermore, the history of Israel,
“2. DerrtcIncIsthat hostilities should ccasc forthwhen it comes to bombing civilian targets and civilian
with . .“.
populations, has a wealth of precedents. It is very rich in
precedents.Were 1 to read from United Nationsdocuments
Itiidcl did not wishto comply with that resolution.
all the resolutions which have condemnedIsrael becauseof
these bombingsof civilian targetsand civilian populations,I
109. The Security Council adopted another resolution,
would keep you here until after midnight. But it is a little
too late to do that and I shallcontent myself with referring 236 (1967) of 11 June 1967, in whicll, inter alia, it called
for “the prompt return to the cease-firepositions of any
to two Security Council resolutions.
troops which may have moved forward subsccluentto I630
hoursGMT on 10June 1967”.
105. The first is resolution 265 (1969) of 1 April 1969. I
shall read paragraph3, that is to say, the last paragraphof
the resolution:
110. Israelstarted its attack againstSyria on 9 June, that
is to say, after having declared and notified the Securily
“The Security Council,
Council that it accepted resolution 235 ( 1967) about the
cease-fireand the cessationof military operations, It also
‘6. . .
ignored resolution 236 ( 1Y67), in which the Security
Council called upon
Israel to return to the ccasc-fire
“Ciindemns the recent premeditated air attacks positionsat 1030hourson 10June. It continued its attack,
launched by Israel on Jordanian villagesand populated stopping only on 12 June. These facts arc confirmctl by
Gcncral David LlaLarwho isat prcscnt the C’hicf of Staff of
areasin flagrant violation of the United Nations Charter
Israel and who at the tiinc of the 1967 war was tlic
and the cease-fireresolutions, and warnsonce againthat
Commander of the Israeli I’orcos which utlucked my
if SUCII attacks were to bc repcatcd the Security Council
would have to meet to consider further and more country. I-lad lsracl complictl with tllc Security Council
effective steps as envisaged in the Charter to ensure resolutions011the ccasc-fire, had Israel uot violated ttic
againstrepetition of suchattacks,”
cease-fire,no part of the Lcrritory of iiiy co~ritry
would bc
occupied by Israel today. Whl
the Minister for l:orcigtl
106. But
there
is another resolution -resolution
Affairs
of Israelwas here, he did nof dart reply.
I challenge
-_.
~~
270 ( 1969) of 26 August 196Y. That time it was the
the rcprcscntativcof Israel to reply tu inc.
10

11 I. Fourtlily, as for Israel’s respect for our Organization,
its organs and its resolutions, I shall give one single
example: the representative of Israel on 30 November 1972
before the Special Political Committee2 openly and candidly declared that his country did not accept the application of the Fourth Geneva Convention. I should like to
know-and I ask the representative of Israel to say-whether
Israel agrees to observe and comply with the Geneva
Conventions. I am anxiously awaiting a reply.

116. I should like to point out that Israel has been
condemned twice by the Commission on Human Rights, at
its twenty-eighth
and twenty-ninth sessions; Israel was
condemned for having committed war crimes. There were
no actual military operations, but the misdeeds in the
occupied Syrian territory were so serious that the Commission on Human Rights considered that Israel had to be
condemned for war crimes. What Israel is doing now by
bombing our urban centres and killing our civilian population I really can find no words to describe. “War crimes”
is not enough. “Genocide”, possibly,

112. Fifthly, the other party accuses us of bombing
populated urban areas. Where ? In the Golan Heights--that
is to say, in our territory, Syrian territory--Masadu, Bukata,
Majdal Shams. Those are typically Hebrew names I suppose! They are Syrian names. But what we bombed were
not these cities-no, not at all; it was the settlements which
the Israelis have built.

117. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of the
United Kingdom, who wishes to exercise his right of reply.
118. Sir Donald MAITLAND (LJnited Kingdom): In her
intervention the representative of Guinea mentioned a news
agency report that Phantom aircraft had staged at a Royal
Air Force station in Cyprus on their way to Israel. I wish to
tell the Council, with the authority of my Government,
that that report is totally without foundation.

113. The representative of Syria drew the attention of the
Security Council to the building of these settlements and to
the political significance of their construction, which could
mean only one thing-the violation of the cease-fire line
since to violate the cease-fire is not only to open fire; it is
also to distort and to alter the physical nature and change
the demographic structure of the occupied territory ---this,
too, was a serious violation of the cease-fire. These are
serious violations of the Geneva Conventions, and this, of
course, is passed over in silence. But there is more. When
the representative of Syria addressed an official letter to the
President of the Security Council [S/85.50 of 18 April
lY68] in which he drew attention to the fact that Israel
was colonising the occupied Syrian territory, the representative of Israel-Mr. Tekoah, himself--replied in his letter of
24 April I968 addressed to the President of the Security
Council. I read from his letter:

119. The PRESIDENT:
Israel.

I call on the representative of

120. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Israel’s Minister for Foreign
Affairs has said all that we intended to say at this meeting.
However, the two additional interventions by the representatives of Egypt and of Syria and their kinsman from Saudi
Arabia, compel me to exercise my right of reply.
121. Even as Israel is locked in a struggle to defend the
Jewish people’s right to life and independence it is fully
aware of and will not forget the treachery and mendacity
accompanying the renewal of Arab aggression. These
reached a climax at the Council’s previous meeting, on
9 October. The orgy of falsehood and abuse, the outbursts
of primitive anti-Semitism at that meeting have shocked the
civilized world, further damaged the stature of the Security
Council, and tarnished the name of the United Nations.
Yet, this has continued today as well.

“The pursuance by Syria of active belligerency against
Israel creates grave security problems. The Nuhd corps, to
which the letter of the representative of Syria refers, are
military units of the Israel Defence Forces. . . .”
[S/8558./

122. By charging a non-existent raid on the Soviet
Embassy in Damascus, and a non-existent air attack on
Cairo, by alleging non-existent casualties among the diplomatic personnel of the Soviet Embassy, the Egyptian and
Syrian Foreign Ministers and their supporters created in this
Security Council an atmosphere that has been described by
eye witnesses, including representatives of international
information media, as pogromist.

I 14. When we say that they colonized our occupied
territory and built settlements they tell us: but these are
nlilitary units; then it is not colonization. It is for
seIf-protection. But, when now, during this war we bomb
tllese colonies, these military units, the representative Of
Israel says that these are civilian-populated areas and that
we arc violating the Geneva Conventions. Well, the other
party should make up its mind. Arc these military units-as
Mr. Tekoah himself said in his official letter addressed to
the President of the Security Council-or not?

123. The Syrian authorities have denied that any Soviet
nationals were killed at the Soviet Embassy or at the Soviet
cultural centre. The Egyptian Government has called the
talk of a raid on Cairo “downright nonsense”. Yet, under
pretext of this nonsense and these falsehoods certain
members of the Security Council joined in a demonstration
of blind hatred and inveterate one-sidedness. The known
inability of United Nations organs to address themselves to
the Middle East situation in an equitable and responsible
manner has never been more evident.

I 15. When this accusation was levelled against us, immcdi:itely an official spokesman at Damascus denied it. He
affirmed that we only bombed military targets. The A’&&
of thcsc settlements arc actually military units. And this is
confirmed in an official letter addressed by the permanent
representative of Israel to the President of the Security
Cc~unciI from which I have just read.

124. Those who unleash aggression know that they expose
their people, including the civilian population, to danger.
11

They know that war, as my ‘Foreign Minister stressed,
cannot be one-sided. Which is-the war-that has not resulted
in civilian casualties? Even if the vile calumnies regarding
civilian casualties in Damascus and Cairo were true, by what
right would the aggressors-Syria
and Egypt-complain
about the inevitable consequences of their own sanguinary
initiative of 6 October?

Middle East aflame once more. Security Council resolutions
establishing the cease-fire are, according to him, not valid,
This is a strange theory for one who has tried for years to
appear, again and again, as the defender of United Nations
resolutions, even those which have only a recommendatory
character, even those which reflect only partisan posi?ions
and not the unanimous view of the members of the
Security Council, after consultations
with the parties
concerned, as the cease-fire resolutions of 1967 did.

125. What right would their supporters have to make of
this a reason for the vulgar spectacle which we witnessed
here the day before yesterday, and which is being pursued
today? Have they expressed any sorrow, any grief, over the
bombardment of Israeli civilian localities mentioned by me
at the previous meeting, repeated again by the Foreign
Minister at this meeting? Have they extended their
condolences to the bereaved Israeli families? Have they
ever voted a resolution condemning the murder of innocent
Jewish men, women and children by Arab terrorists? Have
they ever requested the President of the Security Council to
convey sympathy to the fathers and mothers, to the wives,
to the children, of the Ksraeli athletes killed at the Olympic
Games in Munich, or the Jews and Christian pilgrims
massacred at Lod Airport?

129. The Deputy Foreign Minister of Syria treated us to
another variant of such duplicity. Syria has torn to pieces
the principles and provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations in its relations with Israel, ever since its attack
against the nascent Jewish State in 1948. Syria refuses to
recognize Security Council resolution 242 (1967), whicll
has been for the past six years the very foundation of the
United Nations peace efforts in the area. Syria is not ready
to admit into its territory representatives of the United
Nations trying to work for harmony, understanding and
peace between Israel and its Arab neighbours.
130. Yet, the representative of that Government comes
here and preaches to us respect for the United Nations and
its resolutions, and at length quotes out of them, selectively
of course, in the manner to which he is so accustomed, His
respect for truth and law has been demonstrated in
particular by the announcement he has just made that only
localities in the Golan Heights have been bombarded by the
Syrian armed forces, only civilian villages in the GoIan
Heights have been attacked by Syrian artillery and Syrian
missiles.

126. HOW much more odious the conduct of the Arab
representatives and their supporters has been in view of the
falsehoods on which they based these outbursts. Today, we
have witnessed a similar travesty of logic, law and morality.
Not only have Egypt and Syria initiated the present
hostilities; they are complaining that Israel is fighting back.
TO describe today’s military actions against military air.
fields-or a civilian air field closed since 6 October by the
Syrian authorities and used only by military aircraft-power
stations, refineries and other oil installations, radar posts,
naval headquarters, whether they be in Horns, Latakia,
Damascus or the Nile Delta mentioned here today, as
civilian targets is as justified as calling the initiators of the
aggression of last Saturday the victims of aggression.

131. Now at two successive meetings we have given a list
of names of those villages. Does he expect us really to
believe that he can move MigdJ-Haemek
Gvat, Nahalal,
Nazareth, into the Golan Heights, from deep in Galilee?
132. But I do take note of the fact that the Deputy
Foreign Minister of Syria has formatly, before the Security
CounciI of the United Nations, admitted that the Frog
missiles which have been bombarding Israeli territory since
6 October were directed not against any military targets,
but against civilian localities, and let the map answer the
question as to where those localities are situated. indeed,
Arab leaders no longer insist on one falsehood, and that is
that Israel initiated the hostilities of 6 October. They are
now trying, as the representatives of Egypt and Syria have
done today, to justify their aggression by claiming that
these countries are liberating Arab territory.

127. f have in front of me an official statement from
Cairo, issued today, and I read:
“Earlier today fighters shot down four Israeli planes
which attacked Egyptian air fields in the northern Nile
Delta area, Port Said and the Canal areas, an official
communique said.”
And from Damascus 1 quote another statement from the
Syrian Government: “Syrian defences and fighters shot
down 66 Israeli planes today.” Apparently the mendacity
regarding losses continues even in official communiqu6s.
“The spokesman said Israeli planes continued to attack
Syrian land positions, ground defences and airports today.”
Yet, the representatives of Egypt and Syria come before the
Security Council in the apparent belief that we are on the
moon and unable to follow these official statements, and
repeat the odious spectacle of the last meeting.

133. This is exactly the same pretext they used when they
invaded Israel in 1948 in defiance of the LJnited Nations. At
that time the onslaught on Israel’s emergence as au
independent State, at that time the openly proclaimed aim
to massacre all the Jews of Palestine was also alleged to
have been an effort at liberating Arab land. This was
precisely the excuse used by them for the continuous
attacks against Israel and its civilian population in the
1950s and in the 1960s by Sedayeen terrorist squads
organized by the Egyptian and Syrian Governments and
trained and controlled by the Egyptian and Syrian armies.
Now it is again an alleged effort to liberate. Whenever
Egyptian and Syrian cohorts have struck to kill Israelis and

128. Behind all this, of course, looms the big lie regarding
the origin of the attack on 6 October. I have taken note of
the fact that the Foreign Minister of Egypt no longer claims
that Israel started that attack. Now it is a new theory that
he puts forth. There was no cease-fire, we heard him say
today, and therefore Egypt was apparently free to set the
12

and siaughtered the Jewish men, women and children
assembledfor prayer in the synagogues
of Warsawand
Byalistok. In 1943 it was on the Day of Atonement that
they did the samein the ghettoesof Vilniusand Lublin.

to deprive the Jewish people of its right to live in freedom,
in peace, in security, the world has been asked to consider
the attackers as being on a liberating mission,

134. The civilized world is sick and tired of such liberators. The Hebrew nation has had enough of murderers
shedding Jewish blood in the name of slogans such as
religious truth, racial superiority,justice and morality,

140. Those who have watched and studiedthe attitude of
the Arab leaderstowards the Jewishpeopleand its rights
know that it wasin a similar spirit of fanaticalhatred and
bloodlust that Egypt and Syria attackedIsraelon the Day
of Atonement 1973. Like the Nazis,they too thought we
would be caught unawareon sucha day, unableto defend
ourselves.They were wrong.

135. The problem in the Middle East today is not one of
occupation or liberation. Egypt and Syria waged war
against Israel on the 1947 lines; Egypt and Syria continued
war against Israel on the 1949 armistice lines; and now they
are attacking Israel along the 1967 cease-fire lines. The
problem is not any particular miIitaIy line at any particular
time: the issue is the relentless war of aggression which the
Arab States launchedagainstIsrael’svery existencein 1948
and have carriedon sincethen.

141. The affinity with Nazi thought andthe Nazi attitude
towards the Jewishpeopleis not newfor Egypt’sPresident.
Thus, in September 1953, severalnewsagenciesreported
that Hitler was still alive. On the basisof that report, a
Cairo daily, Al-Moussawar, asked a number of Egyptian
personalitiesthe following question:“If you wishedto send
Hitler a personalletter, what would you write to him?”

136. It is for that reason--andno other--that we are on
the cease-firelines. It is immaterial along which linesthis
war is being conducted or resumed:the aggression
remains
the same; its origin is the same; responsibility for it
continues to rest with Egypt and Syria.

142. Anwar Sadat was one of those questioned.His
answer, published in Cairo’s Al-Maussawar,number1510,
of 18 September19.53,reads,inter aliu:

137. Egypt and Syria opened war againstIsrael in 1948
because they did not want peacewith the JewishState and
sought Israel’s destruction. They refusedto terminatethis
war for 25 years becausethey did not want peaceand
continued to strive for Israel’selimination as a sovereign
State. They have now resumedthe hostilitiesto escapethe
need to negotiate peace, including secureand recognized
boundaries,

“My dear Hitler:
“I congratulate you from the bottom of my heart. Even
if you appearto have beendefeated,in reality you are the
victor. You may be proud of havingbecomethe immortal
leader of Germany. Wewill not be surprisedif you appear
again in Germany, or if a new Hitler risesup in your
wake.”

138. How fickle has been Egypt’s and Syria’s argumentation during the past few days, trying to explain away
their aggression.Their proposition in fact is that temporary,
pre-1967 military armistice lines, persistentlyviolated and
disregarded by them, are moreimportant than Israel’sright
to peace and security. The sandsof Sinai and the rocksof
Golan are, accordingto Egypt and Syria, more sacredthan
the life of an entire people, the right of the State of Israel
to exist. Only a neurotic concept of what law is andshould
be could support sucha view.

Well, new Hitlers have risen up: in the Nile Delta and in
Damascus.

139. Much hasalready beensaidabout Egypt’s and Syria’s
choice of the Day of Atonement for their aggression.
The
6th of October, as is known, wasthe most solemnday of
the Jewish calendar-the Day of Atonement, a day of fast
and prayer when young and old alike are gatheredwith
their families at worship and at home. This is a time when
the entire country is at rest; all work at a standstill;radio
and television stations silent; transportation immobile. I
should like to mention one other aspect of this blasphemous choice for the perpetration of the treacherous
attack. It was this day, the Day of Atonement, that the
Nazis used to select for massacres
of Jews.It wason this
Day of Judgementin 1941 that the Nazi SSsquadsbrought
90,000 Jewish men, women and children to Babi Yar, in
the suburbs of Kiev, madethem dig massgravesand then
mercilessly mowed them down with machine-guns.
It was
on this day of fast and prayer that they usedto surround
synagogues and butcher all the worshippersin them. It was
cn Yom Kippur of I942 that Nazi military forcesattacked
13

143. This is the face of the enemy that Israelconfronts
today. We know that he feels towardsus asthe Nazis did.
We know that if he could, he would completethe Nazi
objective of annihilating the Jewish people and would
destroy its State. WCshall fight him asthe nationsvictims
of Nazi aggressionfought With all -our soul and all our
might, until the Jewishpeople canlive like others--inpeace
and security.
144. The I- I~ESIDENT: I now call on the representativeof
the Syrian Arab Republic, who wishesto speakin exercise
of his right of reply.
145. Mr. ISMAIL (Syrian Arab Republic)(intevv’etation
from French): I shallnot take long,but at the very outsetI
shouldlike to stressthat 1 am incapableof usingthe kind of
languageused by the representativeof Israel.I will gladly
accordhim that privilege.
146. With regard to massacres
andgenocide,Israelisa past
master. Proof of this is the well-knownmassacres
in the
history of Israel, of which I shall mention only a few.
Everyone knows of Qibia, Deir Yassim,Kfar Kassemandof
the bombing in Egypt of the Bahrel-Bakarprimary school,
where dozens of little children weremassacred.
That ismy
first comment.

147. Secondly, I did not hear the Israeli representative
reply to my question about the use of napalm. Perhaps I
was deaf when he was replying, but I did not hear anything
about it. Nor did he reply to my statement that Israel had
not observed Security Council resolutions 235 (1967) or
236 (1967).

barous acts committed, according to the reports of United
Press International and Agence France Presse, by the Israeli
Air Force. Fortunately, casualties were fewer than indicated in the reports of those two agencies. But the
destruction actually turned out to be greater. A woman
named Kurinicheva who taught Russian at the Sollict
Cultural Centre in Damascus was killed. A delayed-actiotl
bomb fell on the premises of the Centre. The building was
reduced to rubble. The living quarters of Soviet personnel
were severely damaged by the bombing. Six apartments
were destroyed and more than 10 persons were seriously
iniured. These are concrete facts taken from official reports
which we have received from MOSCOW.

148. Thirdly, he did not reply either to my reference to
the two 1968 Security Council resolutions on the bombing
in Lebanon and Jordan of urban centres and civilian
populations.
149. Nor did he reply to my comment on Israel’s refusal
to comply with the Geneva Conventions. I gave reference
numbers and dates; J indicated officia1 documents of this
Council. Yet there was no reply.

155. How, then, can it be claimed that nothing of that
sort happened’? I ask the representative of Israel, how cat1
the Security Council and all those present be misled in this
way? How do you dare to defend such barbarous raids 011
residential areas and on the diplomatic quarter? Do you
and your Minister call them “military targets”? That was
how the I-litlerites justified the destruction of towns and
inhabited localities in Western Europe during the Second
World War, the “Coventryfication”
of Coventry and the
destruction of more than 1,700 towns and tens of
thousands of inhabited localities in the USSR-then putting
forward various pretexts for these barbarous misdeeds. Yet
today two official representatives of the aggressor country
have spoken in justification of these misdeeds. What is
more, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the aggressor
country raises the question of “original responsibility”:
who initiated the hostilities? The whole world knows who
started the war against the Arab countries and who has
been waging it without interruption since 1967 and earlier.
In answer to this question we have the official replies of the
United Nations and the decisions of the Security Council.
Who is guilty of aggression and who has been repeatedly
condemned by the two main organs of the United Nations,
the Security Council and the General Assembly?
The
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the aggressor State, speaking
today at an official meeting of the Council, has tried to
defend the murders and justify these barbarous raids and
the killings of peaceful people. Moreover, he pretends that
he does not know who is guilty. But in fact he bears direct
responsibility for the aggression of his State. You ask why?
There are precedents. Tl;ere is the international practice
applied to war criminals at the Nuremberg trial when
Ribbentrop, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Hitler’s Reich,
was condemned on the ground of his direct responsibility
for the aggressive acts of Hitlerite Germany. Today’s
aggressors should bear this in mind and not forget it.

150. Before concluding, I should like to refresh somewhat
the memories of everyone here, including the representative
of Israel. There is a Jewish holiday known as the festival of
the sabbath, a sacred occasion for the Jewish people. We
respect that religious holiday. But it was on that day last
year that Israel kiUnChed
a tremendous attack against
Lebanon. What does that mean? It means that when there
is a religious holiday it does not necessarily prevent the
Israeli forces from going on the attack. They did so last
year against Lebanon; they did so this time, too, on
6 October 1973.
15 1. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of
the Soviet Union to speak in exercise of his right of reply.
1.52. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
ftranslution ffom Russian): It has been a long time since the
Security Council and its members heard such cynical
attempts on the part of two officia1 representatives of an
aggressor country to justify its misdeeds, the barbarous
murders of peaceful people. These advocates of war crimes
were the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Israel, a country
branded as an aggressor in numerous decisions of the
United Nations, and the official representative of that
country in the Security Council.
1.53. Indeed, the day before yesterday the members of the
Council expressed their indignation and condemned the
Israeli aggressors and the Israeli Air Force pilots who, on
the orders of the Israeli Command, carried out a raid
against Damascus, the capital of Syria; according to press
reports, the Israeli Air Force carried out raids against
residential areas of the Syrian capital, including the area in
which the missions of foreign States are situated. As a result
of these raids, buildings on the premises of some diplomatic
missions were destroyed and dozens of people were killed,
including diplomats and members of their families.

156. Eban, with his English education, assumes the role of
a naive person and tells us here: “We do not know what it is
that Egypt and Syria want.” This reminds me of the
Russian saying, “Are you stupid or are you just pretending
to be stupid? ” But no one would call the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Israel stupid. He is a clever and educated
man, versed in military matters; he was, I think a
lieutenant-my
distinguished colleague, the representative
of the United Kingdom, will correct me if I arn wrong-in
the British Navy. He knows what war is, how it is prepared
and how it is waged, and he knows the difference between
the combatants and the peaceful population; no doubt he is
also familiar with the relevant provisions of the Geneva

154. The newspapers reported that the Israeli air pirates
carried out a strafing attack and shot down women and
children in the streets of the Syrian capital. The Israeli
representative denied that Soviet citizens had been killed,
but that is a Goebbels-like trick-to
lie in such a way that
those who do not know the facts will beIieve the lie. The
Security Council and its members emotionally and with all
the dignity of their perfectly understandable sense of
outrage decisively and categorically condpmned these bar14

i

Conventions on the law of war and the difference between
the combatants and the peaceful population, But here he is
speaking as though he were an innocent, uninformed
person. He does not know what Egypt and Syria want. But,
hearing Ihis question fro11z such an educated and experienced politician, a statesman, a diplomat, who has
represented Israel for many years here in the United
Nations, you cannot help recalling the Russian saying I just
mentioned. This is monstrous hypocrisy. He knows very
well what Syria wants and what Egypt wants. Our
distinguished friend Mr. El-Zayyat, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Egypt, told him what they want, They want, as
Mr. El-Zayyat said in his statement here in the Council and
in the General Assembly,3 to return to the 11o~nes taken
from
them by the Israeli aggressors. That is a straight and
clear answer. No one sitting here can have any doubt that
both of them-Mr. Eban and Ambassador Tekoah-know
perfectly well what the Syrians and the Egyptians want.

160. Israel is waging a criminal war against the Arab
countries in Arab territory, seeking to establish itself there
and appropriate that territory. It is using impermissible
means---napalm, shelling and aerial bombardment of the
peaceful population-which
have already led to the death,
as Mr. El-Zayyat, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt, has
informed US, of more than 500 peaceful inhabitants.
161. The Arab countries are defending their land, their
towns and their homes, which they want to liberate from
foreign occupation. It is a sacred struggle for every people
which has been subjected to aggression.
1611. Fortunately, I see at this table few representatives of
the countries which experienced attacks by the Hitlerite air
force during the Second World War, the destruction of their
towns and inhabited localities, the killing of their citizens
and the destruction of buildings. We are happy for those
whose countries have not experienced this. We have
experienced it. I see here the representative of FranceFrance experienced it. I see here the representative of
Yugoslavia-Yugoslavia
experienced it. I see the representative of Byelorussia, my friend, Comrade Gurinovich,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Byelorussia--Byelorussia
experienced it. One in four of the inhabitants of his
country perished at the hands of the Hitlerite barbarians.

157. At previous meetings of the Security Council the
Soviet delegation has repeatedly set forth the position of
principle of the Soviet Union in connexion with the events
in the Middle East. The reason for the present aggravated
situation in that area is the unceasing aggression of Israel
against the Arab States, the desire of the Israeli ruling
circles td expand their territory at the expense of the
neighbouring Arab countries, and the refusal, Israel’s
stubborn refusal, to establish a just peace in the Middle
East. Pursuing its expansionist, aggressive policy towards
the Arab countries, during the six years since its attack on
Egypt, Syria and Jordan in June 1967 and its occupation of
part of the territory of those States, Israel has stubbornly
refused to carry out the decisions of the Security Council
and the Genera1 Assembly concerning a peaceful settlement; it has sabotaged the Jarring mission and flagrantly
violated the Charter of the United Nations and the
generally accepted standards of international law. But the
Minister for Foreign Affairs speaks here and pretends that
he does not know why such events are takjng place in the
Middle East or what Syria and Egypt want.

163. When the representative of the aggressor speaks at an
official meeting of the Security Council and tries to defend
the murders, the barbarous attacks on peaceful towns,
peaceful residential areas and the diplomatic quarter, then I
think it is difficult to imagine greater cynicism and, if I may
say so, greater insolence.
164. The Soviet people understand the feelings of the
Arab peoples very well, for we ourselves experienced
Fascist occupation during the Second World War. We are
happy that the American people have not experienced this.
Perhaps, indeed, that explains why some people in the
United States take such distressing events so lightly.

IS-% The Soviet people have never doubted and do not
doubt that the aggressor will fail in its attempt to impost its
will
on the Arabs and that it will have to withdraw from the
Arab territories which it seized. The longer Israel opposes
the establishment of’ a just peace in the Middle East, the
more inglorious will be the end awaiting its aggressive
policy. Such an end is inevitable.

165. We know the feelings of those who are subjected to
barbarous attacks by an enemy air force and set the strafing
enemy aircraft kill their relatives ancl loved ones before
their very eyes. WC understand their feelings and the
profound righteous indignation, the tremendous feeling of
national hatred and anger towards the annexationists and
aggressors, and the sacred aspiration to liberate their own
soil from foreign occupation. We experienced these feelings
to the full during the Second World War. We know and
understand them as do many other peoples in hWpC
d
in other countries, including the peoples of some of the
countries whose representatives are sitting at this table and
in this chamber, as I have already remarked.

159. Consistently supporting the search for a peaceful,
political settlement in the Middle East on the basis of the
well-known
decisions of the. Security Council and the
General Assembly, the Soviet Union, in full confornlity
with the principles of the Charter, has always considered
and still considers that, faced with Israel’s stubborn refusal
to accept a just political settlement in the Middle East, the
Arab States are fully entitled to fight for the liberation of
tlleir occupied territories. They are so entitled under Article
S I of the Charter, which establishes the inalienable right of
States Members of the United Nations to self-defeace iJ1the
event of aggression.

166. The Soviet Union supports the just liberation struggle
of th: &al) pcr$cs against. imperialist aggression and it
considers that this struggle is legitimate and sacred, as
indeed was the struggle of the Soviet people, the people of
France, the people of Yugoslavia and the peol)les of many
other European countries against foreign aggression during
the Second World War.
15

167. In their statements during the debate the overwhelming majority of members of the Council have
condemned Israel as an aggressor and have noted that the
main cause of the present war in the Middle East is Israel’s
continuing occupation of Arab lands and its policy of
obstructionism and disregard of all United Nations efforts
to achieve a peaceful settlement on the basis of United
Nations decisions. The majority of members of the Council,
like many, very many delegations speaking in the general
debate in the General Assembly, have firmly insisted and
continue to insist on the withdrawal of Israeli troops from
the occupied Arab territories and have expressed themselves
in favour of securing the lawful rights of the Arab people of
Palestine.
168. Some members of the Security Council have called
on the Council to consider the question of applying
sanctions against Israel in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter VII of the Charter if Israel continues its aggression.
Thus, the majority of the members of the Council have
condemned Israel as an aggressor and have called for the
withdrawal
of Israeli troops from the occupied Arab
territories.
IG9. The overwhelming majority of the members of the
Council have drawn attention to the justness of the struggle
waged by the Arab Republic of Egypt and by Syria to
liberate the lands occupied by Israel in 1967 and drive the
aggressor from territories which have been part of the Arab
countries since time immemoria1.

174. This afternoon you heard the statements of tile
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt on the cease-fire and
you have heard how the delegation of Israel has distorted
this. Tomorrow you will have the verbatim record of this
meeting and you will be able to compare what my Mill&r
for Foreign Affairs has said and the inaccurate and deceitful
allegations made by Israel on the subject in order to avoid
addressing itself to the specific points raised by the
Egyptian Foreign Minister in this regard.
175. Secondly, the delegation of Israel has read out
certain communiquCs from the Egyptian press on air raids
on the Egyptian front. You all know that the Israelis have3
monopoly of violence, of destruction, of destroying places
where the refugees live. They have the monopoly of
expelling the refugees from their territory. But we were
um1ware that the Israeli delegation or Israel has a monopoly
on information from the Egyptian Government. But there
are other sources of information; there are other press
communiqu& which may have been issued. I have with me
a communiquC from the International Committee of the
Red Cross which, being alarmed by the damage inflicted OH
the civilian population, has issued an appeal for a cessation
of the attacks upon civilians.
176. From time to time the delegation of Israel speaks of
anti-Semitism. 1 do not know what they mean by antiSemitism. That word does not intimidate us. But it must be
emphasized that whenever Israel is isolated diplomatically,
it ialls back on the use of that extortion.
177. When one hears the delegation of Israel speak here
before you whenever the Security Council discusses the
Middle East, we have the impression that we are not in the
Security Council within the framework of the Charter, but
at a banquet or $1 ,OOO-a-plate dinner organized by the
Zionists to buy Phantoms and other weapons to kill our
women and children and ref,lgees everywhere in the Middle
East. We are not at a conferl:rrce to glorify Zionism and the
aggressive nature of Israel. We are at the Security Council
where one is to observe and respect the territorial integrity
of States, and hear statements about the inadmissibiiity of
occupying territories by force and respect for the saver.
eignty and territorial integrity of Member States. This is
what we should be hearing here. This is the criteria with
which we should judge the attitudes of the two parties.
Religious fervour belongs in the temples; it belongs at
conferences organized by Zionists. But we are here in the
Security Council where the Charter must be respected aad
invoked.

170. With equal justification it has been pointed out here
during the debate that Israel’s occupation of the Arab lands
is the main obstacle to a peaceful settlement in the Middle
East. That is what Syria and Egypt want. If the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Israel does not understand that and asks
in a meeting of the Security Council “What do they
want? “, then that is tragic. Ii is time for the Israeli leaders
and one of Israel’s most responsible statesmen-its Minister
for Foreign Affairs-to
understand that Syria and Egypt, on
a lawful basis and in accordance with the decisions of the
United Nations, want ta recover the lands which were taken
from them unlawfully and in violation of the numerous and
repeated United Nations decisions on the inadmissibility of
the acquisition of territory by force or war.
171. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of
Egypt in exercise of his right of reply.
172. Mr. OSMAN (Egypt) (interpretation from French):
My delegation would have wished to take up one by one
the allegations, lies and deceits with which the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Israel and his delegation have flooded the
Security Council this afternoon and this evening but, since
the hour is late, my delegation will spare the Council and at
this stage of the debate will confine itself to a few remarks.

178. To conclude-if the delegation of Israel comes here
to complain about war victims, if they ask for condolences,
they could have avoided all of that if they had respected
the Charter. If they respect the United Nations resolutions
and leave Egyptian, Syrian and Jordanian territories, then
they would have no cause to come here to complain.
179. The PRESIDENT: I call now on the representative of
Israel in exercise of his right of reply.

173. Members of the Council are already accustomed to
the theatrical rhetoric and tactics of the delegation of Israel
whenever the Security Council is seized of the question of
the Middle East. The falsifications which the delegation of
Israel is skilled at have already been made in the Council.

180. Mr. TEKOAM (Israel): To the Egyptian representative, I would make only one remark. After 25 years of
waging continuous aggressive warfare against my country,
16

i
E
I

after 35 years of refusing to recognize its sovereignty, its
lines, even its very right to exist asan independentState,
what we heard now about the need for respect for
territorial integrity and sovereignty .really does make
strange music. And 1 must say that the kind of reactions
that all of USmust have been reading in this morning’s
press, and yesterday’s press, and heard in international
information media regardingwhat transpiresat our meetings here at this Security Council, is frequently the resultof
the kind of duplicity and hypocrisy to which the rcpresentativc OF Egypt resorted a while agoandhis colleagues
have
done for the last two and a half decades.

to reply to this: By this definition which you threw at US,
all the Soviet marshalsand generals
andofficers andsoldiers
who defended themselvesagainstthe Nazi aggressors
in the
Second World War should be consideredcriminals and
barbarians--andno one, 1 think, in his right mind would
suggestthat. But there is one law, if there is law at all in
this world, and it will be the samefor the SovietUnion and
its military forces and its leadersasit is for Israeland its
Government and its armedforces.

184. blow can the representativeof the Soviet Union
repeat again and again----as
we usedto say in the Soviet
Union, like another editorial in Rwvdaor Izvestia, and by
“we” I mean all those who werein the Soviet Union at the
181. To the representativeof the Soviet I:nion 1 would
time, Soviet citizens and foreignersalike--the chargethat
like to say, 1 wish he and his Government contributedjust
the
INdeli
air actions were not directed againstmilitary
part of the effort to achievepeacein the Middle Eastasit
targetswhen 1 have read here--andhe will beableto check
does to the extent and thicknessof the protocols of the
with the verbatim record---officialcommuniqutsof the
Security Council. One thing is clear after his observations, Syrian and Egyptian Governmentspinpointingthe military
and that is what the Soviet Union wants underthe present installations which were attacked? And you shouldknow,
circunlstances. One thing is clear after listening to the
AmbassadorMatikkyou rememberthose days very well,
representative of the LJSSR,and that is that his Govcm- and my Foreign Minister pointed this out-that war cannot
merit supports the renewalof aggression
by the Arab Slates bo unilateral and war alwaysbringsgrief andsufferingalso
on 6 October. I take note of that fact.
to the civilians, especially to thosein the proximity of
military targets.You had onceupona time in TsaristRussia
182. AmbassadorMalik spoke of responsibility for war
a saying: “All except the Jews”,Thiswill not be. If there is
now and even bcforc, he said, 1 have here a list of
a law for you, the samelaw will apply to us.Do not come
statements tnade by him, by his presentForeign Minister, to preach to us on the basisof theorieswltich you have
and by other representativesof the Soviet 1Jnionin the
adopted from Arab Governmentswhich collaboratedwith
Security Council and the General Assembly at the time
Hitler againstyou and which arecontinuingHitler’sdesigns
when the conflict in the Middle Eastfirst started in 1948.
towards the Jewishpeople.
And at that time the representativesof the LJSSRhad no
hesitation at all in sayingvery clearly who the aggressor
was 185. You spoke today about the allegedattack on Soviet
and pointing their fingersat the Arab Governments.NOW,
buildings in Damascusin a somewhatdifferent tone as
history and fact is not going to be changedwith every
comparedwith the outburst WCall witnessedhereonly the
statenlent in the Security Council delivered by represen- day before yesterday. Falsehood’!Is it enoughfor sometatives of the Soviet Union. The war to which the Middle
thing simply to be passedon to you by another Arab
East has been subjectedby the Arab Statessince1948is
representative for you to makea spectacleof blind hatred
the same war of aggression
initiated by them at that time.
asyou did the other day’?
There was a period of truce followed by a period of
186 I should like to put on record what happenedin
armistice, and now, since 1967, a period of cease-fire.And
Damascusregarding the Soviet Embassyand the Cultural
today we heard the theory that even the cease-firewu
Centre, a report by eye-witnesses,
a report basedon official
non-existent and invalid, But there was never a time of
peace. It is the samewar; it is the sameaggression.
Those Syrian communiquds, dated Damascus,9 October and
of the ReuterAgency
responsible for its initiation are the sametoday asin 1948. dispatchedby a Syrian representative
in
that
city:
Those who are defending their right to live in peaceand
security- in fact, their life; in fact, their right to exist like
“Official sourceshere tonight deniedthat any Russians
other nations do--are the sametoday as in 1948, when
at the Soviet Embassyor the SovietCulturalCentrewere
Ambassador Malik spoke in this very Security Councilof
killed during today’s Israeliair attack on Damascus.
The
Arab aggression,and was supported by Mr. Gromyko,
sourcessaid the Cultural Centre had beenhit and the
Mr Tsarapkin and Mr. Tarasenko.Factsand history cannot
woman director, a Syrian, was seriouslywounded. An
change. And when the Nazis were at Stalingradthey were
unspecified number of Syrian students attending a
aggressors. And when the Soviet Red Army threw them
Russianlanguagecourse were alsowounded.Journalists
back to Berlin, they remainedthe aggressors
and the Soviet
who toured the capital said the Soviet Embassyw3S
army was the defender. Can you imagine, Ambassador
undamaged.It standsin the easternpart of the city while
Malik, someonegetting up in those days of 1944and 1945
the Israeli air raid wasin the west.”
and telling your Government you have becomeaggressors
187. I think it would beof interestto comparethesefacts
because you have defended yourselves successfullyand
with the statement of the representativeof the Soviet
pushed back those who wanted to turn you and your
Union on 9 October. A womanwaskilled? Haveyou ever
peoples into slaves’?
expressed any regret, Mr. Malik, over the Jewish blood
spilled during these last ‘25 years’?Have we heard any
183. I have listened carefully to your definition of what
criminal, barbarian military actions-especiallyair attacks--- condolencesexpressedto those who are suffering, to the
bereaved families of thosewho werekilled simply because
are. We11, let me tell you one thing-and 1 challengethe
they wanted to be alive, asyou andyour peopleare’?
Soviet press to publish it and Soviet international kIWYerS
17

188. You mentioned, in your usual manner, Goebbels and
his methods. If my memory does not fail me, there was a
time when Goebbels was Stalin’s ally; and if my memory
does not fail me, you were brought up in the so-called
Stalinist school. If anyone round this table is continuing,
meeting after meeting, to use Goebbels’ methods, it is you.

been killed. I categorically reject his slander. He says that
one of the Arabs informed me about these casualties. That
is quite wrong: the first to speak and offer his condolenccs
was the distinguished representative of France-- on the basis
of the Agence France-Presse report. Then the United Press
International report appeared. I was reading frum the
reports of agencies which cannot be suspected of pro-Soviet
leanings. So, Mr. Tekoah, do not make up stories; you will
convince no one with them. Everyone here knows how this
happened.

189. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of
Egypt.
190. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt) (irztcrpretatim jvn~
French): Mr. President, I am aware that the hour is late and I
apologize to YOLI and to the members of the Security
Council for speaking now, but I am sure you will agree with
me that these are very serious times and that we cannot
pass over in silence what has been said just now. The
exercise of our right of self-defence is labelled aggression
committed by Egypt and Syria. The representative of Israel
has been hammering away on that point and constantly
repeats it, imagining that he will be believed. Egypt and
Syria are defending themselves. We are not in Israeli
territory; we are on our territory, our national territory. I
should like to say to the representative of Israel that we
shall defend our territory with all our force and strength. If
Israel has not understood this in the last six years, you must
understand and believe it now, because we will continue to
defend ourselves and we will defend our right with all the
determination which the Arab people possesses. The Arab
people have been the victim of aggression since 1967, not
the aggressors.

196. It is true that there was an outburst of hatred and
indignation from me and my colleagues here. I do not deny
it. I can imagine whal would happen if the Isrzli
representative at the Council table received a United Press
International and Agence France Presse report that 36 of
his peaceful fellow-citizens, including diplomats, had been
killed. Would he have remained silent, without reacting or
showing his feelings in any way? It is inconceivable, So try
to understand my reaction. It was a correct reaction and
was supported by many Ambassadors; for the first time in
the history and practice of the Security Council loud
applause was heard-in support of my attitude towards the
murderers.
197. You are not speaking the truth when you say that
not once have I expressed regret at the death of Jews. Read
the records of the Council. I told you plainly that 1 am
distressed that 6 million Jews died in Hitler’s Ccrniany. 1
said that I was distressed; you do not deny it but YOU
continually slander mc-“no, no, no”. Read the records for
last year. But you, Mr. Tekoah, have never said that you
regretted the death of the 20 million Soviet citizens who
died to save all lhe other 15 million Jews throughout the
world, including yourself.

191. The aggressors believe, or believed, that that state of
affairs could go on. They have never understood that they
were mistaken. I hope that they will realize it before it is
too late for them.
192. You are all informed of the physical structure, the
geographical change which is taking place in the occupied
Arab territories and the desire for permanence of the
situation which existed was certainly the dream of the
Israeiis. Need I mention the violations of the rights of the
civilian populations of these territories which have been
chased out, persecu-ted, imprisoned? The United Nations
annals are replete with these facts.

198. If we and our allies had not won the Second World
War, you would not be here; there would be “Hitler’s World
Reich”, Yes, we saved you, so be grateful. I recommended
you to advise your Government that instead of slandering
the Soviet LJnion and inciting American Zionists to hate the
Soviet Union, it should erect a monument in Tel Aviv in
honour of the Soviet warrior by way of showing gratitude
for the salvation of the Jews. I advised you to do that a
long time ago.

193. That is my reply to the representative of Israel. We
are at present going through a very serious period and 1 am
certain that the Security Council will take due note of this
because Egypt and Syria are determined to defend themselves.

199. As to the fact that the Soviet Union voted for the
establishment of the State of Israel, yes, it is true, I voted
and I spoke in favour of it. Why? On the basis of the
Leninist principle of respect for the right of every people to
an independent existence, to independence and self-determination. We are proud of the struggle which the Soviet
Union has been waging for more than 50 years for the right
of peoples to self-determination. We have supported, do
support and will continue to support all such peoples. Ask
the Africans. We have helped many of them to become
independent, free and sovereign. They are grateful to the
Soviet people for that.

194. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of
the Soviet Union to exercise his right of reply.
19.5. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translation from Russian): What impression do we get
from the latest reply of the representative of Israel? I get
the impression that he regrets that so few Soviet citizens
were killed in Damascus. Yes, the number of casualties does
not tally with the figures given in the United Press
International
and Agence France-Presse reports of
9 October. That is the only conclusion I have been able to
draw. But the attitude of the representative of Israel is the
attitude of a murderer who regrets that so few people have

200. The highest praise which I have received from a
foreign statesman was that given by Mr. Kaunda, President
of Zambia, when he said to me that the Zambians were
grateful to the Soviet people and its armed forces for having
beaten Hitler. If we had not beaten him, he said, the
18

Africans would have remained slaves, and we, the Soviet
people, wouId have become slaves. That is the highest praise
of the heroism of the Soviet peopie and Soviet armed forces
that I have heard from a foreigner. None of your petty
slander, Mr. Tekoah, will expunge from the pages of world
history that great exploit of the Soviet people and the
Soviet Union which saved the peoples of the world from
the Fascist plague and saved all the Jews in the world.

Syria, Jordan and Egypt are side issues, although we are
directly seized of the recent events.
206. And here is where I want to correct a misconception.
Mr. Tekoah always refers to anti-Semitism and says that the
Arabs are anti-Semitic. Well, if anybody is Semitic it is the
Arab. But those who are converted to Judaism are not
Semitic in culture. They are Semitic in religion. There are
three Semitic religions. They are Judaism, Christianity and
Islam. If the ancestors of Mr. Tekoah were original Jews or
converted Jews, that does not make him or his ilk Semitic,
because he ‘was ieared and grew up like all the conveited
Khazars. A distinction should be made between Judaism
and political Zionism. The mere fact that Zionists are Jews
does not necessarily make them Semites. Let this be clear.
We cannot be anti-ourselves, we Arabs in the area. How can
we be anti-Semitic? This is my first correction.

201. But when Israel became an aggressor, we changed our
policy towards it. We cannot agree with Israel’s flolicy. We
categorically condemn it. Israel has become an aggressor,
We are helping the victims of aggression and we are proud
to be helping them and will continue to do so. You have
read this on numerous occasions in the statements of the
Soviet Government and you have heard my statements here
as official representative of the Soviet Union. To fight
against aggression is one of the sacred principles of our
foreign policy. That was and will always be the case.

207. Secondly, Mr. Tekoah gave the impression that the
Arabs collaborated with Hitler. I know whom he has in
mind. He has in mind the Grand Mufti of Jerusalem and
Rashid Ali Al-Kailani of Iraq. Both these gentlemen may,
perhaps, have had some communication with the Nazis
because they found that the British would not help them,
We were placed by the British under a mandate. Iraq was
placed under a mandate, and Palestine was placed under a
mandate. The British were strong then. They had an
empire. You could not talk to them. When you have an
empire you get drunk with power. Now they are very
reasonable-we are very glad that we have reasonable British
diplomats to talk with-because they lost their empire. Not
only the British, but also the Romans. Who could talk to
the Remans? We know from history. And now Israel is a
small empire. You cannot talk to them. They have to be
right. Propaganda.

202. Do not speculate about anti-Semitism and do not
accuse me of it. My best friends are Jews. I can tell you
their names-Brodsky,
Chernyak, Shub and others. They
were and still are my friends. In our country we have no
racial discrimination or racial hatred. When in 1968 I came
here for the second time, I, a Ukrainian, was proud to have
sitting on my right my deputy Mendelevich, a Jew, and on
my left Issraelyan, an Armenian. The former United
Kingdom representative, Lord Caradon, with his characteristic sense of humour, made a joke in the Security
Council. There was the Russian team, he said-a Ukrainian,
a Jew and an Armenian. That was a joke but, I think, a
friendly joke, and we are proud of it. It is an indication of
the equality of all nationalities in the Soviet Union. We
have no hatred, no racial discrimination. The Soviet Union
is a model of complete equality and equality of opportunity. None of your slander about anti-Semitism will help
you. You can mislead only little children or big fools, as we
say, But the whole world knows that there are more than
100 nationalities in the Soviet Union and that they are all
equal, including the Jews. That is the true situation. You
have spoken about a challenge. We have rebuffed the
aggressor’s challenge; we have always done so and will
continue to do so.

208. Hitler had contempt for Jew and Arab alike and he
never collaborated with anybody, not even with his
generals. He had a mind of his own. He was independent.
That is why he lost the war. He would not heed his
generals.
209. So you say that some of us collaborated with Hitler
against the Jews. Have you forgotten who Rosenberg was?
He wrote the book The Aryan for Hitler. He was a Jew.

203. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Saudi Arabia, who wishes to speak in exercise of his right of
reply.

210. Where did you want the Grand Mufti of Jerusalem
and Rashid Ali Al-Kailani of Iraq to go? To London or to
Paris? Tb.ey would have hanged them. Or to New York
City where there are 2 million Jews who pull the strings?
Are you listening, Mr. Scali? You have 2 million Jews here.
The Grand Mufti and Rashid Ali Al-Kailani of Iraq thought
that the best thing would be to negotiate with the enemy of
the enemy. There are many Jews I know who actually
collaborated with Hitler, merely because of the fact that
there were many Jews in Germany. There were practically
no Arabs in Germany. You Zionists dance on many ropes.

204. Mr.
BAROODY
(Saudi Arabia): Thank you,
Mr. President, for being so gracious as to give me a few
minutes at this hour to exercise my right of reply, taking
into account that such statements in exercise of the right of
reply-as
we have been witnessing here-may become
interminable,
fruitless and abortive. There is no end to
accusations and recriminations. However, since Mr. Tekoah
chose the path of propaganda and distortions, I feel
constrained to set the, record straight.

211. Now you talk about war. I agree that war is war and
many victims are lost, innocent victims. We know what
happened in Viet-Nam; certain villages were wiped out. We
know what happened in Korea; we know what happened to
Dresden. Nobody talks about Dresden except myself, and I
am not German. Why does not anyone mention Dresden?

205. Mr. Tekoah said that the Arabs have a fanatical
hatred for the Jews. I can assure him that it is not a
question of hatred. It is the question of defending the Arab
homeland, the homeland of the Palestinians that is the core
of the whole problem. Even the occupied territories of

9

Who wiped out 200,000 in Dresden? You know what
happened in Stalingrad, how the Germans erased it. We
know what happened in Coventry. Ambassador Malik
mentioned all that.

created. He said it was not wise to partition Palestine,
because many countries have certain racial minorities,
elements or groups. They would want to secede and
become independent. At that time the Jewish people of
Palestine was less than one third of the population. And
none other than Mr. Evatt was in the Chair, from Australia.
Ask me. I set the record straight for you all. And they
brought pressure on Mr. Evatt and many others. The
illustrious General Romulo spoke against partition. Mr. Truman-listen to me, you Americans-sent
word to the
President of the Philippines and told him: “If you want to
receive aid”-after they had suffered through four years“you vote for the partition of Palestine or you will not
receive aid.” Ask Mr. Romulo. Let someone go and see
where he is. Let somebody go and tell him that Baroody is
talking and he can check what I am saying, to see whether
it is true or not. And Mr. Romulo, like a valiant representative, said: “I cannot vote like that”. He had self-respect
and he thought it was the policy of his country. But his
country changed its policy because our American friends
would withhold wheat and footstuffs, and I don’t know
what, to the Philippine people. So the poor President of the
Philippines was compelled to tell Romulo: “Vote for
partition.” Romulo said: “I will not vote.” So he left on a
ship, and the Philippine President ordered his Embassy in
Washington to send a representative to raise his hand for
partition.

212. We deplore the loss of life amongst the Jews, whether
they be in Syria, in Palestine, in Germany, or wherever they
are. But those Jews, innocent Jews, who lost their Iives have
been the victims of political Zionism-just like the Russians
were the victims of nazism; just as the British were also the
victims of German nazism, and so on. Therefore, do not
accuse the Arabs and say that through the operations of
war some Jews have been killed. Accuse yourself. If you
have a conscience, say, “Well, let us analyse dispassionately
this factor”, and you will find that those poor Jews have
been the victims of political Zionism.
213. Now, again, Mr. Tekoah maligned the Soviet Union.
The Soviet Union is a big country. They have an Ambassador who is capable, more capable than I am. He defends
his country. But I want to tell you about an Arabic proverb
we have which says: “If I give him one inch, he wants five
inches or the fingers of my hand; if you give him five
inches, he wants a foot; if you give him a foot, he wants a
yard; if you give him a yard, he wants a mile”, and so on.
214. What more do you want? They sent you 33,000
Soviet Jews to Palestine last year, in one year. And you still
whip them-33,000.
1 told Ambassador Mallk that we
consider that a hostile act against us, because, for sure now,
they will consolidate them in the occupied territories. I
have no right perhaps to interfere in the domestic affairs of
Ambassador Malik. But you are having it all your own way.
The Americans give you Phantoms and the Russians give
you immigrants, what else do you want? And still you
come <andcurse the Ambassador of a great country. I think
it is shameful. I stand on his human rights as well as on
your human rights if anybody will try to curse you-and
nobody should curse one another. But these are the facts.
They are more eloquent than anything else-33,000 in one
year. What do you want them to do? Are you going to
build skyscrapers in ‘so-called original Israel? Where will
you get the proteins to feed them, from the desert? You
have to expand because your plan has been the in-gathering
of all the Jews into Palestine. And we also know your plans.
I have read them. One day you will say that Abraham lived
in Ur of the Chaldees in western Iraq, so this is hallowed
land. You forget that Abraham is also the ancestor of all
the Semitic people or a good part of them through Ishmael,
Isaac, and then Jacob, I do not have to go into the
genealogy. You should know it, but I think you are secular.
You are too much concerned with the political aspects of
political Zionism as to heed the genealogy of the Bible.

216. All right, I am not going to say anything because I
have some Latin American friends here. I do not want to
embarrass them. It was ~1Latin American country and they
told me about it personally. I am not talking from hearsay.
You were not there anyway, Mr. Tekoah, you were in
Shanghai.
217. This gentleman assured us that they were against
partition, for reasons of their own, not because they were
in love with us or something. They were 6,000 miles away
from the Arab lands. And then the gentleman came to US
and said: “I have received instructions after I cleared the
question of partition with my Government, and now I have
instructions to vote for partition; they even tried to bribe
me.” And another Latin American representative spoke.
This is very significant, because I am telling you facts. I am
not talking from hearsay or engaging in propaganda-for
the
benefit of Mr.. Tekoah.
218. They tried all kinds of persuasion, and inducements.
He said: “But I cannot vote for partition of Palestine
because I have already made my speech.” Then this
representative was surprised by his wife, who said: “It is
not my birthday. What is this fur coat you sent me? ” He
asked: “I sent you a fur coat? ” The fur coat came from the
American Zionists in order to influence her husband. But
she did not know that; she thought her husband had given
her the coat.

215. The creation of Israel was a mistake from the beginning. Now you can check what I say here, because I have
a witness who was with me in 1947 at Lake Success. DO
you know the illustrious General Romulo? He is today the
Foreign Minister of the Philippines. He was one of those
who attended the San Francisco Conference. Then, in 1947
he was a representative of the Philippines at Lake Success. I
happened to be also at Lake Success. Mr. Romulo spoke for
an hour almost, saying that it is not wise to partition
Palestine. Because now I want to tell you how Israel was

219. I know many things but I do not want to enumerate
them so as not to embarrass him. I stand for his human
rights. You will be embarrassed; your face will turn the
colour of a tomato if I tell you.
I feel pity for you,
Mr. Tekoah. Honestly, I am not putting you on. I wish YOU
to know that this State was artificially created. I do not
care whether the Russians or the Americans were with you;
20

I care for the Palestinian people. There was the Charter and
there was the principle of self-determination in the Charter.
If the British sold Palestine, because of Balfour, down the
Thames and then Truman sold it down the Potomac, this
does not change one iota the principle of self-determination
enshrined in the Charter, and the United Nations had no
right to partition Palestine.

tomorrow,
There is “Tomorrow
and tomorrow and tomorrow” as Shakespeare said in Macbeth. I shall wind up,
Sir. 1 mean that. It will take me two or three minutes.
229. I shall not go into the rest of my notes, but 1 want to
be frank, My approach to any subject is unorthodox. If 1
were to talk in clichCs or engage in propaganda, I would not
stay here; I would refuse to stay here, And the record of
my statements testifies to that.

220. Mr. Tekoah asks: “The Jewish people’s right? ” The
Jewish people WC all respect and admire, but not political
Zionism., which is an imperialist colonial movement trying
to make of Palestine a crossroads for the Rothschild& the
Montagues and the Oppenheimers-the
bankers and the
bullion merchants and the brokers for international trade.
We know it.

230. My last question is directed to my good friend
Ambassador Scali. 1 am not trying to embarrass him. This is
a question of war or peace in the whole Arab world and
everybody might be involved. I should feel remiss if I did
not pose this question. J mcntioncd the 33,000 the Soviet
Union saw fit to send, That is their business. I want to ask a
certain question. Yesterday I heard that the United States is
sending military aid in large quantities to Israel, which will
of course prolong the war. I was requested by many Arab
colleagues, some of whom are Foreign Ministers, to find out
what the truth was-if it was true or not true.

221. Judaism, a religion, has been used as the motivation
for a political and economic end. And in fairness to the
leaders of the Zionists, most of them are secular like any
other leader in the world nowadays who, even if they go to
a church, a synagogue or a mosque, the next day they cut
each other’s throat.

231. Like the Soviet Union, you are free to send armsjust as they arc free to send immigrants. I addressed my
specific question to Ambassador Bennett. 1 could not talk
to you, Mr. Scali, because you were very busy. So far 1 have
received no reply. And I do not blame you because, after
all, your Government is not responsible to us here in the
United Nations to tell us all it does. But I think you sit irt
the Cabinet-at least, your predecessors did. YOU should
know. I am not blaming anybody-the Soviet Ilnion for
sending 33,000 and the United States, whether or not they
are sending arms-but WC want to know the truth.

222. We know what leaders are, and you are no different.
You are only trying to play on the sentiments-~.
223. The PRESIDENT: I should like to make an appeal to
my good friend Ambassador Baroody. We have had rather a
long day224. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Why did you not
appeal to Lhe Soviet Union?
225. The
evening.

PRESIDENT:-and

it is rather late in the

232. We should like to have a direct reply. First, from the
Soviet IJnion: Will you continue to send us immigrants?
And, secondly, from the United States: Is it true that you
are sending arms, and is Congress forcing your hand?
Whatever you want to tell us, please tell US. But do not
leave us in the dark because we do not want to go by
rumours.

226. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Yes, it is late. Never
ntind. What do you think we are doing here? Playing’? We
have to work.
227. The PRESIDENT:
We admire-indeed
greatly
admire-the
eloquence of the Ambassador of Saudi Arabia.
I should like to remind him that he was the very first
speaker J heard in the United Nations in 1950 and I have
enjoyed his eloquence since then. But I would, if I InaY,
appeal to him to wind up.

233. I thank you, Mr. President, and I hope my two
friends will have occasion to let me know what is the policy
of their Governments.

228. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Yes, I shall wind up
to please you as a friend, Sir. I shall take the floor again

T%e meeting roof at 11 p. ix.

21

HOW

TO

OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

Unite-l
Nations
publications
may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the world. Consult
your bookstore
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES

PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies soot on ventc dans les libwiries
et les ~gences
depositaires
du mondo entior. Informez-vous
aup&
de votre libraire ou adressea-vous
B : Nations
Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou GenPve.
KAK

TIOJIIKWSTL

COMO

CONSEGUIR

&%3AAHli53

PUBLlCACIONES

OPrAIiH:IAl~HU

DE

OWLEAIIHEHHMX

LAS

NACIONES

HAl~lU3

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Nacioncs
Unidas estin en venta en librerias
y casas distribuidoras
en todas pertes de1 mundo.
Consulte a su librero o dirijase
a: Naciones
Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

In United

Nations,

New York

Price: $U.S. 2.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

82001~May

1979-2,200
