S/PV.8142

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8142

nd meeting
Tuesday, 19 December 2017, 10.50 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bessho. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015) and 2332 (2016)
(S/2017/1057)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-44984 (E)
*1744984*

S/PV.8142

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.50 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014),
2258 (2015) and 2332 (2016) (S/2017/1057)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria, and Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/1057, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191
(2014), 2258 (2015) and 2332 (2016).
I now give the floor to Mr. De Mistura.
Mr. De Mistura: At the outset, let me say how
much I and my entire team appreciate the support we
have been receiving this year in particular. As this
may be the last occasion this year for me to brief the
Security Council — and the end of the Security Council
cycle for some members — I would like to say thanks,
because I have felt that Council members supported us
and understood our challenges. I count on that for next
year as well.
The eighth round of the intra-Syrian talks in
Geneva concluded last Thursday. During my previous
briefing (see S/PV.8113)I indicated why and how I was
planning to try to facilitate some real negotiations and
discussions, not just pre-negotiations. I did so because,
first, we saw developments on the ground, including
de-escalation and major strides being made against
the territorial control of the Islamic State of Iraq and
2/13

19/12/2017

Levant (ISIL)/Da’esh. That provided logical impetus
for the political track. ISIL is almost gone from the
territory, although Al-Nusra is still there. But now
it is time to talk about a political future. Secondly,
significant international diplomacy had taken place
just before the talks — in Da Nang, where an important
statement was made; in Riyadh, where a second
process was established, which was considered almost
unthinkable a year ago, so that now three different
opposition groups, which had not really been talking to
each other, are now united in one group and have one
voice; and in Sochi, where an important meeting took
place between Presidents Putin and Al-Assad. There
have also been important meetings between Presidents
Putin and Erdoğan. Thirdly, both the Government of
the Syrian Arab Republic and the opposition Syrian
High Negotiations Commission had given some public
signals that they were interested in committing to a real
discussion in Geneva.
How would that take place? Through a clear and
realistic work plan focused on the full implementation of
resolution 2254 (2015) — which, as the only resolution
that is guiding us on a political process and legitimizing
that process, is all we have and all that we have been
able to bring together — and with a particular focus on
the so-called 12 principles, a constitutional process and
United Nations-supervised elections, both presidential
and parliamentary, which in our internal jargon we
refer to as basket 2 and basket 3. The process would
play out while also exploring the very important issues
of governance and counter-terrorism — basket 1 and
basket 4 — and while pushing for confidence-building
measures, such as humanitarian access, which
Mr. Lowcock will talk about, and the issue of detainees,
abductees and missing persons, with the active support
of outside players.
How did the eighth round go? The agenda I just
outlined, which I though was quite ready to start
moving forward, for the reasons I mentioned, did not
in fact move forward. The opportunity to begin real
discussion or negotiation was not taken. A golden
opportunity was missed, for many reasons. One is
psychological, because we are at the end of the year;
another is political, because we are at the end, or want
to believe we are, of a major military operation; and
another is grounded in a human point of view, since
most ordinary Syrians have been asking and waiting
for this because they want to see the situation change
for them.
17-44984

19/12/2017

The situation in the Middle East

Let me explain why. I will try to do it as objectively
as possible, although I cannot help showing my feelings,
even in my body language — I am Swedish and Italian,
and am supposed to maintain my Swedish-style calm
and not show my emotional Italian side — but while I am
a United Nations diplomat with 47 years of experience,
and trained to keep my emotions in check, I cannot hide
my disappointment. So I will explain why by quoting
from the perspective of each delegation.
The opposition delegation, which held 11 meetings
with me, came to Geneva almost directly from the
so-called Riyadh II conference, about which I think I
briefed the Council the last time. They were therefore
unable to prepare themselves, but in spite of that they
were able to maintain one line and one voice. They
publicly affirmed their position, as indicated in the
Riyadh II statement, calling for direct negotiations with
the Government, which they emphasized was a position,
not a precondition. They also stated their willingness
to engage in indirect negotiations through me and my
team if direct negotiations were not possible.
The opposition received from us an updated version
of the 12 living intra-Syrian essential principles,
translated into English, which are the principles that
we have been working on for more than a year now,
and which we have discussed with everyone, including
civil society, the Government and the opposition, as the
potential basis for principles for a future constitution.
The opposition gave concrete input in response to our
presentation of the updated version of the essential
principles. For the first time, frankly, they also engaged
on all four baskets in very in-depth and relevant
discussions, sometimes welcoming and sometimes
disagreeing with ideas that the United Nations had
developed or proposed, while also sharing their own
ideas with us.
The Government delegation, which I met seven
times and which was not in Geneva on some of the same
days — or not for exactly the same length of time as the
opposition — considered that the Riyadh II statement
implied “a precondition in its call for President Al-Assad
to depart at the start of any transition period”. In all
fairness, the Council should know that both I and the
Saudi authorities in Riyadh — and I think the Special
Envoy of the Russian Federation and many others from
various countries as well — advised the opposition not
to emphasize that aspect, precisely because it would
potentially be considered a precondition. They told us
that it was important for them to do so because it has

S/PV. 8142

been a party line since the beginning and that it was not
a precondition but a position — an opinion.
The Government also regarded the language in the
Riyadh 2 statement on the role of the Islamic Republic
of Iran as unacceptable, and it further questioned
whether the opposition delegation — although now
unified — including the Moscow platform and the
Cairo platform, as well as the old or renewed Riyadh
platform, was not sufficiently representative.
It also stated, through a video on YouTube, that
until full Syrian sovereignty was restored and terrorism
defeated in all parts of the Syrian territory, it would
not be possible to entertain real movement on a
constitutional review process or elections. That, to me,
was a new condition that I had never heard before. It
made me very worried about any other initiative besides
that of Geneva, because if we all have for the whole
country to be in a different geographic and political
environment, with no foreign or terrorist presence
at all, it might mean that any intention of generally
addressing a constitutional review or election would be
set aside for a long period, if the Government’s position
were confirmed. And it was confirmed to us; I have it
on record.
Then they also started calling for the Riyadh 2
statement to be withdrawn as a precondition. The
Government therefore declined to meet directly with the
opposition or to negotiate indirectly with them through
me until and unless the Riyadh 2 statement were
withdrawn. The Government also further declined to
explore any item of the agenda with the United Nations
other than counter-terrorism, which we call basket 4
and which, frankly, is very important and affects us all,
but is not the only important issue. They also received
an updated version from us of the 12 living intra-Syrian
essential principles, but did not comment on them or
engage with them any further.
As a mediator, I naturally tried to help both
sides to think creatively and overcome any perceived
barriers to negotiation. For instance, I counselled
the Government that the opposition had set out its
own negotiating position in Riyadh and that, as
we all know, any opposition in the world can and
sometimes does call for a change of Government as
an ultimate goal. I further explained that a negotiating
position was not the same as a precondition. I said
that the Government should also test the other side
in negotiation, confront them and talk to them. The

17-449843/13

S/PV.8142

The situation in the Middle East

Government found my position unconvincing, arguing
that the mentality of the opposition, as expressed in the
Riyadh 2 statement, revealed that the opposition was
pursuing unattainable demands.
Meanwhile, I also counselled the opposition to
depersonalize and broaden their thinking on governance,
not to constantly refer to that type of personalization
of the political solution, and indeed to publicly clarify
that they had no preconditions. The opposition pointed
out that the Government was setting a precondition to
talking to them. Nevertheless, the opposition responded
to my appeal about its public messaging by making
clear that they are calling for the implementation of
Security Council resolutions and “a tough negotiation
with different goals” but not attempting to actually
persuade the Government to engage with them or me on
anything other than terrorism. The opposition regarded
that as a sign that the Government was avoiding the
negotiating table. In other words, the opposition was
ready for negotiations.
I should add that for the whole time we were in
Geneva, no progress was made on the most urgent
humanitarian issues. I had hoped some progress could
be reached during that period. It was the perfect
moment to give some good news, and I must say I have
to congratulate the entire Council — whatever each
member’s position has been — for moving forward on
an important resolution. At this time of year, that gives
me a feeling that the Council can move forward when
people are in need. There was no progress made on the
most urgent humanitarian issues, but Under-SecretaryGeneral Lowcock will brief the Council on that topic,
so I will not even touch upon that subject.
There was also no progress on the critical issues of
detainees, abductees and missing people, a topic that
had been raised via the Astana process but had not yet
been delivered, either in Astana nor in Geneva. In view
of the fact that we now have a new Astana opportunity,
I strongly urge Iran, the Russian Federation and Turkey,
in their capacity as guarantor States, to address the
issues of the detainees, the abductees and the missing
persons during the next meeting in Astana and not to
miss that opportunity at the end of the year. That will
probably happen towards the end of this week.
Whatever the frustrations — and I recognize that
there are many and on all sides — let us recall that
only a United Nations-brokered process will be seen
by the Syrians as impartial and attract the needed
4/13

19/12/2017

regional and international legitimacy. That is why the
Council has mandated the United Nations to facilitate
the political process. I appreciate the support extended
by permanent members of the Council when they
assembled in Geneva at the opening and closing of this
round of talks.
Let us also remind ourselves that despite the
failure to negotiate in round 8, the front-loading of
the living essential principles I mentioned for a future
constitution, the identification of details of processes
under the constitution/electoral basket — while
working to build a safe, calm and neutral environment
under the governance and security baskets, which are
two important elements for a constitution/electoral
basket — remain the most feasible approach to the
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015).
The 12 living intra-Syrian essential principles,
published in round 8, which seek to embody end-state
commonalities and offer an enduring perspective on
the vision of a future that can be shared by all Syrians,
are consistent with and reflect many of the end-state
principles contained in resolution 2254 (2015) and can
serve to inform the parallel discussions of the four
baskets, which remain on the agenda of the talks. Thus,
the principles constitute an important assurance about
the ultimate purpose of any political settlement process
under resolution 2254 (2015).
Let me shift now from the slightly theoretical
to the pragmatic and practical. Since we have been
hearing and talking about the constitutional process
and elections, and we were not able in the intra-Syrian
talks to actually engage both sides on the matter, I will
engage the Council.
I believe that the time has come for the United
Nations to provide some specific elaborations on the
constitution and electoral baskets 2 and 3, and how
they relate to governance, counter-terrorism, security
governance and confidence-building measures, and
develop agreed and clear modalities for the full
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) and thus
stimulate broader consultation.
Let me share our thinking at this stage on
basket 3 — elections. In its paragraph 4, the resolution
expresses the Council’s support for
“free and fair elections, pursuant to the new
constitution ... administered under supervision
of the United Nations and [held] to the highest
17-44984

19/12/2017

The situation in the Middle East

international standards of transparency and
accountability, with all Syrians, including members
of the diaspora, eligible to participate”.
What do we mean when we say that we should be involved
and that those elections should be internationally
legitimate? The United Nations has provided electoral
assistance to the majority of Member States, including
around one-third of them in the past two years alone, so
we do have experience, often in post-conflict situations
and across the full spectrum of electoral assistance.
There is therefore clearly a need to fully respect
Syria’s sovereignty — no question of that — and its
own national electoral process, while at the same time
facilitating United Nations supervision that the Council
has stated it supports. Bearing in mind resolution 2254
(2015) and insights obtained from parties — because
we were able to talk to each side a little bit prior to this
round about elections, as well as with civil society and
the average Syrian people — in order to hold free and fair
elections to the highest international standards, there
must be a clear timeline and sequencing agreed, as per
resolution 2254 (2015), for United Nations-supervised
elections, both presidential and parliamentary.
Provisions would need to be made to ensure equal
opportunity for all to participate in public life, not to
be terrorized or scared to be involved in it. Principles
would need to be agreed for a legal electoral framework
that meets the highest international standards and
ensures independent electoral management. Parametres
would be required on voter eligibility so that all
Syrians, irrespective of their religion, ethnicity or
gender — including members of the diaspora — can
vote with special procedures to ensure the participation
of refugees, internally displaced persons and other
Syrians impacted by the conflict.
Specific provisions would have to be made to
promote women’s participation, and United Nations
supervision could include roles in support of the
legal electoral framework, electoral institutions and
operations, including diaspora voting. This would
also involve reporting to the Security Council on the
implementation of the electoral processes, as related
to the highest international standards of inclusivity,
transparency and accountability. Those are issues
surrounding elections. If we want the United Nations
to be involved, that is what United Nations involvement
comes with. Ready to respect sovereignty and ready to

S/PV. 8142

work hard — that is what United Nations-supervised
elections mean.
Basket 2 concerns the constitution. Resolution 2254
(2015) calls for a United Nations-facilitated process
to set the schedule and process for drafting a new
constitution before United Nations-supervised elections
are held. The United Nations has therefore sought at
every turn in our meetings to understand the feelings of
the various parties on that matter. Based on this, let me
offer 11 observations to set some parametres and help
produce further discussion, if we want a constitution
process, as per resolution 2254 (2015), and thus the
blessing of the United Nations.
First, it would appear that both parties have accepted
that Syria requires a review of its constitutional
order, culminating in the popular approval of a new
constitution. We all agree and they all agree that it is
for the people of Syria alone to determine the future
constitution of Syria. It should not be written by any
country or any of us; we can help, but it should be theirs.
Second, any constitutional review must be Syrianowned, Syrian-led and conducted in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015), which, as I have indicated,
provides that the setting of a schedule and process
for the drafting of such a new constitution must take
place in the context of United Nations-convened and
facilitated intra-Syrian talks.
Third, such a scheduling process should attempt to
identify and contain guiding principles and a sequenced
timetable, and identify all relevant institutions that
need to be established, including their mandate and
composition and the manner of establishment. To
that end, we believe that such a constitutional review
process could be guided by the principles contained in
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex), and be informed by the 12
living essential intra-Syrian principles, which offer
a perspective of a vision of a future Syria that can be
shared by all.
Fourth, as I indicated earlier, those principles give
important assurances to the people Syria as to the
purpose of any constitutional review, which must meet
the legitimate aspirations of the people of Syria.
Fifth, such principles, while not supra-constitutional
unless otherwise agreed by the Syrian people, could be
developed and embodied by a constitutional drafting
body. However, if such a constitutional drafting body

17-449845/13

S/PV.8142

The situation in the Middle East

were to be credible, any drafting process would also
likely need to address how power is to be shared,
decentralized and exercised in Syria at the national,
provincial and local levels.
Sixth, the two institutions that have so far emerged
from discussions for the purposes of drafting and
revising a new constitution and instituting a national
dialogue process are a constitutional commission and
a national conference. The constitutional commission
could prepare and refer an initial draft of a new
constitution to a national conference in Syria, which
could oversee a national dialogue and review, revise and
then refer any draft constitution for popular approval,
in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015).
Seventh, both institutions should have their
mandate, terms of reference, powers and rules of
procedure agreed in United Nations-facilitated
intra-Syrian talks in Geneva.
Eighth, the United Nations would ensure that any
composition agreed would be consistent with resolution
2254 (2015) and based upon any inclusive and objective
selection criteria determined and agreed in Geneva. At
the very least, both institutions would have to consist of
representatives of the Government, the opposition in the
intra-Syrian talks, and additional components of Syrian
society, including religious, political, intellectual,
economic, union figures, Syrians from the diaspora and
legal experts, with provisions made for including civil
society, independent people and women.
Ninth, such aconstitutional review would have to be
inclusive and contain a national dialogue that is wellstructured, conducted transparently and broadly-based,
ensures opportunities for the dissemination of drafts,
debate and revision, and has full contact and consultation
with civil society, political parties, universities,
academia and the public on the draft constitution.
Tenth, the United Nations stands ready, if
authorized by the Security Council, to provide goodoffices support to any constitutional commission and
national conference as described, and as agreed by the
parties in the intra-Syrian talks, as well as the provision
of international expertise.
Eleventh, if a meaningful and inclusive
constitution-making process is to take place in Syria,
a secure, calm, neutral environment would need to
be established to enable Syrians from all segments
of society to participate safely and freely. That in
6/13

19/12/2017

turn would require the sides in Geneva to identify
relevant and appropriate counter-terrorist, security,
governance and confidence-building measures, as well
as credible, all inclusive, non-sectarian Government
arrangements that would need to be agreed and put in
place via negotiations.
A tough approach to governance would also help
identify milestones and performance indicators. I
need hardly repeat that the process of establishing a
favourable environment would be greatly enhanced by
tangible progress on unhindered humanitarian access
and confidence-building measures, in particular action
on detainees, abductees and missing persons in a
nationwide sustainable ceasefire.
Forgive me for speaking at great length, but this is
an important moment for actually setting some clear
parametres before us when we talk about important
next steps. These propositions are advanced in good
faith by the United Nations in order to promote fresh
thinking in all quarters, in particular in relation to
the constitution and elections and their relations to
governance and counter-terrorism. They come out
of intense engagement with the parties and Syrians
across the board, far beyond the people we have been
meeting in the official meetings. What I have presented
is designed to show how resolution 2254 (2015) could
be implemented credibly and in full in a way that is
genuinely responsive to the needs of Syrians and the
realities of the moment. We intend to present some of
the ideas and approaches I hjave outlined in a non-paper
or a mediator statement early next year.
I will see the Secretary-General this afternoon, so
I am not at present in a position to update the Security
Council on further developments regarding proposals
to hold an early national dialogue congress in a location
outside Syria. According to the instructions I have
received so far, the Secretary-General will continue
to view this and all other initiatives in the context of
a simple test. Do they support the mandated political
process under United Nations auspices and the full
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015)? According to
the Secretary-General, the bottom line is, if any entity
relevant to constitutional review were to be established
outside Syria and there were a desire for it to work
under the aegis of the United Nations, either it would
have to emerge directly from the intra-Syrian talks
in Geneva or the United Nations would need to retain
the prerogative to review such a body, in consultation
with the Council. I would be guided by resolution 2254
17-44984

19/12/2017

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8142

(2015) in this regard and, obviously, the guidance of the
Secretary-General.

look forward to an active and, I hope, proactive start to
2018 in that regard.

Let me conclude by reminding the Council of
something else — something I have always stressed
and, as the year comes to a close, should perhaps do so
again. These past three weeks, while the negotiations
did not proceed, Syrians made their own voices heard
and their views known to us. The Syrian Women’s
Advisory Board provided valuable insights and ideas
on the 12 principles in baskets 2 and 3. We hosted 130
civil society representatives. These included experts on
constitutional legal matters, human rights, grass-roots
dialogue and social cohesion. We held a discussion via
video-teleconference with Syrian refugees — because
sometimes we forget that there are 5 million of them
and they are there and they want to be part of the future,
but they also want to be reassured that, if they decide
to come, there is a future — in Jordan and Lebanon,
as well as with civil society representatives in hard-toreach areas across Syria and with those who are present
also in Turkey. They had inputs and thoughts on every
issue on the agenda, and my team and I have learned a
lot from them.

I thank the Council for its patience. My statement
was longer than average, but we are at the end of
the year.

However, most of all they called without any doubt
for a political solution, for dignity, for the protection
of civilians, for maintaining Syrian territorial integrity
and for unconditional access to health care, support
and education, which they reminded us are pillars
of counter-terrorism. They demanded the release of
detainees and abductees and that those who left and
became refugees not be punished upon their return,
because they are afraid of that. They also demanded
information on the missing and for the United Nations
and the international community to create conditions
conducive to the voluntary return of refugees. They
desperately wanted to see the United Nations-Geneva
process move forward.

The President: I thank Mr. De Mistura for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lowcock.
Mr. Lowcock: Let me begin by welcoming the
action that you, Mr. President, have taken today to
adopt resolution 2393 (2017). I note your request that
the Secretary-General conduct an independent review
and for us to work even harder on monitoring, reporting
and data gathering. We will, of course, do all that.
Cross-border deliveries will remain an essential
part of our efforts to meet the needs of all those across
Syria who require humanitarian assistance. This will
hardly be news to the Council, but it is important for
me to repeat that in besieged eastern Ghouta increased
fighting and the lack of humanitarian access is rendering
life unbearable for an estimated 393,000 people trapped
inside the enclave. Thousands of civilians are caught
in fighting that threatens their lives on a daily basis.
Except for a pause of two days, intensive air and
ground-based strikes have been reported every day
since mid-November. There has been significant loss
of civilian life and hundreds have been wounded, both
in eastern Ghouta and in Damascus city, where shelling
from the besieged enclave has continued.

I think that nobody in this Chamber finds those
requests or pleas unreasonable, but trust, confidence
and political will are the hardest commodities to find
when I hold my intra-Syrian talks. I hope that, by
liberating ideas, the parties and all Syrians can see that
resolution 2254 (2015) can actually be implemented,
even in the context of the realpolitik of 2018, in the
interests of all Syrians. The question is how much we
all will do to help achieve this vision.

Over the past weeks, the United Nations and its
humanitarian partners have been allowed to reach only
7 per cent of those in besieged towns and villages in
eastern Ghouta. Tiny amounts of aid have been allowed
in, enough for only a fraction of those in desperate
need. Food shortages have led in many cases to severe
acute malnutrition, and a nutrition sector survey
conducted in November showed a rapid and significant
deterioration in the nutritional status of children under
the age of five. Nearly 12 per cent of children have been
diagnosed with global acute malnutrition — a fivefold
increase in the past 10 months. This is the highest level
of acute malnutrition recorded so far in the country
since the conflict began. These children, whose lives
depend on timely and targeted intervention, need our
immediate support.

I can assure the Council that Secretary-General
António Guterres and myself will spare no efforts. We

In addition, more than 500 people in eastern Ghouta
still require urgent medical evacuation. They include

17-449847/13

S/PV.8142

The situation in the Middle East

19/12/2017

137 children, 231 girls and women, and 61 people over
the age of 65. There are 73 people with severe cancer.
There are 25 patients with kidney failure. There are
97 people with heart disease. There are five acutely
malnourished children. Infants — some of them just
one or two months old — will die if evacuation permits
are not granted immediately. There have already been
16 civilian deaths among those waiting for permission
to leave eastern Ghouta for medical reasons, including
three in the past few days. Among them are a 45-dayold infant, a nine-year-old girl and a quadriplegic.
All that is needed is the green light from the Syrian
authorities for these people to go to hospitals just a few
miles outside of eastern Ghouta.

from within the country resulted in the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to millions of people in
need, including approximately 2.7 million people who
received food assistance so far this month through more
than 1,595 deliveries.

There has also been minimal progress in recent
months in responding to the needs of those trapped
and besieged in Fo’ah, Kefraya and Yarmouk. So far
this year, only a trickle of assistance has been allowed
in for those people. Humanitarian access continues to
face restrictions in all the besieged and hard-to-reach
locations. On average in 2017, only 27 per cent of
people identified to receive assistance under the United
Nations bi-monthly plans have in fact been reached
through inter-agency cross-line convoys each month.
Bureaucratic impediments, like the non-issuance
of facilitation letters, continue to be a significant
factor in these delays, despite the creation of the
tripartite coordination mechanism intended to address
such problems.

The overall humanitarian and protection situation
of civilians displaced from Raqqa city remains of high
concern to me, particularly due to mines and explosive
remnants of war. Civilian deaths and injuries due to
mine explosions continue to be reported with alarming
frequency. More than 125 civilians were killed and
almost 200 trauma cases were reported since the end of
military activities in Raqqa city.

In November, only five cross-line convoys were
able to deploy, reaching approximately 200,250
people in hard-to-reach locations and 28,700 people in
besieged locations out of a total besieged population
of more than 400,000 people. So far in December,
none — not one — of our convoys has made it to any
of the besieged locations. Only two convoys have
received the necessary authorizations for deployment
to hard-to-reach locations — one to Harbanifse
in Hama governorate and the other to Al-Houle in
Homs governorate, on 14 December, which delivered
assistance to 60,000 people. Those deliveries were
themselves delayed, following a reduction of one third
in the agreed number of beneficiaries from what had
initially been approved in the access plan.
In the past month, the United Nations and its
partners have continued to reach millions of people
in need through regular programming to parts of the
country controlled by the Government of Syria and
through cross-border operations. Regular programming
8/13

Cross-border assistance also remained a vital
part of the humanitarian response, with the United
Nations and its partners providing services for health,
education, protection, water and sanitation, and
humanitarian supplies. More than 650 trucks have this
month delivered food assistance to more than 900,000
people through cross-border operations, as well as
health assistance for nearly 1 million treatments.

Contamination from explosive hazards, including
improvised explosive devices, presents a major threat
and impediment to enabling safe returns. The full scale
of the contamination is not yet fully known, given the
lack of a systematic survey of the city. In addition to the
threat posed by unexploded ordnance, up to 80 per cent
of all buildings in Raqqa city are severely damaged
and at risk of collapse. Those conditions mean that
humanitarian organizations have only very limited
access and presence on the ground.
In Deir ez-Zor governorate, military offensives to
retake the remaining areas held by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) continue to prompt
significant population displacement. More than
250,000 displacements were registered in November.
Government advances against ISIL along the Euphrates
River have displaced thousands of people from the Abu
Kamal sub-district, near the border with Iraq. Military
operations and associated heavy aerial attacks have
reportedly resulted in more than 150 civilian casualties.
The majority of internally displaced persons (IDPs)
are suffering in dire circumstances due to an extreme
shortage of shelter, food and safe water. On 12 December,
a Syrian Arab Red Crescent convoy was finally able to
deliver food, health and other relief items provided by
the United Nations and other partners to about 15,000
children, women and men in Abu Kamal city.
17-44984

19/12/2017

The situation in the Middle East

People continue to suffer from the effects of
conflict in other areas of the country that have received
less attention. Increased fighting in the past two months
in Hama, Idlib and Aleppo governorates resulted in
more than 90,000 people being displaced. Most of those
people moved further into Idlib governorate, which
is already under strain from hosting extraordinary
numbers of IDPs. The humanitarian response in that
area has been difficult due to the ongoing violence, and
the little humanitarian infrastructure that is in place
continues to be impacted by the fighting.
October and November were the worst months this
year for displacement, with 440,000 people forced to
move in October and almost 375,000 in November.
That brings the total number of people displaced this
year alone to approximately 2.6 million, which equates
to 7,700 displacements every day. Many have been
displaced more than once.
The last time humanitarian assistance was delivered
to the people in Rukban camp, which is located on the
border with Jordan, was in June. I am still urging the
Government of Syria to authorize, as a matter of urgency,
the inter-agency deliveries of life-saving humanitarian
assistance to those people from Damascus. In the
meantime, let me say that I am very grateful for the
ongoing efforts to permit an exceptional delivery of
humanitarian assistance to that camp from Jordan and I
hope that that can happen immediately.
The civilian population of Syria deserves to see a
tangible improvement in their daily lives, because they
have always borne the brunt of this unrelenting conflict.
I urge all Council members to do everything possible to
ensure that 2018 brings some relief to their suffering.
The President: I thank Mr. Lowcock for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura
and Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for their
comprehensive and very sincere briefings.
This is the last time that Uruguay will make a
statement on the Syrian conflict as a member of the
Security Council, a conflict that has left the world
horrified and in constant suspense. The barbaric
terrorism, the intransigence of the Government in
Damascus and the geopolitical gains that several States
of the region and elsewhere have tried obtain from this

S/PV. 8142

conflict have prolonged and worsened the crisis in a
manner that was completely unnecessary.
For the Council, and in particular for the 2016-2017
membership, the agenda item on Syria has undoubtedly
generated the greatest amount of work, easily
surpassing 100 meetings — including open briefings,
consultations, meetings under the heading “Other
matters” and emergency meetings — in addition to the
multiple negotiations and contacts that have been held
in attempting to contain the crisis. However, all of that
has unfortunately been insufficient.
Despite the willingness of the United Nations
and the Security Council to achieve a political and
negotiated solution in Syria, it is two years since
the adoption of resolution 2254 (2015) and we are
unfortunately yet to see direct negotiations between the
parties or a political transition process with a road map
and clearly established deadlines, which we have been
unable to implement.
In difficult times such as the present, we encourage
Special Envoy De Mistura not to let up and to continue
seeking new ideas to allow that process to get under
way as soon as possible. It will require flexibility
and original ideas to impose a new dynamism and,
in particular, to create the conditions to generate a
minimum level of trust between the Government and
the opposition.
There is little left to say that we have not previously
mentioned on Syria. Uruguay has attributed maximum
priority to the peaceful resolution of the crisis and
has always focused on the protection of its civilian
population and on the humanitarian tragedy of the
millions of Syrians who have been affected since
2011. As we have done each month, we recognize
the sacrifice, selflessness and bravery of the workers
of United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and its associated agencies and
organizations in Syria and bordering countries, who
risk their lives on a daily basis in attempting to alleviate
the living conditions of millions of Syrian civilians. In
the fulfilment of their tasks, we must always ensure
their protection and security.
We are pleased that a few moments ago, by adopting
resolution 2393 (2017) (see S/PV.8141), we were able
to renew the mechanism for cross-border aid, which
makes it possible to aid almost 3 million people. The
serious difficulties that have hindered humanitarian

17-449849/13

S/PV.8142

The situation in the Middle East

assistance in Syrian territories have made it essential
that that mechanism be renewed.
Last month, a few hours prior to the previous meeting
on this agenda item (see S/PV.8117), we received news
of relief aid being delivered to eastern Ghouta, which
unfortunately never arrived. To date, 400,000 civilians
remain besieged in a situation of great need, the famine
is affecting the most vulnerable, the bombings continue
and medical evacuations are not being carried out, with
500 civilians in urgent need thereof. And all of that is
happening despite being one of the de-escalation zones
according to the Astana process. Worst of all is that
it has not been possible for the humanitarian convoys,
which are constantly on standby to deliver aid, to reach
that region. We urge the Government to put an end to
thoe blockades, to lift all sieges and to allow aid to
reach all those who need it without exception.
In another area, and in an emblematic example, not
even the hospital at Khan Shaykhun was spared from
repeated bombings, a locale that became notorious in
April as a result of a merciless chemical attack. Nothing
is left of the hospital. All those events were in flagrant
violation of resolution 2286 (2016), which we adopted
last year.
I would like to reiterate one final time several
points that are very important for Uruguay.
Over the past two years we have constantly argued
that there should not be any impediment to access and
the distribution of aid throughout Syria, including
besieged and hard-to-reach areas. We are concerned
that humanitarian access continues to face serious
difficulties every month. We need immediate, secure
and unhindered access in order to reach all of the
people in need in Syria. We would urge countries that
have influence over Syrian officials to see to it that this
is done through ongoing cooperation and coordination
with the United Nations Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs. The Syrian Government has
the primary responsibility to ensure that it provides
food, water and medicines and other vital goods to its
population in order to ensure their survival, and it must
lift all sieges that it currently maintains.
Humanitarian principles, human rights and
international humanitarian law must be respected in
all conflicts. When they are violated, as has happened
blatantly and repeatedly in Syria, where very serious
crimes have been committed that constitute war
crimes and crimes against humanity, the only option
10/13

19/12/2017

is to find a way to hold those responsible for such acts
accountable in a court of law. In that regard, we once
again support the request of Secretary-General Guterres
for specific cases relating to Syria to be referred to the
International Criminal Court. We also hope that there
will be full cooperation with the International Impartial
Independent Mechanism Investigating Serious Crimes
in Syria, established at the end of 2016 to investigate
the serious crimes committed in the country.
With regard to the Astana process, we hope that
the meeting to be held in a few days’ time will help to
provide details on the implementation of the violence
de-escalation zones, which must be given transitional
status so that in future the unity and territorial integrity
of the Syrian Arab Republic can be maintained.
In conclusion, as we said in 2016 and 2017, we
hope that in 2018 we will see a final end to the conflict
in Syria and the beginning of a political transition
process that is accepted by all the parties, which will
make it possible for its entire population, after so much
suffering, to be part of a better future. That is why we
once again express our support for the role being played
by Special Envoy De Mistura, and we express the hope
that, with the goodwill of all involved, the ceasefire and
direct negotiations can quickly become a reality.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we are
grateful to Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, and to Mr. Mark Lowcock,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for
their respective briefings. We express our solidarity
with them in the tasks entrusted to them.
The situation on the ground has changed. It has been
possible to establish four de-escalation zones, and with
it a reduction in violence that has made it possible to
regain control of various cities and areas that were once
hard to reach. We believe that the most recent meetings
held in various formats help to continue the cessation
of violence. However, we must make progress in taking
specific decisions that will help to resolve the conflict
in Syria and enable its population to regain peace and
return to their homes. Among other efforts to that end,
those made by the Government and the people of Syria
in their fight against Da’esh are fundamental. It is also
important to take all the necessary measures in order to
avoid in the short-term the reconstitution or emergence
of new terrorist groups, but that in the medium- and
long-term also make it possible to rebuild Syria.
17-44984

19/12/2017

The situation in the Middle East

In that regard, we believe that any unilateral
military action is totally illegal and contravenes
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Fundamentally, however, such actions violate the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab
Republic and hinder the implementation of the road
map set out in resolution 2254 (2015). We reiterate that
it is imperative that we pool our efforts in order to bring
about the full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015)
in its four aspects.
We stress the need for greater reconciliation
among the parties to the Geneva process, wherein the
participation of the Cairo and Moscow platforms are
essential to bring about a political solution. In that
regard, we would highlight those agreements that make
it possible to reduce violence, respect the ceasefire and
create conditions that help guarantee the secure and
dignified return of refugees and internally displaced
persons. We also highlight the efforts made to bring
about stability, promote trust between the parties
involved and to improve the humanitarian situation in
conflict zones. We welcome the efforts undertaken to
date in the various rounds of the Astana process, which
has now become an important forum for establishing
the de-escalation zones and, therefore, as we
reiterate, important in reducing violence and bringing
about stability.
We once again express our great gratitude for the
work of the staff of various humanitarian agencies,
and we demand that international humanitarian law
be respected as humanitarian workers carry out their
very hazardous work on the ground. We therefore again
remind the parties involved in the conflict that they
must permit unconditional access for humanitarian
assistance and guarantee and safeguard the security
and physical well-being of humanitarian workers,
particularly those in besieged and hard-to-reach areas.
Finally, we would reiterate that the only alternative
to resolving this conflict is through an inclusive
political process of dialogue and consultation, led by
and for the Syrian people, which would make it possible
to bring about a peaceful solution among the parties
involved. We reiterate that such political transition
process must always safeguard the sovereignty, unity,
territorial integrity and independence of Syria, through
all peaceful means provided for under the Charter of
the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.

S/PV. 8142

Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My Government has taken note of the fortysixth monthly report of the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs. We note that the report includes
improvements, including its recognition of the fact that
the United Nations has managed to get humanitarian
aid to thousands of people in need in Syria, thanks to
the assistance of the Syrian Government and Syrian
agencies.
However, Syria believes that the current report
requires yet further balance and objectivity. In both word
and deed, the report should reiterate the commitment to
the implementation of the United Nations resolutions,
in particularly respect for Syrian sovereignty, and to
providing humanitarian aid to those who are in need in
Syria, without selectivity or politicization. Yesterday,
we sent an official letter to the Secretary-General and
to the President of the Security Council, setting out the
position of the Syrian Government on the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/1057) under consideration
today. However, I would like to make the following
main points.
The authors of these periodic reports are incapable
of resolving a serious professional shortcoming, namely,
the fact that they are relying on politicized and other
open sources that lack credibility, while continuing to
ignore the Syrian Government’s reliable sources. The
Syrian Government regrets that the authors of the report
speak about what they administrative impediments and
deliberate restrictions that they claim limit the delivery
of humanitarian assistance to unstable areas.
In that regard, Syria reiterates that it provides
every possible facilitation to ensure the delivery of that
assistance when it is genuinely directed to those Syrian
citizens who truly deserve it and when it is arranged
in accordance with the agreed mechanisms that respect
the applicable Syrian laws and regulations.
As Security Council members will recall, the
Syrian Government has approved the proposal of the
Resident Coordinator to set up a tripartite mechanism
because it is open to any measure that would strengthen
humanitarian work in Syria. The mechanism has met
five times to date — contrary to the sugegstion of the
authors of the report that it is ineffective and that its
meetings are few and far between.
With regard to cross-border deliveries of
humanitarian assistance, I would like to make the
following points.

17-4498411/13

S/PV.8142

The situation in the Middle East

First, Syria still believes that there is currently no
practical justification for the cross-border delivery of
such assistance, in particular given the options created
by the agreements for the establishment of de-escalation
zones in order to deliver humanitarian assistance to
those in need from within the country.
Secondly, the parties in charge at the Office for the
Coordination for Humanitarian Affairs are still either
unable or unwilling to offer the necessary guarantees
that assistance reaches those who deserve it, and not
armed terrorist groups, as has been the case so far. In that
connection, my Government is bewildered by the vague
ideas contained in paragraph 29 of the report regarding
partners or independent third-party companies that
were contracted to ascertain the delivery of assistance
to the warehouses and to those who are eligible for such
aid. I would add that, to date, no United Nations official
has proposed such ideas to the Syrian Government
even though the Syrian Government is the main party
concerned. The Syrian Government therefore requests
that the United Nations provide the names and reports
of the United Nations partners who are allegedly able to
verify this essential information.
Thirdly, the Syrian Government, in cooperation
with its allies, has liberated most Syrian territories from
Da’esh, the Al-Nusra Front and other affiliated terrorist
groups. Those groups have prevented humanitarian aid
from reaching civilians in those areas. That requires
us today to agree on mechanisms to deliver assistance
from within Syria and in cooperation and coordination
with the Syrian Government.
Fourthly, those who prepared the report did not
mention the refusal of the United States and Jordan to
allow aid to reach the Al-Rukban camp, or of Turkey to
open the Nassibine crossing points, which is a flagrant
violation of international humanitarian law and further
evidence of the double standards and politicization of
cross-border assistance.
My Government reiterates the need for United
Nations personnel in Syria to refrain from dealing
with any separatist entities, the illegal so-called local
councils or unlicensed civil society organizations. We
warn that most of those entities have close ties to or
affiliations with armed terrorist groups.
My Government regrets the continuous use by the
authors of the report of the term “besieged zones” when
talking about the situation in eastern Ghouta, while they
constantly and deliberately ignore the fact that citizens
in eastern Ghouta are under internal siege by armed
12/13

19/12/2017

terrorist organizations there. Those organizations use
citizens as human shields and seize, monopolize and
distribute humanitarian assistance to their supporters,
but sell it at exorbitant prices to those in need, as was the
case in eastern Aleppo. Independent media have aired
audio and video footage of the suffering of besieged
civilians and exposed the practices of terrorist groups
that steal humanitarian aid and deprive it to those in
need of that aid.
My country’s Government continues to call on the
authors of the report to be transparent and credible by
clearly mentioning the deeply negative impacts of the
unilateral economic coercive measures imposed on
Syria by the United States of America, the European
Union and other States. Those measures have an
impact on all basic sectors of life and affect even the
activities of the United Nations entities and foreign
non-governmental organizations in Syria.
As Council members are aware, the eighth round
of the Geneva talks took place immediately following
the so-called Riyadh conference for the Syrian
opposition, which was attended by the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General after having been postponed
for three months. Members are also well aware that
the outcome of the Riyadh conference is a deliberate
violation of the relevant United Nations resolutions on
the Syrian crisis, in particular resolution 2254 (2015).
The statement issued by that conference contained
preconditions on key issues that eliminate any potential
for a Syrian national dialogue led by the Syrians
themselves, without foreign interference.
The Special Envoy, who was present at the Riyadh
meetings, ignored the fact that the so-called Riyadh
2 document was a flagrant attempt to undermine
the Geneva track and prevent a political solution to
the Syrian crisis. Therefore, the Syrian Government
position was clear and firm in rejecting the goals of the
Ryiadh 2 grouping, namely, to waste time and prolong
the crisis in an act of submission to the injunctions of
their employers in Saudi Arabia and Western States.
Resolution 2254 (2015) stipulates that all
preconditions should be rejected and that the dialogue
should be inter-Syrian and led by Syrians without
foreign interference. However, the Special Envoy,
who attended the Riyadh 2 meeting, decided to laud
its outcome and adopt it in a provocative manner, in
violation of the United Nations resolution. He adopted
an unbalanced position and sided with the so-called
opposition groups that are still imposing preconditions.
17-44984

19/12/2017

The situation in the Middle East

He also began to promote the dangerous outcome of the
Riyadh 2 meeting and tried to justify it to the extent
that he became party to the exacerbation of the crisis,
rather than a facilitator.
The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
strictly respects the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations and the principles of international
humanitarian law, which are the basis of the United
Nations role and its credibility. We reject the misuse
of United Nations mechanisms by certain influential
States. We condemn the hostile and irresponsible
statements of certain States that have employed
terrorist armed groups in Syria. As usual, those States
have exploited the position of the Special Envoy in the
media so as to justify the preconditions imposed by
the opposition groups in order to obstruct the Geneva
process and thwart any possible solution to the crisis.

S/PV. 8142

In conclusion, the Syrian Arab Republic has
participated in 15 rounds of talks in Geneva and Astana
and two rounds of talks in Moscow, and expects to
participate effectively in the inter-Syrian national
dialogue conference in Sochi. The position of my
Government is clear. No one can alter or manipulate
it, or weaken Syria’s resolve to respond to any sincere
effort to end the bloodbath in Syria and to meet the
aspirations of the Syrian people. That is why we urge
the Secretary-General to convince States that sponsor
the opposition groups to invalidate the so-called Riyadh
2 statement and pave the way for serious progress in the
talks on Syria.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at noon.

17-4498413/13
