UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTIETH

YEAR

MEETING:

22 SEPTEMBER

’

1975

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

... ... .. ... . ... ... .. ... .. .. ... .. ... ..

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of New Members concerning the
application of Papua New Guinea for admission to membership in the United
Nations (S/ 11829) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l841)

S/PV. 1841

‘,

,

‘.
‘

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
__
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . ,. .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the OfJiciul Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Re.solutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 Januaryl965,
became fully operative
on that date.

,:

‘.

/’
,.

.’

<

1841st MEETING
Held in New York on Monday,
Mr. Moulaye

President:

EL HASSEN

22 September

(Mauritania).

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The Security Council will now consider the report of
the Committee
on Admission of New Members in
document S/11829, photocopies of which are before
the members of the Council in all working languages.
The mimeographed
text of this report will be distributed itraIl languages very shortly.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China, Costa
Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy, Japan, Mauritania,
Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland,
United Republic of Cameroon, United Republic of
Tanzania and United States of America.
Provisional

Adoption

2.

Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee
on the Admission of
New Members
concerning
the application
of
Papua New Guinea for admission to membership
in the United Nations (S/11829)
The meeting

4. In paragraph 3 of its report, the Committee recommended that the Security C.ouncil have recourse to
the provisions of the last paragraph of rule 60 of the
provisional rules of procedure. The thirtieth session
of the General Assembly has just opened and I think
this procedure-that
is, for the Security Council
immediately
to make its recommendation
to the
General Assembly-will
meet with the agreement of
all members of the Council.

agenda (S/Agenda/l841)

1.

of the agenda

5. If there is no objection, I shall take it that the
Council wishes to waive the application of the penultimate paragraph of rule 60 on the. particular timelimit prescribed for this case.

was culled to order at 4.45 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

6. In paragraph 4 of its report the Committee recommends that the Security Council adopt a draft resolution on the application for admission of,Papua New
Guinea. In accordance with the procedure followed
at previous Council meetings, I propose first to put
that draft resolution to the vote, on the understanding
that those who wish to speak will be given an opportunity to do so after the vote. If I hear no objection I
shall take it that the Security Council wishes first, to
proceed to the vote.

The ugendu wus adopted.
Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee
on the admission of New
Members concerning the application of Papua New
Guinea for admission to membership
in the United
Nations (S/11829)
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
I have received a letter dated 22 September 1975 in
which the Foreign Minister of Australia has asked to
be invited to participate
in the Security Council’s
debate on the item concerning the application
of
Papua New Guinea for membership
in the United
Nations. In accordance with the relevant provisions
of the Charter, namely, Article 31, with “le. 37 of
the provisional
rules of procedure and the usual
practice of the Council, I propose to invite the Foreign
Minister of Australia to participate in the Council’s
discussion without the right to vote.

7. I therefore now put to the vote the draft resolution which is contained in paragraph 4 of the Committee’s report on Papua New Guinea’s application
for admission, and which reads as follows:
[The speaker

read out the druft’resolution.]

A vote wus taken by show of hands.
The draft resolrrtion

was adopted

unanimotrsly’.

8. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
I would congratulate the new State on the decision
just taken by the Security Council. I am sure that,
for its part, the General Assembly will wish to adopt
the Council’s recommendation
as soon ..as possible.
Hence, I would request the Secretary-General,
in
accordance with rule 60 of the Security. Council’s

2. In accordance with the usual practice, I invite
the Foreign Minister of Australia to take a place at
the Council table.
At the invitation
of the President,
(Austruliu)
took a pluce at the Council

1975, at 4.30 p.m.

Mr. Willesee
tuhle.
1

provisional
mendation

rules of procedure, to forward this recomto the General Assembly.

forward to seeing him in New York next month if, as
he hopes, he is able to make the visit.

9. A number of members of the Security Council
have asked to be allowed to speak following the voting,
and I shall now call on them.

13. My delegation has already had the opportunity
to congratulate Papua New Guinea during last month’s
session of the Trusteeship Council, when independence was imminent;
and I need not repeat at length
what was said on that occasion. I should, however,
like to convey once again the warm wishes and congratulations
of the United
Kingdom
Government
and people to the Government and people of Papua
New Guinea upon the occasion both of their independence and of their application for admission to the
United Nations. We welcome in particular the emergence of a new Commonwealth
country, with which
my own country has had close historical links and
with which we hope to develop still closer links in
future. We have admired
Papua New Guinea’s
progress to nationhood
under Mr. Somare’s wise
leadership.

10. Mr. MURRAY
(United Kingdom): May I begin,
Sir, by congratulating
you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. Your presidency
this particular month seems to me to have a symbolic
significance. September, which sees the opening of
the General Assembly, is perhaps the most important
month in the calendar of the United Nations. The
Foreign Ministers of many of the most powerful
countries in the world are or will be in New York
in the course of the month. It is a striking demonstration of the principle of equality of States that during
this important month it should be the turn of one of
the smaller States in our Organization to provide the
President of the Security Council.
11. May I congratulate
also the representative
of
Japan on his conduct of the presidency during the
month of August. He had not always an easy time.
I well remember the hectic afternoon when representatives differed hotly on what precisely they had just
voted on. We all admired the imperturbability,
the
courtesy and, above all, the complete objectivity with
which Ambassador Saito discharged his functions.

14. Papua New Guinea is of course no stranger to
the United Nations. New Guinea’s status first as a
mandated territory and then as a Trust Territory has
ensured not only that we in New York have been
kept fully informed of its progress towards independence, but more importantly,
Papua New Guineans
themselves have learned what the United Nations
stands for and how concerned this world body has
been for Papua New Guinea’s progress ans welfare.

12. I am particularly
happy to be representing my
country at this afternoon’s meeting-and
for a special
reason; I returned to New York last night from Papua
New Guinea, where, as current President of the
Trusteeship Council, I had the honour of leading a
delegation of the Trusteeship
Council, invited by
Mr. Michael Somare, the new Prime’ Minister of
Papua New Guinea, to take part in the independence
celebrations.
Along with Trusteeship Council representatives from France and the United States; with
Mr. Tang, the Under-Secretary-General
for Political
Affairs, Trusteeship and Decolonization;
and with a
delegation of the Special Committee,
the situation
with regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, headed by Ambassador Rupia, I was
in the Sir Hubert Murray stadium in Port Moresby
last Monday when, in the presence of His Royal
Highness the Prince of Wales, representing Queen
Elizabeth,
the Governor General of Australia, the
Prime Minister of Australia and representatives
of
many other States, the Australian flag was lowered.
I was present also next morning on Independence Hill
when at a colourful ceremony the beautiful new flag
of Papua New Guinea-the
bird of paradise and the
Southern Cross-was hoisted. I was able to convey
to Sir John Guise, the new Governor General of Papua
New Guinea, and to Mr. Michael Somare the warm
greetings of the Trusteeship
Council and its best
wishes for the Papua New Guineans’ new prosperity.
I was able to assure Mr. Somare that we much look

15. I can assure members from first-hand experience that Papua New Guineans hope that this concern
for their welfare will continue. After the celebrations
in Port Moresby were over, some of my colleagues
and I were invited to be the official guests at the celebrations in Wabag, the headquarters of Enga, possibly the most remote district in the highlands of
Papua New Guinea. Thousands of farmers had come
in from the mountains around for the occasion. I
was invited by the chairman of the local celebrations
and by the local members of Parliament present to
make a speech to the assembled throng. But Papua
New Guinea is clearly a very democratic society,
and numbers of my audience claimed immediate right
of reply. I was told by them that they hoped that
the United Nations fully realized that although Papua
New Guinea was now independent,
Papua New
Guinea and the district of Enga in particular, still
required much financial assistance and much manpower from the outside. They wanted to go on receiving help from Australia, and they wanted help
from other friends. Called upon to sum up at the end
of what was a distinctly disorderly debate-although
in the best of spirits-I
assured them that their own
leaders and I myself had on the previous evening, at
the state dinner, heard Mr. Whitlam,
the Prime
Minister of Australia, assure his audience that Papua
New Guinea.would
continue to have first call on the
external aid programme of Australia. I added that I
knew that the United Nations Development
Programme and other agencies were already active in
2

Nations. This is the fourth occasion of which the
United Nations can be very proud. Several weeks ago
the United Nations Security Council recommended
the membership of Cape Verde, Sao Tome and Prinand of course those three
cipe and Mozambique,
nations are now Members of our Organization.
And
today we have just adopted a resolution recommending
the membership of Papua New Guinea in the family
of nations. Naturally,
this is a source of great gratification to my delegation and indeed, I believe, to the
entire membership of our Organization.

Papua New Guinea, and I said, speaking personally,
that I was sure that Mr. Somare would receive a
sympathetic
hearing in such requests as he might
make for United Nations assistance. It will now be
up to the various agencies of the United Nations to
ensure that I did not mislead the farmers of Enga.
16. This occasion demonstrates
once again how
valuable and constructive
the Trusteeship
System
has been. Although there is now only one Trust Territory remaining this, in a sense, is a tribute to the
role played by the United Nations in the past 20 years
in bringing countries to independence.

24. It is also a happy coincidence that as the United
Nations is about to mark the thirtieth anniversary of
its foundation and as we are about to commemorate
the fifteenth anniversary of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, we should witness the birth of four sovereign
nations which we have already recommended
for
United Nations membership,
and one at least-that
is, Angola-which
we hope to be recommending
soon
for membership in our Organization.

17. It remains for me to express my Government’s
appreciation of Australia’s role as a Trustee. It gives
us particular pleasure that Mr. Willesee, the Foreign
Minister of Australia, should be able to be here this
afternoon to hear my delegation say this. As a colonial
Power of some experience,
we have admired the
way in which Australia has changed a colonial relationship into a relationship between free and equal nations.
18. It must have been particularly gratifying to the
Australians present in Papua New Guinea that, not
once but on several occasions during the independence celebrations, prominent Papua New Guineans
stressed publicly that the Australian flag was being
lowered, not torn down.

25. The independence
of Papua New Guinea and
its subsequent application
for membership
in our
Organization is certainly another instance of fulfilment
of the objectives of the founding fathers for all peoples
to exercise their right to self-determination
and universal participation
by all peoples in the United
Nations.

19. I end by repeating the good wishes of my Government to the people of Papua New Guinea and to
their representatives
in New York, in particular to
Mr. Ralph Karepa, whom we have got to know well
as a member of the Australian delegation and who
will now be looking after Papua New Guinean interests,
and we look forward to the contributions
that the
Papua New Guineans will make to our deliberations
in future.

26. It is therefore a matter of great pleasure for my
delegation to have supported actively the membership
of Papua New Guinea. We are certainly looking
forward to the day when the representatives of Papua
New Guinea will take their rightful place in the United
Nations.
27. The history of Papua New Guinea is well known
to this C.ouncil. The aspirations of the people of Papua
New Guinea to exercise their right to self-determination and independence have been a subject of discussion in the various organs of the United Nations
for a long time and, more specifically,
within the
Trusteeship Council and in the Special Committee.
Indeed, the involvement of the United Nations has not
been confined to discussions alone. When Papua New
Guinea achieved independence
on 16 September
1975 the United, Nations, as my colleague Ambassador Murray of the United Kingdom rightly pointed
out, sent two delegations: one, that of the Trusteeship
Council, led by him, and the other led by my colleague
and compatriot,
Ambassador Paul Rupia, the representative of Tanzania to the United Nations.

20. Mr. SALIM
(United
Republic of Tanzania):
Mr. President, I should like to join my colleague, the
representative of the United Kingdom, in expressing
very warm congratulations
on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council. The fraternal
ties that bind our two countries and our two peoples,
the personal relationship
that prevails between us,
are too well known to need further elaboration. I am
convinced that under your -capable leadership the
Security Council will conduct its business in the most
efficient manner.
21. I should like also to pay a tribute to your predecessor, Ambassador Saito of Japan, for the outstanding way in which he presided over our.deliberations last month, notwithstanding
the fact that at times
the meetings had their controversial moments.

28. Therefore, the application of Papua New Guinea
which we have just approved is not only an event of
which the United Nations should be seized as an outsider, but in fact is an event for which we have all
been working,
and a cause for joy among all the
Members of the United Nations.

22. 1 should like also to welcome to our midst our
old friend Ambassador Vinci of Italy.
23. Today we are witnessing another happy and
memorable
occasion in the history of the United
3

29. In welcoming Papua New Guinea to admission
to the United Nations, I wish also to pay a tribute to
,the people and Government
of that country. Under
the able and enlightened
leadership of the Prime
Minister, Mr. Michael Somare, the people of Papua
New Guinea certainly have a bright future as they
confront the new challenges before them. There is
no doubt in my mind that our Organization,
which
has actively supported the right of these people to
self-determination
and independence,
will continue
to render effective support as the new sovereign
nation confronts its many challenges and embarks
on the process of the consolidation
of its independence and the preservation of its national unity and
territorial integrity.

34. Mr.. CHUANG
(China) (translation
from Chiness): On 16 September Papua New Guinea, another
new State in the Pacific, freed itself from colonial
domination
and proclaimed
independence.
On the
occasion of the proclamation
of the independence
of Papua New Guinea, Chou ,En-lai, Premier of the
State Council of the People’s Republic of China, sent
a message of congratulations
to the Prime Minister
of Papua New Guinea, informing%him of the decision
of the Chinese Government to recognize Papua New
Guinea. We hope that the friendly relations between
China and Papua’ New Guinea will develop daily,
and we wish the people of Papua New Guinea new
successes in their struggle to combat imperialism
and
colonialism
and defend national
independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity, and in the cause
of building their country.

30. My country looks forward in confidence that the
future will witness a fruitful development
of cooperation between Papua New Guinea and ourselves.
Already a sound foundation has been laid in this
context, as reflected in the various exchanges of visits
between the delegations of the two countries. We
will continue to pursue such relations both bilaterally
and multilaterally.
As a member of the Commonwealth
of Nations, Tanzania also looks forward to close
co-operation with the new Commonwealth
member.

35. Papua New Guinea applied for membership in
the United Nations immediately
after the proclamation of its independence. The Chinese delegation holds
that, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the United Nations Charter, Papua New Guinea.is
qualified for membership in the United Nations. We
therefore support its application and agree that the
Security Council should recommend to the General
Assembly the admission of Papua New -Guinea to
membership in the United Nations.

31. In 1972 I had the rare opportunity and privilege
of visiting Papua New Guinea in my capacity as
Chairman of the Special Committee.
At that time I
was impressed by the determination
of the people
and the. Government
of that country not only to
achieve their right to self-government
and independence, but, above all, to proceed to the construction
of a new society. This determination
underscored
the importance of the efforts of the United Nations to
help the people of that country to achieve’their independence. It is therefore very gratifying to see that
those .efforts-that
is, the collective efforts of the
people of Papua New Guinea and the efforts made by
our Organization-have
now resulted in the birth of a
new and sovereign nation.

36. We believe that upon admission to membership
in the United Nations Papua New Guinea will make
positive contributions
to the realization of the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter,
together with all the other justice-upholding
Member
States.
37.

Mr.

FACIO (Costa Rica) (interprctcrtiou
from
First I should like to say to you, Mr. President, on behalf of the delegation of Costa Rica,,how
pleased. we are ,to see you exercising the office of
President of the Security Council this month. In view
of your ,experience and your capacity we are sure
that you will conduct these proceedings with your
usual, sagacity and intelligence. My delegation pledges
to you its total support for success in the task entrusted
to.you.

Spanish):

32. This is not only one more example of the fact
that people ‘everywhere will achieve their indepen:.
dence, but also serves to emphasize the just position
which the United Nations has adopted against all
forms of colonialism wherever it may exist.’

38. I should 1ike:also to congratulate .most warmly
Ambassador, Saito.sof Japan on the brilliant, way in
which. he conducted the difficult proceedings of this
Council in August.
*.
..,
,‘i
j9. Turning now to the item for which we have been
convened, my delegation would like to express its
profound, satisfaction at the fact that it was able to
contribute
by means of its vote to producing the
recommendation,
which, under the. Charter, is the
prerogative of, this Council, for the admission of
new Members. We are very gratified at the fact that
the country being admitted, Papua New Guinea, is
a n.ation which has,,emerged, independent and sovereign, very recently-and has expressed its wish to join

33. I cannot conclude my very brief remarks without
paying a warm tribute to the Government-and
people
of Australia, whose Foreign Minister is here with us.
As an administering
Power, Australia has’adopted. a
policy of decolonization
which is an example t&be
followed by other administering
,authorities.
Their
co-operation,
both with the people of Papua New
Guinea and with the United Nations, not only helped
to bring about a smooth transition without the necessity for the difficult struggles which we witnessed
elsewhere, but also ensured new and meaningful
relations between Australia and Papua New Guinea
itself.
4

the United Nations and thereby to join’ the intkrnational community,
which has chosen this Organization as the forum for the expression of the aspirations
of all the peoples in the world.

admission of Papua New Guinea to membership
of
the United Nations. The consistent and determined
struggle for the early elimination
of the remnants of
the colonial system and the provision of every kind
of support to, the peoples struggling for their national
liberation and independence is one of the most important principles of the foreign policy of ,the Soviet
Union and we welcome today Papua New Guinea as
a newly independent State as just one more consequence of the adoption in 1%0 of the historic Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, for which the initiative came
from the Soviet Union.

40. I cannot refrain from expressing my satisfaction
at the fact the process which has brought independence to Papua New Guinea was carried out gradually
and peacefully up to the point where total sovereignty
was reached, under the careful guidance and observation of the United Nations. This new nation comes
to independence fully able to devote itself to meeting
the needs of its people, without the internal upheavals
which, in other less fortunate nations, necessitated
so many years of determined
struggle against colonialism. In this peaceful process which has occurred
in Papua New Guinea we .recognize the outstanding
role always played by the administering
Power, Australia, a country which so well and with such a sense
of international
responsibility
understood the aspirations to independence of Papua New Guinea and used
its trusteeship in order to lead the new nation to a
level of self-government
such as to permit it to enjoy
its total independence and thus prepare it properly for
the tremendous tasks which confront it as a new
nation. I request the Foreign’ Minister of Australia,
who is. here with us, to be good enough to transmit
to his Government hour warm congratulations
on the
valuable contribution
.of his country to the process
of decolonization.

45. The attainment of independence for the 3 million inhabitants of Papua New Guinea is a new, important step towards the final defeat of colonialism.
The
recommendation
of the Security Council to admit
Papua New Guinea to membership
in the United
Nations demonstrates once again that the process of
the ehmination of the colonial system is reaching a
successful conclusion and that the day is near when
there will be no remnant of any stain of the shameful
system of colonialism in our world.
46. The Chairman of the Council of Ministers of
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Mr. Kosygin,
in his congratulations
to the Prime Minister of Papua
New Guinea, Mr. Somare, on the occasion of the
proclamation
of the independence
of Papua New
Guinea, spoke as follows:

41. The people and Government of Costa Rica salute
the accession to independence of Papua New Guinea
and express the wish for a bright future for its people.

“Unswervingly
pursuing a policy of equality and
friendship among all States, regardless of their social
systems, and guided by the principle of self-determination for peoples, the Soviet Government declares
its recognition of Papua New Guinea as a sovereign,
independent State, and expresses its readiness to
establish diplomatic relations with it”.

42. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretution
from Russiunj:
Permit me
first of all, Mr. President, to congratulate
you, the
representative of a friendly cauntry, Mauritania,
on
your assumption of the lofty and responsible post
of President of the Security Council and to wish you
success in your important task. I should like also to
express my gratitude to your predecessor; the permanent representative of Japan to the United Nations,
Ambassador Saito, who presided over the Council in
August. It was not his fault that no satisfactory solution was found, during the course of his presidency
to the problem of the admission to the United Nations
of the two Viet-Namese
States which, as was shown
by the voting in the Security Council and confirmed
by the recent vote in the General Assembly, enjoys
the support of the overwhelming
majority of Member
States of the United Nations.

47. The Soviet delegation would like once again
cordially to congratulate the people and Government
of Papua New Guinea on the attainment of independence, and to express our conviction that this, young
State ‘Will take its proper place within the United
Nations.
48. Mr. RYDBECK
(Sweden): First of all I want to
pay my respects to you, Mr. President, and congratulate you on your assumptionof
this office and to
promise you our co-operation. For reasons which are
easily discerned, I have been reflecting a little on the
uneven distribution
of the work-load of the Council,
and I think it is a pity that your talents and capacity
as a President have not been exploited to their full
measure; but you have our co-operation for the time
remains.

43. I should like to welcome,to the Security Council
table.our mutual friend, the permanent representative
of Italy to the United Nations, Ambassador Vinci,
who has returned once again to the United Nations;
this time from Moscow.

49. Secondly, my thanks go to Ambassador Saito,
who, with diplomatic
tactfulness, unfailing courtesy
and energy, ‘conducted some very difficult negotiations and meetings during the summer, in the month
of August.

44. The Soviet delegation supported with satisfaction
the recommendation
of the Security Council for the
5

50. ,I also want to pay a tribute to the Foreign Minister of Costa Rica, under whose presidency we all had
the hpnour and pleasure to serve earlier. And then I
must mention our old new friend, Ambassador Vinci
of Italy, who has served not only his country but also
the United Nations for many years; we are very happy
to see him back here and to profit by his advice and
experience.

I have no doubt that it will happen very soon, and the
Swedish delegation looks forward to co-operating with
it closely-in the future in the conviction that Papua
New Guinea will make an essential contribution to the
work of our world Organization.
58. Mr. JACKSON
(Guyana): Mr. President, let
me say at the outset how very pleased I and my delegation are at seeing you occupy the presidency of this
Council for the month of September. Our delegations, and the two of us personally, as representatives
of brotherly
non-aligned
countries,
have worked
closely together here in the Security Council and in
other forums. In affirming my delegation’s
pledge
of co-operation with you, my primary intention is to
give public acknowledgement
to a relationship which
both you and I take as axiomatic. Your diplomatic
talents and your personal charm will, I am sure, serve
to enable this Council to reach just and expeditious
decisions during this month; and, if I may say so,
Mr. President, we already have evidence of that.

51. It is always a happy occasion when a new State
Member enters our Organization.
Every time this
happens the United Nations is brought once step
closer to the goal of universality,
one of the fundamental preconditions for an effective United Nations.
52. We have taken great strides in this direction
during the last few years as a result of the quickening
pace of the process of decolonization.
Today, we
once again have on our agenda the application for
membership of a new independent country which has
emerged from colonial status to take its rightful place
among the members of the international
community.

59. I wish to embrace this opportunity to pay a warm
and sincere tribute to Ambassador Saito of Japan who
presided over our deliberations during the month of
August. His well-known patience, his tact and his
skill, of which we were the beneficiaries, were much
in evidence as we grappled with difficult and complex
issues during last month.

53. The Swedish Government
recognized Papua
New Guinea on 16 September, the day that the new
State attained independence. My delegation has found
the application for membership in full accordance with
the requirements
of the Charter and has therefore,
with great pleasure, joined the other members of the
Council in recommending
to the General Assembly
the admission of Papua New Guinea as a Member of
the United Nations.

60. May I also take this opportunity
to say how
very pleased my delegation is that the Foreign Minister of Costa Rica, a sister Latin American republic,
is here with us today; and may I also add my own and
my delegation’s
words of welcome to Ambassador
Vinci of Italy.

54. We have followed the development
of Papua
New Guinea with great interest and admiration. There
have been great difficulties- to overcome, difficulties
caused by the mere topography of the country as well
as by its ethnic and linguistic diversity. Under the
leadership of the National Coalition Government, the
goal of national unity has been pursued with determination, and policies and institutions have evolved in
accordance with the basic character of the country
and its needs.

61. The Government
and people of my country,
Guyana, have already formally sent sincerest and
warmest felicitations to the Government .and people
of Papua New Guinea on that State’s accession to
independence.
I should nevertheless like to conjoin
the congratulations of my delegation with those already
expressed by my Government and people.

55. Through
fruitful
co-operation
between the
Government and people of Papua New Guinea, the
former administering
State, Australia, and the United
Nations Trusteeship Council, Papua New Guinea has
now peacefully attained its independence.
It is yet
another example of the fruitful role that the United
Nations can play in co-operation
with the parties
concerned in guiding dependent Territories towards
their day of freedom.

62. For the State of Papua New Guinea, 16 September signalled the beginning of a new era. Now
that the people of that State have recovered their
freedom, they can, as an independent
nation, reflecting a considerable cultural and racial diversity,
chart the course of their own future in accordance
with their own dictates and their own choices. The
opportunities
as well as the challenges of nationhood
are not unfamiliar
to peoples of the developing
world, and in this context the people of Guyana share
with our sisters and brothers in Papua New Guinea
their goals of peace, justice and progress as a nation
united.

56. A special tribute goes to Australia in this context.
Australia has, indeed, in every way lived up to the
great responsibilities
of a trustee. We have all admired
the way in which Australia has assisted Papua New
Guinea on the road to independence.

63. For Papua New Guinea, the task of nationbuilding now begins. It is a process, not an occurrence, and it is a task rendered more difficult ‘by a

57. It will be a great pleasure for me to welcome the
delegation of Papua New Guinea to the United Nations.
6

.i

.

Admission of New Members, and we support with
particular satisfaction the application of Papua New
Guinea for membership in the United Nations.

history during which the people of those islands have
had to endure some of the worst excesses of European
colonialism.
During the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries, indeed even the twentieth in part, administrative authorities and miscellaneous
traders, belligerent inintent and unscrupulous in practice, sought
.to plunder the rumoured riches of the land. In pursuing
a multifaceted
programme
of action designed to
construct a just and equitable society, the people of
Papua New Guinea can be assured of fraternal support
from,
and the constant
understanding
of, the
people of Guyana.

72. My Government was pleased to be represented
at the Papua New Guinea independence celebrations
in Port Moresby on 16 September. We welcome the ”
independence of Papua New Guinea and have established diplomatic
relations. As a result of United
States participation,
as a member of the&Trusteeship
Council, in visiting missions to Papua New Guinea
and in the deliberations
concerning that new nation
here in New -York, we have come to appreciate the
warmth and hospitality
of her people, the striking
beauty of her land and seas, and the dedication .and
diligence of her elected leaders and their commitment
to the welfare of their people.

64. Conscious of the zeal and determination
with
which the people of Papua New Guinea have pursued
the goal of independence,
my delegation
finds it
apposite, nonetheless,
to take cognizance of the
spirit in which the Government of Australia has successfully sought to discharge its obligations to the
former Trust Territory.
Such an attitude should be
an example to those who, in one guise or another,
seek to resist the march of other peoples to-freedom
and independence.

73. If I may be pardoned a personal reference,
Mr. President it was my privilege to lead a United
Nations Visiting Mission to Papua New Guinea in
1972, to observe the elections for the House of
Assembly, a four-week electoral process’ that was
carried off with smooth efficiency by-the administering
Power and with the reasoned exerc.ise of their. free
will by the people of Papua New Guinea. That elect,oral
process has led on directly, through a series of,steps,
in the constitutional
process, to the recent ceremonies
of independence in Port Moresby which have resulted
in our meeting here today.

65. The achievement
of independence
by Papua
New Guinea and its admission to the United Nations
will represent a further step towards the ultimate
objective of universality of membership in the United
Nations.
66. It was in this context that my delegation welcomed the application before us. We salute the Government and people of Papua New Guinea in their
aspiration to participate’ in the United Nations as a
full Member. We fully support that aspiration and
thus we voted in favour of the draft resolution.

74. Great credit is due both to the people of Papua
New Guinea and to Australia,
the administering
Power under the Trusteeship
Agreement
adopted
by the General Assembly on 13 December 1946, for
this orderly process of self-determination.

67. As we seek to intensify our efforts for the creation of an international
society truly based on justice
and equity, my delegation and the Government
and
people of Guyana look forward to a prolonged period
of friendship and meaningful co-operation
with the
Government
and people of Papua New Guinea and
with their representatives here in New York.

75. Papua New Guinea begins its life as a new nation
with excellent prospects. Its functioning
representative democracy and constitution,
fully’ debated by
the people’s representatives, as ,well as the admirable
respect which the ‘Papua New Guineans have shown
for human rights and due process of law bode well
for the future.

68. Mr. BENNETT
(United States of America):
Mr. President, in beginning my remarks I should like
to say with what satisfaction my Government views
your presidency of the Council, with your co-operative
spirit and your sense of the fitting and the correct.
It is a satisfaction for us to have you in the Chair.

76. Papua New Guinea has cordial relations with
its neighbours and enjoys rich natural resources and
the elements of a sound and expanding economy.
77. In contrast to many new Members of the United
Nations, Papua New Guinea already has a wealth of
first-hand experience in this Organization
through
its participation in the deliberations of the Trusteeship
Council and the Fourth Committee.
Among those
who have been most active in Papua New Guinea:s
participation
here in New York, and for whom my
delegation
has developed
great respeet, is Ralph
Karepa, who has worked closely with the Australian
delegation and who, I understand, wili now be Papua
New Guinea’s
representative
in New York. We
look forward to working with him and with his delegation during this session and during the years to
come.

69. I should also like to pay tribute to your predecessor, Ambassador Saito, who has the respect and
affection of us all.
70. It is a distinct pleasure today to welcome here
an old friend, the Foreign Minister of Costa Rica, and
it is of course a pleasure to have Ambassador Vinci
back on the Council.
71. My delegation
the recommendation

concurred whole-heartedly
with
of the Council’s Committee
on
7

,..
‘I’

.

3 ,, . ..>.

1.

-*

78. .-My delegation would also like to welcome to
this chamber Senator Donald Willesee, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Australia, and to express to him
personally and to the Government
of ,Australia our
admiration
for the exemplary
manner in which
.Australia has discharged its responsibilities
as Administering Authority under the Trusteeship Agreement.

delegation is extremely pleased, the -more so since
my country,, Cameroon, and your country, Mauritania, are linked by a firm friendship and a militant
third-world solidarity,
,‘. .,
86. My delegation,
which knows and appreciates
your.eminent
qualities as a man and as’s diplomat, is
convinced that our work will be .carried out successfully under your enlightened guidance.

79. The Government .of’ the United States believes
that Papua New Guinea ,will.be a.valuable and productive new member in the community
of nations,
and we have warmly supported its application
for
membership in the United Nations.

87. I should also like to avail myself of this opportunity. to pay a just tribute to Ambassador Saito of
Japan, for the competence and.authority
with which
he guided our work during the month of August last.
My delegation is most grateful to him for the manner
in which he discharged his heavy duties.

80.. Mr. ZAHAWIE
(Iraq):. It is a source of great
satisfaction to my delegation, Mr.‘President,
to see
you presiding over the .deliberations of the Security
Council for the month of September. We .offer you
our sincere congratulations
and the assurance of our
full co-operation.
.j

88. ‘Finally,
it is a pleasure for me to welcome
Mr. Pietro Vinci,‘the new ambassador of Italy, whose
vast experience and talent will be most useful -and
enlightening to us in the course of our debates.
;’
89.. My delegation is extremely pleased at the unanimity manifested’ in our ‘Council in favour of the
admission of Papua New Guinea to this Organization.
This is the’final phase which completes the lengthy
process of evolution in that Territory, which started
with the establishment
of a Trusteeship -Agreement
in 1946, was followed by the &cession of Papua New
Guinea to internal autonomy on 1 December 1973,
and finally by its accession to independence on 16 September 1975.*
._ ;’
<
90. it is’a’source of great satisfaction that the accession’ of Papua New Guinea to independence
and
international
sovereignty took place with complete
respect for its territorial
integrity and its unity, in
accordance with the wishes broadly expressed by the
population and the views contained in the last report
of the T,rusteeship Council on the administration
of
that former Territory.

81. My delegation would also .likel to express its
appreciation
to Ambassador Saito of Japan for the
excellent manner in which he presided, over the
Council’s meetings during the month of August.
82. I join you, Mr.( President; in extending a warm
welcome to the distinguished
Foreign Minister
of
Costa Rica and to Ambassador Vinci of,ltaly,
upon
their return to the Council.
:
7..
.‘~
83. Iraq, as an active Member of the Special Committee’, has ‘closely followed the’ developments
in
Papua New Guinea over the past .several years, and
our representative on that Committee’was
a member
of the Mission that visited Papua New..Guinea
in
1971. The United Nations, we ,feel, can. be justly
proud of its record in Papua New Guinea, and Australia
is to be specially commended for the manner in which
it .has co-operated with the United Nations and its
different bodies. We now urge the world Organization
and the Australian Government
to provide all possible aid and co-operation that will enable the newly
inedependent State to achieve economic and political
.stability.

9,i. We are particularly
grateful to Australia for
the manner i,n which that country discharged the
grave respons/bilities
conferred .on it ,with respect to
that former Territory, which had initially been placed
under British administration.
‘.

84. Iraq firmly believes in the urgency and ncessity of eliminating’all
traces of colonialism and, having
supported the people of Papua -New Guinea in their
quest for independence
and sovereignty,
Iraq has
now voted in favour of the admission of ,Papua New
Guinea to membership
in the United Nations. We
extend our warm congratulations’and
welcome to the
new Member “and wish its pe’ople and Government
success and prosperity.
85.

Mr.

OYONO

93.’ We are ‘happy to ‘welcome Papua .New Guinea to
our Organization, and we wish,‘at once to assure it of
our complete support and co-operation.

‘of Cameroun)
I should
like first ‘of all to offer my warmest and most fraternal congratulations
on the occasion of your accession to the very important post of President of the
Security Council for the month of September. My

(i~rtcvprc~tation

jiwm

(United

92. . The, idmission
of Papua New Guinea thus
strengthens the universality of the United Nations,
which the United Republic of Cameroon has always
supported with conviction.

Republic

French): Mr. President,

94. Mr. SAITO (Japan) : Mr. President, first of all
I should like to express to you my congratulations
upon your assumption of, the office of President of the
Security Council for this month. I am confident that
with your diplomatic
ski!!, deep-seated wisdom and
8

; :

broad experience you will be able to guide the deliberations of this Coulicil both smoothly and effectively. I should like to express my gratitude for the
kind words about my presidency offered by you and
by the other representatives.
‘,
95. We are delighted to see Mr. Facie, the.Foreign
Minister
of Costa Rica, back in this Council this
afternoon; the Security Council benefited from his able
guidance in March.

101. My Government recognized Papua New Guinea
on 16 September 1975, the very day on which it became independent. A member of our House of Representatives represented
my country at the formal
independence
celebrations
at Port ,Moresby and
conveyed the best wishes of the Government
and
people of .Japan to the Government
and people of
Papua New Guinea. Japan opened a ConsulateGeneral in Port Moresby last January, and we established diplomatic
relations with Papua New Guinea
on its Independence
Day, immediately
after our
recognition
of the new State, in order to promote
good-neighbourly
ties between our two countries.

96. It is particularly
gratifying to my Government,
hs an Asian and a Pacific nation, that the Security
Council has decided unanimously
to recommend to
the General Assembly that Papua New Guinea be
admitted to membership .in this world Organization.
This unanimous decision is strong testimony to the
fact that that this independent and sovereign State is
fully qualified to join the United Nations as a,peaceloving country under the United Nations Charter.

102. I should like to add that our support today in
the Security Council of Papua New Guinea’s admission to the United Nations is especially meaningful
to my country, which is located very close to Papua
New Guinea. We- are prepared to co-operate to our
maximum capability with the Government of the n’ew
State in its efforts towards economic and social
development and for the social welfare ,of its people.,
We have a strong desire to establish a new era of close
and friendiy .ties, based. on sovereign .equalitL and
mutual respect.

97. My delegation has whole-heartedly supported the
application
of Papua New Guinea and warmly welcomes its membership.
The delegation -of Japan has
full confidenck in the ability and willingness of Papua
New Guinea to carry out the obligations contained
in the Charter.
d
.:;

103. My delegation is looking forward to clbse co;
operation ‘with ~the delegation of Papua New Guinea
in our joint efforts, within -and outside the ,United
Nations, to pursue our common objective; enshrined
in the Charter-the
attainment
of- a peaceful and
;’
__,.
prosperous world.
,,.
104. My delegation
is’ gratified that Papua New
Guinea has already played a constructive and sign&
cant role in regional co-operation and development
as a member of the Pacific forum. .Its independence
and membership
in the World Organization
will
expand its activities in the international
.area, promoting in ,tum the stability of the region and its accelerated development.
1
. .

98. Ori,this ,auspicious &casion;‘.I’
wish to express,
in the name of the delegation *of Japa?, our sincere
congratulations
‘to the Go<ernm.ent and people .of
Papua New Guinea on the c6nfidence and assu&nce
accorded them today by this Council. We anticipate
that the General Assembly.will
soon decide to admit
Papua New Guinea to membership
in the’ United
Nations.
99. My deiegation wishes also to express its pleasure
at the peaceful and orderly process of decolonization
which enablkd ‘this neti’state‘
to proclaim its formal
independetick ion 16 Septembtir last: We wish to,pay a
high tribute to the leaders of PapGa New Guinea,
under the guidance of Prime Minister Somare, for
their statesmanship as demdnst&ted
in theii efforts
to’yards dkdolonisation.
At the same time, I wish to
&press the profound’appyeciation
of my d&leg&ion,
my Government
and’ of myself personally,‘? t,o the
Government
of Australia for the faithful ‘fulfilment
of its ‘respqnsibilities
as Administering
Authority
under thi Trusteeship Agreement, which successfuliy
led the peo’ple of Papua New’ Guinei to domplete
freedom and full independence.
I’ know this. fact
through my personal experience in AuStrBlia.’ It is
encouraging to learn that the Government of Australia
has ensured the continuation
of close relations with
Papua New Guinea and has pledged genero&&onomic
and social aid, indispensable
to the advancement of
the new nation.

TCHERNOUCHTCHE?JKb.
(Byelo105. Mr.
russian Soviet Socialist
Republic)
(intg,tpy2trtion
from Russian):
I should like, first of all, Mr. President, to congratulate
you, an eminent diplomatic
representative of your country, and to say how pleased
we are to,see you presiding over the Securjty Council.
We wish you every success in cal;ryjng put t’he important tasks entrusted to you.
106. At the same *tin&, we should like to‘ express
our appreciatidn
to the representative
‘of Japan,
Mr. Saito, who presided ovei the .Security Council
during the month of August.
107. It is with genuine satjsfaction that we note that
the work of the S&urity Council once again benefits
from the presence of the Minister for Foreign Affa~irs
of Costa Rica, Mr. Facie.

100. We wish also to congratulate the TrusteeShip
Council, :the Special. Committee,
and other* United,
Nations bodies for their valuable kontributions
in
assisting the new State to achieve independence.

108. We also’wish to join in the-congratulations
that
have been addressed to Ambassador Pi&o Vinci of
9

Italy, who has long been well known in. the United
Nations and who has again .been appointed Permanent
representative
of Italy to the United Nations and
representative ,of his country in the Security Council.
It is a great pleasure for me to address these words
to Ambassador Vinci because a few years ago I had
the honour of not only :making his acquaintance but
also enjoying fruitful co-operation on problems connected with the work of the United Nations.
I
109. The delegation of the Byelorussian
SSR was
pleased to vote in favour of the Security Council
resolution
containing
the recommendation
to the
General Assembly to admit the new sovereign independent State of Papua New Guinea to membership
in the United Nations. The people of Papua New
Guinea have adopted a course of independent national
development at a time when, as a result of tremendous
changes which have occurred in the world, we are
witnessing an intensification and expansion of detente,
and find ever more confirmation
of the principles of
peaceful coexistence ‘of States with different social
systems in international
relations. This in its turn
creates new opportunities
to eliminate the last remnants of the ‘colonial system and favourable conditions
for the independent development
of young States,
including Papua New Guinea.

114. Finally, on behalf of the delegation of France,
I should like to express our immense satisfaction at
seeing among us once again the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Costa Rica and Ambassador Vinci, the new
representative
of Italy, whose experience will certainly be most valuable to us.
115; On 15 September 1975 the Secretary-General
and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Australia
signed adocument which brought to an end the Trusteeship Agreement between the United Nations and the
Government of Australia concerning the administration of the Territory of Papua New Guinea. The proclamation of the independence of the new State, which
occurred almost simultaneously,
enabled Papua New
Guinea to enter the international
community.
116. France had the .privilege of following closely
the events which led to this. As a member of the
Trusteeship Council, France has participated
since
1946 in the meetings of that body to ensure that the
essential purposes of the trusteeship system were
pursued.
117. The delegation of France takes this opportunity
to pay to Australia the tribute it deserves. As the
Administering
Authority it has discharged its international responsibilities
in a most satisfactory manner,
in application
of the Charter and the Trusteeship
Agreement.

110. .The emergence ‘of ‘that State and its admission
to membership of the United Nations are very noteworthy events and demonstrate
that the historic
process of the political liberation of peoples from
colonialism ,does not fail to affect any part of the world
and .that the time ,is drawing inexorably nearer when
throughout the world there will not be the remotest
corner where the forces of racism or colonialism still
prevail.

118. The spirit of good understanding
that always
prevailed between the administering
Power and the
Government
of Papua New Guinea made possible a
progressive transfer of responsibilities.
We know
that since 1 December 1973 the country had been
self governing and in control of all sectors of the
administration;
We know also that questions ,of
defense and foreign relations had been successively
transferred to the Port Moresby authorities, who are
now completely in charge of those matters. A Constitution was adopted on 15 August 1975. Thus, even
before the official proclamation
of its independence,
Papua .New Guinea already enjoyed most of the
attributes of international
sovereignty. Moreover, in
submitting
the application
for the country’s admission to the United Nations, the Port Moresby authorities stated that they accepted the obligations of the
Charter and solemnly undertook to discharge them.
Hence, &he French delegation obviously had no difficulty‘ in recommending
to the Assembly-as
it has
just done by its vote here-the
admission of this new
State to the Organization.

111. ‘. In conclusion,
our delegation would like to
take this opportunity to convey its cordial congratulations and express its good wishes to the Government
and people of Papua New Guinea in their course of
development
and comprehensive
progress as an
independent State.
z
112.

Mr. ‘LECOMPT
(France) (interprelution
from
The representative of France cannot fail to
be extremely happy to see the presidency of the
Security Council entrusted to the representative
of
Mauritania.
Mauritania
and France have enjoyed
long and friendly relations based on many historical
ties. The relations between our delegations are a
reflection of the cordial and friendly relations between
our Governments.
It is from the bottom of my heart
and with complete confidence that I express my
best wishes for the success of your presidency, Sir.

French):

119. Geography has placed France very far from
Papua New Guinea, and glthough several regions of
the new State are named after brave French navigators
who contributed to the discovery of our world, the
history of the past centuries has really not facilitated
contact between our two peoples. Nevertheless, the
French delegation wishes Mr. Somare’s Government

11.3. ,I wish also to express our appreciation
to
Ambassador Saito of Japan, who presided over our
work with competence and distinction at a time when
the ‘Council had to deal with difficult and complex
matters.
10

gratulations to that country and best wishes for their
further work of building up their economy and strengthening their nationhood and their independence. From
what we have heard from our colleagues who have
had the great opportunity
of visiting Papua New
Guinea, we understand that the pCople of that country
has been most successful in building its nationhood
and achieving full independence and in. creating a
very democratic society. That is most encouraging,
and we take great satisfaction in what we have heard.

to know that it has our best wishes for success in
the task-the
noble but often difficult task-facing
many young States. We shall follow its efforts with
understanding,
and we hope to establish as soon as
possible diplomatic relations with the country headed
by Mr. Somare.
120. Mr. VINCI (Italy): First, I should like to thank
you sincerely, Mr. President, for the warm welcome
that you extended to me at the 1839th meeting on
your own behalf and on behalf of the representatives
sitting round this table. I take the generous words
you used to be an acknowledgement
of the contribution made by the Italian delegation to the work of the
Security Council.

126. For our part, we regard the admission of another
State to our world family as a further step towards
that objective of universality
which Italy has unceasingly supported.

121. I am equally grateful to my colleagues here
-Ambassadors
Salim of the United Republic
of
Tanzania, Ovinnikov of the Soviet Union, Rydbeck
of Sweden, Jackson of Guyana, Bennett of the United
States, Zahhwie of Iraq, Oyono of the Uuited Re-.
public of Cameroon,
Tchernouchtchenko
of the
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic and Lecompt
of France-for
the very kind and generous words
they used in reference to my return to this body.

127. At the same time, we w‘elcome a State which
can somehdw be regarded as .a proud, son of this
Organization.
In that connexion I extend our very
sincere congratulations
to Australia, as the. trustee,
on the way in which it carrime out-its very important
commitments
and responstbdities
in administering
the country,

122. It is indeed a great honour and a privilege to
serve my country again in the Security Council.
indeed, it is a moving experience to be back and to
find such good old friends as you, Mr. President, and
other colleagues here who have been kind enough to
extend a welcome to me personally.
I can assure
the members of the’Counci1 that I shall do my best
to be worthy of the confidence placed in me and to
live up to the flattering expectations that have been
expressed here about my future activities in the
Council. In doing so, I shall keep particularly in mind
the sterling example that has been set for me and my
delegation by my predecessor, Ambassador Eugenio
Plaja .

129. The PRESIbENT
(interpretcrtion
from French):
1 thanks the representative
of Italy and with the
Council’s permission,
I should like to make a brief
statement on behalf of MAURITANIA.

128.

Again, our best wishes go to Papua New Guinea.

130. In recommending
unanimotisly
to the General
Assembly that it admit ,Papua New Guinea to membership in the United Nations, the Security Council
has just takeh a decision which does honour to -the
new State and its representatives.
131. The attitude of the leaders of Papua New
Guinea, their farsightedness and clear thinking have
won them the sympathy and admiration
of all. The
decision taken just a few moments ago by the Security
Council is striking evidence of this. The process .of
decolonization
begun in that country in 1972 is exemplary in every respect. After a century as a colony
and then as a trust territory of Australia under the
United Nations Papua New Guinea has achieved
its independence and national sovereignty in friendship with the former trusteeship Power. This is an
example which does honour to Australia too, a country
to which I should like to pay .a warm tribute here.
Australia’s
exaniple should insp.ire other countries
which persist in transforming
the trusteeship given
to them by the United Nations, into ,direct and irreversible colonization.

123. May I in turn, Mr. President, extend my congratulations to you and my deep appreciation for the
expeditious and efficient way you have guided the
Security Council’s
work since your assumed the
presidency. I am sure that in the coming days during
which you will have this hi$h responsibility -you will
continue to guide us in the same effective way.
124. I would also join previous speakers in expressing
appreciation to Ambassador Saito for the brilliant way
he presided over the work of the Security Council
last month, in less easy times-as
I understand; I
myself was not here, of course.

132. It is thus with pride and legitimate. satisfaction
that I b;d.welcome to Papua New Guinea. I am convinced now that the admission of Papua New Guinea
to membership of the United Nations, while bringing
the Organization closer to its objective of universality.
will enable this new State ‘to make its contribution.
which 1 am sure will be a positive one, to the wc:rk
of the United Nations.

125. Nothing could be more gratifying to someone
like me, who is again sitting in the Security Council,
than to know that my first appearance here this time
coincides wiht this happy occasion when the Council
is recommending
the admission to the United Nations
of the new State of Papua New Guinea. Of course, I
join all previous speakers in extending warm con11

133. I should like to assure the representative
of
Papua New Guinea and the Government
of that
country that my country is ready to establish with his
the most friendly and co-operative relations.
134. In my capacity as President, I now call on
Mr. Willesee, the Foreign Minister of Australia.
135. Mr. WILLESEE
(Australia):
Mr. President,
first of all, I should like to thank you and all the other
members of the Council for allowing me to participate
in this Council’s consideration
of the application of
Papua New Guinea for admission to membership in
the United Nations.
136. I should like to add how pleased my delegation
is to see this meeting presided over by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Mauritania, a country
which because of its own colonial history can well
understand the full significance of this application
for membership by a newly independent country. I
should also like to express my deepest appreciation,
on behalf of the Government
and people of Australia, for the kind words which members of the
Council have today said about my country.

140. Finally, this year is significant in that we have
already seen the admission to membership last week
of the three former .Portuguese African Territories.
My Government
would like to pay a tribute to the
Government of Portugal for the progress it has made
up until now with its programme of decolonization.
141. The progress of Papua New Guinea to complete independence last ‘Tuesday does not represent
a dramatic shift in the quality of the relationship
between Australia and Papua New Guinea, since
for the last two years Papua New Guinea has, with
our encouragement,
been acting as a fully independent nation in its own right. The date of Papua New
Guinea’s independence was chosen by Papua New
Guinea itself in its own House of Assembly, and the
Papua New Guinea Constitution
has emerged by
democratic processes, from its own people through
a Constituent Assembly.
142. Australia now looks forward to maintaining
a
close and cordial relationship with the new nation, as
our nearest neighbour. It is a relationship of equals,
based on mutual respect, understanding and trust. It
will also-be a.relationship
of mutual aid. I should like
to reaffirm what has been mentioned here today, and
that is the Australian Government’s
commitment
to a
united and independent
Papua New Guinea’s continuing to have first call on Australia’s expanding aid
programme.

137. Finally, I should like to ask you, Mr. President,
to convey to the Secretary-General our sincere thanks
for the message which he sent to the Prime Minister
of Papua New Guinea and the Governor-General
of
Papua New Guinea on the occasion of that country’s
independence on 16 September.
_

143. The linal act of independence for Papua New
Guinea on 16 September 1975 symbolizes the end of
Australia’s formal role towards Papua New Guinea,
and with your permission,
Mr. President, I should
like in conclusion, to quote an extract from the Australian Prime Minister’s
speech in Port Moresby on
the occasion of Papua New Guinea’s independence
last Tuesday. On that occasion my Prime Minister
said:

138. Mr. President, I am sure that you and the other
members of the Security Council are aware that
Papua New Guinea is in the fortunate position of
being able to apply for membership
in the United
Nations with direct, first-hand experience of your
proceedings. You will recall that as a Trust Territory
up until the date of its independence last Tuesday,
the case of Papua New Guinea has been considered
in detail by the United Nations Trusteeship Council
since 1946. For many years Australia has had special
representatives from Papua New Guinea as members
of its delegations to the Trusteeship .Council and in
the Fourth Committee of the General Assembly and
they have taken an active part in these proceedings.

“Today Australia, herself once a group of colonies, has ended the role as a colonial Power imposed
upon her by an irony of history. Australia could
never be truly free until Papua New Guinea was
truly free. In a very real sense, this is a day of liberation for Australia as much as for Papua New Guinea.

139. The admission of Papua New Guinea will occur
at a significant time in the history of the United Nations.,
this year being the thirtieth annniversary of the Organization. The year 1975 is also the fifteenth anniversary
of the Declaration on. the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples contained in resolution 1514 (XV), which has provided the blueprint
for the accession to independence of so many other
former colonies, with a consequent increase of the
membership of the United Nations.

“Further, Australia has today finally discharged
her mandate from the old League of Nations and
her trusteeship to the United Nations.”
The meeting

’ See

resolution

375

rose nt 6.15 p.m.

(1975).

12
1.”

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMEM

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

publications
may be obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous
auprb de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Gentve.
K.4K

COMO

IIOJIB’lIITh

CONSEGUIR

HSAAHMH

OPI-AHH3Al~kiki

PUBLICACIONES

Oli’hEA1IHEHHlrIX

HAIWEI

DE LAS NACIONES,UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas estan en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes del mundo. Cons&e
a su librero o dirljase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccibn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations.

New York

00300

82-61202-November

1983-2,200
