United Nations

S/PV.6371

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6371st meeting
Tuesday, 10 August 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Ebner
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Dunlop
Mr. Yang Tao
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Sumi
Mr. Khachab
Mr. Heller
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Mugoya
Mr. Quarrey
Ms. Anderson

Agenda
The situation in Chad, the Central African Republic and the subregion
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic and Chad (S/2010/409)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-48016 (E)

*1048016*

S/PV.6371

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

rules of procedure to Mr. Youssef Mahmoud, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad.
It is so decided.

The situation in Chad, the Central African Republic
and the subregion

I invite Mr. Mahmoud to take a seat at the
Council table.

Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad (S/2010/409)

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of the Central African Republic, in
which he requests that the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Regional Integration and Francophone World of the
Central African Republic be invited to participate in
the consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite the Minister to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I have also received a letter from the
representative of Chad, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
On behalf of the Council, I wish to extend a warn
welcome to His Excellency General Antoine Gambi,
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and
Francophone World of the Central African Republic.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gambi
(Central African Republic) and Mr. Allam-mi
(Chad) took seats at the Council table.
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Council agrees to
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional

2

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2010/409, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in
the Central African Republic and Chad.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Youssef Mahmoud. I now give the floor
to Mr. Mahmoud.
Mr. Mahmoud: I thank you, Sir, for the
opportunity to present to the Security Council the latest
report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/409) on the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad (MINURCAT). This is the first
report since the Council adopted resolution 1923
(2010) on 25 May, authorizing a revised mandate for
MINURCAT. The report before the Council contains an
assessment of the security and humanitarian situations,
of the progress made towards the fulfilment by the
Government of Chad of the tasks and benchmarks set
out in paragraphs 2 and 3 of resolution 1923 (2010),
and of the implementation of the mandate of
MINURCAT. The report also contains an assessment of
international and regional options for the Central
African Republic based on the Secretary-General’s
evaluation of the consequences of MINURCAT’s
departure from the north-eastern part of that country.
Following the adoption of resolution 1923
(2010), MINURCAT has worked to adjust its tasks and
posture in eastern Chad to the new mandate.
Accordingly, on 27 May its military component ceased
all area security patrols and escorts, and confined its
activities to those outlined in paragraphs 10 and 11 of
the resolution. By 15 July, MINURCAT’s military
component had been reduced to 2,174, with 1,878 in
Chad and 296 in north-eastern Central African
Republic, and is now based in four main locations —

10-48016

S/PV.6371

three in eastern Chad and one in north-eastern Central
African Republic.

eastern Chad. An estimated 150,000 members of the
host population also received humanitarian assistance.

As far as the security situation is concerned, I
should like to summarize it as follows. Some criminal
activities and banditry remained the main threat to
security in eastern Chad during the one and a half
months covered by the report. As in earlier periods,
there have been no reports of deliberate targeting of
civilians or of fresh significant internal displacements.

Since April 2010, humanitarian actors have
reported a steady stream of returns in the Dar Sila and
Ouaddai regions, estimated at 20,000 people. Time will
be required, however, to determine how many of these
returns represent permanent or seasonal movements.

As of 27 May, when MINURCAT’s military
suspended area patrolling and escorts, the Government
took over full responsibility for the security and
protection of civilians and humanitarian workers in
eastern Chad. Despite the complexities of the security
situation and logistical and other limitations, the
Government has spared no effort to rise to the
challenge.
The Détachement intégré de sécurité (DIS) has
increased its escorts of humanitarian workers and
patrols in and around refugee camps and key cities by
21 to 25 per cent compared to earlier periods. On 1 July,
the Government also launched a new system for the
coordination of security patrols and escorts for
humanitarian workers. This system, which is being
established in 13 key locations in eastern Chad, will
supersede the earlier coordination mechanism run by
MINURCAT. The joint Chad-Sudan border force —
whose headquarters are scheduled to move this month
from El Geneina to Abéché — also continued to patrol
along the border with a view to interdicting cross-border
arms movement and banditry. This has resulted in an
increase of cross-border trade and civilian population
movement.
Following the spate of security incidents against
humanitarians in June, President Déby replaced the
Government of the Ouaddai region in Abéché. In July,
the number of incidents decreased, also thanks to the
start of the rainy season.
As far as the humanitarian situation is concerned,
there have been encouraging reports of some returns of
internally displaced persons (IDPs). The recent
deterioration of the security situation in Darfur,
however, has prompted new, albeit so far limited,
arrivals of Sudanese refugees. Some 70 international
humanitarian organizations continue to provide aid to
the 255,000 Sudanese refugees and 168,000 internally
displaced persons in eastern Chad, and to 64,000
refugees from the Central African Republic in south-

10-48016

Pursuant to resolution 1923 (2010), on 1 June the
Government of Chad and the United Nations launched
the Joint High-Level Working Group, chaired by the
head of the Coordination nationale d’appui au
déploiement de la force internationale à l’est du Tchad
and composed of representatives of MINURCAT, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and the Chadian security forces. The Joint
High-Level Working Group has been meeting monthly
to assess the situation on the ground with respect to the
protection of civilians and the implementation of
measures adopted by the Government towards
implementing the tasks set out in paragraph 4 of
resolution 1923 (2010).
In the meantime, MINURCAT continued to
implement its mandate in the areas of the rule of law,
including the provision of assistance and advice to the
DIS and the justice and prison sectors in eastern Chad;
human rights monitoring; and promotion and
protection, with particular attention to sexual and
gender-based violence. At the same time, it has
produced plans to consolidate the gains achieved in
these areas and to lay the foundation for their
sustainability by the Government of Chad and its
partners. In this regard, MINURCAT is discussing with
the United Nations country team ways to help absorb
some of the Mission’s activities in the current planning
processes, and particularly the early recovery plan for
eastern Chad, on which the United Nations
Development Programme is in the lead.
The sustainability of the DIS is an issue that will
require sustained attention by the Government of Chad,
especially given the short time remaining before
MINURCAT’s withdrawal. The Government and the
United Nations have established a joint technical
working group that has been working since June on a
plan for the sustainability of the DIS.
MINURCAT, for its part, has already started
activities towards the consolidation and sustainability of
the DIS. Most of the construction projects in support of
the DIS are expected to be completed by 31 December,

3

S/PV.6371

except the drilling of wells in the police stations, which
can start only following the end of the rainy season in
October.
As far as the Central African Republic is
concerned, the Secretary-General has outlined in the
report before the Council two options on how best to
mitigate the impact of MINURCAT’s departure from
the north-eastern part of that country. The threat to
civilians, IDPs, refugees and humanitarian workers in
the north-eastern area remains real. The lack of
sustained progress in combating security threats in
north-eastern Central African Republic is mainly the
result of the weak presence of its armed forces and the
lack of logistical and other means from which it
suffers.
In this context, the Secretary-General has
presented two options to the Security Council. The
first, as members may recall, provides for a United
Nations peacekeeping force in north-eastern Central
African Republic that would deter insecurity in the
area and provide in extremis security and extraction for
humanitarian actors until the Government has
developed adequate capacity to assume this deterrent
role. The Secretariat estimates that the deployment of
approximately 1,000 personnel, military and civilian,
would be needed. Preliminary estimates of the cost of
the operation range anywhere between $98 and $122
million per year.
The second option would focus on strengthening
long- to medium-term efforts in building the Central
African Republic State capacities for security and the
rule of law, coupled with immediate measures to
strengthen the capability of the armed forces of the
Central African Republic in the north-east. This option
could be complemented by the deployment of joint
border patrol forces between the Government of the
Central African Republic on the one hand and those of
Chad and the Sudan on the other, pursuant to
agreements the Central African Republic signed with
its neighbours some time ago.
Assistance for the strengthening of the Central
African Republic’s State and security capacity could be
provided on a bilateral or multilateral basis, including
through the Economic Community of Central African
States (ECCAS), with the support of the African Union
(AU) and other regional implementing partners whose
presence through the Mission for the Consolidation of
Peace in the Central African Republic (MICOPAX) is,

4

in reality, in the Central African Republic. In
preliminary contacts with ECCAS and MICOPAX
officials, as well as the AU, most of these interlocutors
have expressed readiness to examine this option.
Yesterday, Mr. President, you had a chance to
meet with Foreign Minister Antoine Gambi, who
conveyed to you the position of the Government of the
Central African Republic. This position was expressed
to me in June by Prime Minister Touadera and, in July,
confirmed to me by President François Bozizé, who
reiterated that the preferred option for the north-eastern
Central African Republic would be the one that builds
the capacity of the Central African Republic security
forces.
As noted in the Secretary-General’s report, and
based on his assessment of the situation and the
position of the Government of the Central African
Republic as stated above, the Secretary-General is of
the view that the second option is the more appropriate
course of action. He stands ready, of course, to lend his
support. In this regard, allow me to add that the
Peacebuilding Commission configuration on the
Central African Republic could play a catalytic role.
Further to resolution 1923 (2010), MINURCAT
has undertaken the planning necessary for the full
withdrawal of its civilian and military components by
31 December 2010, and for the Mission’s liquidation
starting on 1 January 2011, unless the Council decides
otherwise. In this connection, I wish to state that the
initial drawdown of the military component was
carried out in an orderly and secure manner. In that
regard, I wish to express my appreciation for the
cooperation MINURCAT has received from the
Government of Chad. I would also like to express my
appreciation to all troop- and police-contributing
countries for their unfailing support to MINURCAT
during this last phase of its mandate.
(spoke in French)
To conclude, I would like to underscore the three
following points.
During the six weeks following the adoption of
resolution 1923 (2010), the Government of Chad has
spared no effort to gradually assume its responsibility
for the protection of civilians. When necessary,
vigorous action has been taken.
Secondly, the Détachement intégré de sécurité
(DIS) has made considerable progress alongside the

10-48016

S/PV.6371

other security forces in providing protection for the
humanitarian space. However, a great deal remains to
be done by the Government and MINURCAT during
the Mission’s final few months. Many challenges
remain to be overcome. Ensuring the sustainability of
the DIS will be a long and painstaking process that will
require the full attention of the Government and its
partners.
Thirdly and finally, an urgent solution will have
to be found over the coming two months to fill the
security vacuum following the departure of
MINURCAT from the north-eastern Central African
Republic.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Mahmoud for his briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency General
Antoine Gambi, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional
Integration and Francophone World of the Central
African Republic.
Mr. Gambi (Central African Republic) (spoke in
French): Allow me to express my great appreciation for
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/409) on the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad (MINURCAT), which was just
introduced by his Special Representative for Chad and
the Central African Republic. In follow-up to that
report, I should like to underscore a few points that I
consider worthy of clarification in order to reach a
better understanding of the situation in the Central
African Republic and of the legitimate expectations of
the people and the Government of the Central African
Republic regarding this peacekeeping force.
The current political situation in the Central
African Republic is marked by preparations for the
legislative and presidential elections that have recently
been scheduled for 23 January 2011. As the Council is
aware, these elections had initially been scheduled for
the end of the first half of 2010. However, despite the
firm commitment of the President of the Republic, His
Excellency General François Bozizé, to organize the
polling within the time frame set by the Constitution, it
had to be postponed twice because of the scheduling of
pre-election operations. These were disrupted by the
delays in the drawing up of voters lists and in the
implementation of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programme, by the continuing
climate of insecurity and, especially, by financial
constraints.

10-48016

Following the postponement, which was
requested by our partners, by the political party of the
democratic opposition and by civil society and armed
groups, the National Assembly adopted constitutional
legislation that extended the mandates of the President
of the Republic and of Deputies until the next
elections. This brought stability to the Central African
Republic’s institutions in the light of our country’s
recent history, the general environment and the
geostrategic stakes of the conflict, including its wellknown regional effects, in particular the crisis in
Darfur and its impact on the Central African Republic.
All of this has been compounded for over a year now
by the presence in the Central African Republic of the
Lord’s Resistance Army rebellion, which kills, maims
and rapes in the eastern part of our country along the
border with the Sudan and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
I would recall here that the Central African
Republic shares no border with Uganda. However, a
Ugandan rebellion is currently taking place within the
Central African Republic’s territory, dealing the worst
possible blow to our people and to the economy of our
country.
The insecurity and instability in the north-east of
the country led the Security Council to decide, through
resolution 1861 (2009), to deploy the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad, in
order to stabilize the region resulting from the longterm consequences of the political and military
upheavals of the 1990s.
Now that the mandate of MINURCAT is coming
to an end, there is a need to protect the future of this
still precarious part of the Central African Republic,
which could relapse into violence because of many
destabilizing factors such as transborder insecurity,
banditry, pockets of rebellion, interethnic conflict, the
limited presence of defence and security forces and
other emerging challenges.
MINURCAT’s mandate was to secure the Birao
area, bring limited patrols into that vicinity and protect
humanitarian workers and evacuate them if necessary.
There was honest cooperation between the Mission and
the Central African authorities in discharging this
mandate. My Government takes this opportunity to
convey its heartfelt gratitude to all the countries that
voluntarily and sincerely contributed to this
peacekeeping force which truly eased the situation in

5

S/PV.6371

Birao and its surrounding areas, as well as in Sam
Ouandja in northern Haute-Kotto.
The Mission has also been conducted in a
transparent manner, thanks to the vigilance of the
Secretary-General, who spared no effort to ensure
implementation of the provisions of the contract.
However, the announcement of the withdrawal of the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic, which will have dangerous consequences if
we are not careful, has led to a strong response by the
Government of the Central African Republic, whose
entrenchment in that part of our country is not
guaranteed due to the fragility and limited capacity of
the security and defence forces.
Hence, a letter dated 15 February 2010 was
addressed to the Secretary-General by the President of
the Republic and head of State, His Excellency General
François Bozizé, requesting advisers, trainers and
observers from MINURCAT to assist the Central
African Republic armed forces. We welcome with
satisfaction paragraph 82 of the report of the SecretaryGeneral, which takes account of the wish of the Central
African Republic Government’s wish to strengthen its
security and defence forces in the north-east of the
country — which is the soft underbelly of its territory,
marked by permanent insecurity, given its geostrategic
position — through the recommendation submitted for
the consideration of the members of the Security
Council, which my Government hopes to see adopted.
What we wish is to have a strong, toughened,
sustainable army of the Republic, capable of facing any
possible situation.
For that reason, we seek supervisory assistance
for the Armed Forces of the Central African Republic,
training for the police and the gendarmerie, and followup on our equipment needs, including uniforms,
clothing, bulletproof vests, vehicles, communication
and transmission equipment, observation equipment
and barracks.
The current period, which will extend through the
end of 2010 and into the beginning of 2011, is
especially vital for the Central African Republic. The
withdrawal of MINURCAT, the transitional phase, the
electoral
deadlines,
the
post-election
period,
compounded by the referendum in Southern Sudan and
by the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA), are factors which
should draw the international community’s attention to
the problems of the Central African Republic.

6

The primary responsibility for international peace
and security lies with the Security Council. The Central
African Republic cannot and does not want to fail, and
it therefore counts on the proven support of the Council
to meet the aforementioned challenges — and new
ones as well.
A wise decision from the Council would be a
great relief for us. For its part, the Government of the
Central African Republic is already striving, through
bilateral consultations, to reactivate agreements related
to the joint transborder patrols. It intends to increase
the number of the armed forces of the Central African
Republic in the north-east to more than the strength of
a battalion. For we face huge challenges if we are to
protect Birao and its surrounding area, control the
gangs of transborder bandits and poachers, ensure the
security of refugee camps and control internally
displaced persons, and especially combat the LRA
rebel groups which have already reached the doorstep
of the Vakaga region, to the north of Haute-Kotto.
In the coming weeks, members of the Economic
Community of Central African States will engage in
dialogue to gauge the possibility of making a
contribution to the recommendation of the SecretaryGeneral contained in his report. This recommendation
is timely because it falls perfectly within the
framework of the security sector reform that the
Government of the Central African Republic has had
some difficulty in launching owing to a lack of
resources. It is also propitious in other ways, as the
disarmament and demobilization programme has
already started in the north-western region — which
should also be the case in the eastern region, where it
is proving very difficult to put an end to insecurity.
With a view to ensuring stability throughout our
territory in order to enable the people of the Central
African Republic to shoulder its civic responsibility, let
me stress that the second option proposed by the
Secretary-General should be urgently implemented in
the coming days. This is urgent because we are
approaching the 15 October 2010 date for the end of
MINURCAT operations in the north-eastern Central
African Republic.
If the principle of accepting paragraph 82 is
established, it should be followed with immediate
effects. For that reason, the Government is relying on
the goodwill of the States participating in MINURCAT
to provide it with instructors, appropriate supervisory

10-48016

S/PV.6371

assistance and basic equipment for its security and
defence forces. A price cannot be put on peace in an
operation such as this, where the lives of thousands of
people are in danger.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Chad.
Mr. Allam-mi (Chad) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of August. I should also like to welcome the
presence among us of the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Central African Republic and to reaffirm that my
country fully shares his heartfelt concerns, stands
steadfastly at his side and joins its voice to his in
calling for the support of the international community.
With regard to the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/409) introduced by his Special Representative
Mr. Mahmoud, whose presence I welcome here today, I
should like to say that it accurately reflects the reality
on the ground and the concerns of various parties,
including us and our humanitarian partners. We
therefore welcome the high quality of the report.
We take this opportunity to stress that we have
spared no effort to respect the implementation of the
road map set out in resolution 1923 (2010) of 25 May.
Above all, we wish to reiterate our commitment to
protecting civilians, especially refugees and internally
displaced persons, until their voluntary return to their
places of origin. That will involve, without the shadow
of a doubt, the Détachement intégré de sécurité (DIS) —
an institution that, it should be recalled, was originally
created by Chad, with the support of the Office of the
High Commissioner for Refugees, then strengthened by
the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad (MINURCAT). DIS will need to be
maintained and strengthened in terms of personnel,
resources, and support for the Chadian security and
defence forces. That is currently taking place and will
continue after the full withdrawal of MINURCAT.

To give the Council an idea of the efforts we are
making to ensure security in the eastern part of the
country, I wish to underscore that approximately we
are devoting $12 million of our own resources to that
purpose each month. Furthermore, it is our hope that
the international community will pursue its efforts to
help ease our burden. Specifically, this will require the
promised infrastructure to be provided to the benefit,
of course, of DIS and our judicial and penal
institutions. The trust fund must be maintained after
MINURCAT’s drawdown in order to meet the needs of
DIS, which is a unique pilot force of which the United
Nations and Chad should be proud. We have always
said that it is a rather unique community police unit
whose role on the ground is of major importance. It is
only right to reaffirm our recognition of and gratitude
to the generous contributors to the fund, and to call for
these efforts to be kept up, with the encouragement of
the Security Council.
In this regard, I cannot conclude my statement
without informing the Council that the plan for the
Chadian takeover of DIS, which was expected by the
Security Council on 31 July, will be transmitted to the
Council as soon as possible. We encountered a delay in
awaiting some information from MINURCAT on its
takeover of DIS to include in our report.
We have also taken due note of the concerns
expressed and comments made by members of the
Security Council in various settings, including informal
meetings, and we will do our utmost to follow up on
them accordingly.
Finally, we reiterate our full cooperation with the
United Nations in the accomplishment of its noble
peace mission in our country and the subregion.
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.50 a.m.

10-48016

7
