United Nations

S/PV.5331

Security Council

Provisional

Sixtieth year

5331

st meeting
Monday, 19 December 2005, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Sir Emyr Jones Parry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Romania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Katti
Mr. Mayoral
Mr. Idohou
Mr. Sardenberg
Mr. Zhang Yishan
Ms. Løj
Mr. De La Sablière
Mr. Vassilakis
Mr. Oshima
Mr. Chuasoto
Mr. Dumitru
Mr. Denisov
Mr. Manongi
Mr. Wolf

Agenda
The situation in Africa
Briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

05-65034 (E)

*0565034*

S/PV.5331

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Africa
Briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Jan Egeland, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator.
I invite Mr. Egeland to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
At this meeting the Security Council will hear a
briefing my Mr. Jan Egeland, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator.
There have not yet been any requests from
representatives of interested countries to be invited to
take part in this discussion. Moreover, as there is no
list of speakers for this meeting, I would invite Council
members who wish to take the floor to so indicate to
the Secretariat as from now.
I now give the floor to Mr. Egeland.
Mr. Egeland: This is a very important
opportunity for us to brief the Council on several major
challenges that the humanitarian community faces in
Africa at the moment, all of which have regional
implications. I will start with what continues to be the
largest humanitarian operation in the world — the
crisis in Darfur — as well as with its impact on
neighbouring Chad.
The humanitarian operation launched in late 2003
has been remarkably effective this year, against
overwhelming odds. Some 13,000 international and

2

national relief workers have been providing relief to
more than 3 million people in Darfur and Chad. The
success of their work can be measured in the thousands
of lives saved, as mortality rates among displaced
persons have dropped by two thirds over the past year.
I want to pay tribute to the heroic work of those
men and women. But we must realize that their work
and their lives are under increasing threat and that our
operations can now be disrupted completely by
renewed conflict any day, and anywhere, in Darfur. We
must be acutely aware that all that has been built up by
the thousands of relief workers and by hundreds of
millions of dollars in donor contributions could be
destroyed. We could be on the brink of losing this huge
humanitarian operation. In addition, no amount of
humanitarian relief can provide what those threatened
by the conflict have wanted most from day one:
effective protection against violence of the most
vicious kind, and the ability to return to their homes.
Only an effective ceasefire, a political solution and a
strong international security presence can accomplish
those objectives.
We have to face up to the terrible reality that our
colleagues on the ground are witnessing and reporting
every day. The killings have not stopped. The rapes are
continuing, as are the burning, looting and forced
displacement that I first reported to the Council more
than 20 months ago. For three consecutive months
now, the situation has been deteriorating. We have had
less humanitarian access during this period than at any
other time since that first briefing, in early April 2004.
More than 20,000 more people were displaced in the
last few weeks alone. In a deeply worrying new
development, camps for internally displaced persons
(IDP) are themselves increasingly being attacked by
militias.
The regional spillover effects of this crisis on
Chad and the impact of Chadian groups crossing into
west Darfur are also cause for great concern. Tensions
between the 200,000 Sudanese refugees and Chadian
host communities remain high. Attacks on innocent
civilians by armed groups crossing from the Sudan
continue to be reported, including the massacre in
Modaina on 25 September, which the Council
condemned. Only yesterday, it was reported that 100
people were killed in an attack on the town of Adré, in
eastern Chad. Equally worrying are the recent political
and military developments in Chad, including the
mounting tension with the Sudan over Darfur. A further

S/PV.5331

deterioration of the situation would pose a threat to
ongoing relief operations to Sudanese refugees and
could trigger a serious humanitarian crisis.
The Council has taken many important steps to
address the crisis in Darfur. But unless those measures
have a real impact on the ground, the wound will
continue to bleed. Our massive humanitarian operation
will not be sustainable unless we finally see
commensurate efforts in the political and security
areas. The next few weeks will be critical, both for the
talks in Abuja and as the Security Council and the
African Union deliberate on the next steps. We need an
expanded and more effective security presence on the
ground as soon as possible: a presence that can provide
more effective protection and, ultimately, allow people
to return to their homes. That expanded presence is
needed whether or not the Abuja talks succeed. It
cannot be right that we have twice as many
humanitarian workers in Darfur as international
security personnel. I therefore appeal very strongly to
the Council to show the sense of urgency and
determination needed to achieve the objectives
identified in its resolutions and to help bring this crisis
to an end.
The second issue I want to address is the regional
crisis caused by the activities of the Lord’s Resistance
Army (LRA) in Uganda, the Sudan and, most recently,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In midSeptember, a group of LRA fighters crossed from the
Sudan into the north-eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. They remain in that border
region, from where they threaten much of the Western
Equatoria area of southern Sudan. LRA attacks on
civilians and humanitarian workers have escalated,
severely undermining our ability to provide relief to
millions of people and disrupting the long-awaited
return of refugees to southern Sudan. While the overall
number of LRA combatants may not have increased,
they have spread out over a larger area and now
constitute a significant threat to regional security, with
appalling consequences for several million people.
The specific impact of LRA activities on
humanitarian operations has been as follows.
In northern Uganda, gains are being lost as
security erodes. Access to the nearly 1.7 million IDPs
encamped in the northern districts has decreased in the
past three months. Recent violence has hampered
assistance efforts, and we have seen a shocking new

tactic: the deliberate targeting of humanitarian
personnel. In October and November alone, five
humanitarian workers were killed by LRA ambushes in
the Sudan and Uganda.
The United Nations can access only 18 of the 200
camps for internally displaced persons in northern
Uganda without military escorts. Although the World
Food Programme (WFP) is able to distribute food
under heavily armed military escorts, many other
organizations find fees for escorts prohibitively
expensive or do not use them on principle. The nongovernmental organization Action Against Hunger has
reported that 57 per cent of internally displaced
persons in one area — 480,000 people — were not
accessible in November. Without access, the effects are
predictable: increased mortality, rising exposure to
human rights violations, and deepening vulnerability.
Life in the camps continues to be unacceptable. A
recent joint study conducted by the Ministry of Health,
the World Health Organization and non-governmental
organizations indicated that crude and under-five
mortality rates were more than double the emergency
thresholds. Access by internally displaced persons to
farming areas outside camps is extremely limited due
to movement restrictions imposed by the Uganda
People’s Defence Forces. Less than half the internally
displaced persons in Acholi districts can access land
that is more than two kilometres outside of their
camps, severely hampering their ability to produce
their own food. At present, there is no prospect of a
large scale return before the critical March planting
season. Therefore, WFP will have to provide food aid
to 1.5 million internally displaced persons through
2006.
Given the conditions in the camps, it is not
surprising that many LRA combatants remain in the
bush. We have not done enough to create the “pull
factor” that could draw more of the LRA to
disarmament and reintegration programmes. Those
who have come in have found few chances to live a
safe and productive life. We must dramatically expand
our programmes for reintegration in order to give hope
to those who still see fighting as a better option.
The LRA is also wreaking havoc in the
Equatorias in the southern Sudan. Dozens of civilians
have been killed since the LRA crossed the Nile in
mid-September and over 100 people, including

3

S/PV.5331

children, have been abducted, many of whom have not
returned.
The impact on our humanitarian operations has
been dramatic. After three staff members of nongovernmental organizations were killed, large parts of
the Equatorias became inaccessible. In Central
Equatoria, international non-governmental organization
staff withdrew and critical health programmes in rural
areas have been curtailed. In Western Equatoria, a
UNICEF-led measles campaign has been disrupted and
only covered 10 per cent of the targeted population.
Some 180 primary health care facilities in Central and
Eastern Equatoria are currently inaccessible to
UNICEF and non-governmental organization partners.
The LRA attacks have also severely hampered the
preparation for the return of refugees from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central African
Republic and Uganda. Many recovery projects to
support the returnees have had to be suspended for
now, including hospitals and water points. As long as
there is a significant LRA presence in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo/Sudan border area, it is difficult
to imagine when refugees will be able to start returning
to Central or Western Equatoria, areas that previously
were among the safest in the southern Sudan. That has
clear consequences for efforts to rebuild and stabilize
that important region.
Much more needs to be done to address the
threats and conditions I have just described. The
Governments of Uganda, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Sudan bear the primary
responsibility to protect and assist their populations, as
well as to pursue the LRA. Unfortunately, their actions
so far have not prevented the LRA from causing the
devastation I have just described. The LRA continues
to maintain bases and moves relatively freely
throughout the region. A relatively small number of
fighters is threatening a huge area and millions of
people.
I would like to suggest a number of steps the
Governments in the region and this Council could take.
It is of the utmost importance that the three
Governments concerned fully acknowledge how
dangerous the situation has become for civilians and
humanitarian workers and that they do whatever they
can to protect their citizens, secure access for relief
workers and promote regional solutions.

4

As I noted in my recent briefing to the Council on
the protection of civilians, efforts to find a peaceful
solution to the conflict in northern Uganda must be
strengthened through an internationally supported
process. The United Nations must actively contribute
to that effort.
While I welcome steps taken by the Government
of Uganda to operationalize the national policy on
internally displaced persons, more should be done by
the Government and its army and police to assume
responsibility for the protection of the civilian
population. More must also be invested in the
provision of basic services in the affected areas.
The Security Council should pay close attention
to the regional dimension of the crisis and the threats
to humanitarian work, and could consider several
potential steps. The Council should strongly condemn
the LRA’s attacks against civilians and humanitarian
workers. The Council should insist on an immediate
cessation of violence and of all support to the LRA
from all sources. To help the Council consider further
steps and improve its understanding of the LRA, it
could consider appointing a panel of experts. Such a
panel could explore the sources of funding and support
for the LRA and work with the three affected
Governments and other parties to determine how the
Council could most effectively contribute to reducing
the threat emanating from the LRA. The Council could
request regular updates on the effects of the LRA’s
activities on the region.
I also hope that, in their reports to the Council,
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan and the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo can indicate what
else they can do, within their mandates, to provide
security to relief workers and help create the necessary
conditions for the return of refugees and IDPs.
Finally, I have just returned from Zimbabwe and
South Africa. As I reported to the Council in April, the
humanitarian situation in the subregion is already very
serious due to severe food insecurity, widespread
HIV/AIDS and inadequate basic services. More than 10
million people in the region are in need of food
assistance. The situation could deteriorate in 2006,
particularly in Zimbabwe and Malawi, unless actions
are taken to meet immediate needs and to reverse the
decline in key sectors.

S/PV.5331

In Zimbabwe, the humanitarian situation has
worsened significantly in 2005. More than 3 million
people — almost one third of the population — will
receive food through WFP in January and even more
will receive assistance come April. Annual maize
production, the basic staple, is one third of what it was
several years ago. Basic services continue to
deteriorate, particularly in the health, water and
sanitation sectors. Inflation currently stands at over
500 per cent. In that context, and as I told the
Government in my meetings in Harare, the massive
urban eviction campaign of hundreds of thousands of
people was the worst possible action at the worst
possible time.
We are now entering the peak of the “lean
season”. Food prices are rising fast, placing some basic
commodities out of reach for a growing portion of the
population. I welcome the memorandum of
understanding finalized by the Government and the
World Food Programme, which will ensure that these
emergency needs are met. I also hope it will lead to
better collaboration between the Government and the
humanitarian agencies in other sectors.
Yet we much recognize that this huge need for
food assistance is symbolic of the vicious cycle that we
are caught in. It was raining when I left Zimbabwe, but
all expected that next year’s harvest would be poor
because of the lack of a skilled agricultural labour
force, in part caused by the devastating toll of the
HIV/AIDS pandemic; counterproductive agricultural
policies and practices; and a lack of inputs such as
fertilizer, seeds and tools. It is not sustainable to
provide food assistance for millions of people year
after year without making the necessary investment to
get out of the situation. We can have a new approach
that again will provide food security for all
Zimbabweans. That will require major efforts from all,
nationally as well as internationally. There is no
substitute for engagement and dialogue at all levels in
order to address the humanitarian crisis in Zimbabwe.
From my discussions with the Government of
Zimbabwe, I am convinced that the United Nations and
the humanitarian community at large must try to
engage more actively with the Government to address
the enormous humanitarian crisis. We reached
agreement on some issues during my mission: a more
active and systematic dialogue on food security; a
more hands-on approach to resolving bureaucratic
problems for humanitarian organizations through one-

stop shops at both the Government and the United
Nations; and the initiation of a shelter programme for
households affected by the eviction campaign.
However, sustained progress will require the
following. The Government must stop further evictions
and be more flexible in allowing shelter and other
programmes for those affected. It must ensure that
beneficiaries are assisted solely on the basis of need.
The United Nations and our humanitarian partners, as
well as the donors, should be guided in their own
response by the needs of the population. We should
provide the appropriate level of assistance where and
when we identify the needs. Beyond food aid, we need
to invest in food security, livelihoods and basic
services. The Governments in the region and in Africa
at large should engage more proactively with
Zimbabwe to find constructive solutions, also given
their interdependence and the risk of increased
migratory movements. All parties must understand the
importance of neutral and impartial humanitarian
assistance.
More is currently at stake in terms of lives saved
or lives lost in Africa than on any other continent. At
the same time, there is great hope and opportunity,
given the forward-looking initiatives of the African
Union and the subregional organizations. Also, the
Group of Eight countries and other donors have
pledged more resources for Africa than at any other
time. In this coming year, we must and can see change.
As humanitarian workers, we cannot accept that
so many lives are lost every year on this continent to
preventable diseases, neglect and senseless brutality.
We cannot accept that low levels of funding impede
our operations in so many places. We must demonstrate
our humanity by responding equally to the needs of
those affected, whether they are families returning
home to the southern Sudan, young men and women
looking for a future beyond the IDP camps of northern
Uganda, or AIDS patients trying to sustain their
families through a drought in Zimbabwe. I call upon all
Member States to live up to their commitments to fund,
support and facilitate a much more ambitious
development and humanitarian agenda.
And finally, we must recognize that too many of
these humanitarian crises result from a total absence of
peace and security. Humanitarian aid cannot be an alibi
for an unwillingness to address the root causes of
conflict. The greatest contribution we can make to

5

S/PV.5331

addressing humanitarian crises in Africa is determined,
energetic and sustained efforts to bring an end to the
conflict and injustice that cause so much suffering in
Africa.
The President: I thank Mr. Egeland for his
briefing.
Mr. Idohou (Benin) (spoke in French): I would
like at the outset to pay tribute to the humanitarian aid
workers for their inestimable efforts to halt the
humanitarian crisis in Darfur and elsewhere in Africa.
In Darfur we must ensure the success of the Abuja
negotiations. We must also find ways to stabilize the
situation. The Security Council should re-evaluate the
situation and, in close cooperation with the African
Union, find ways to increase security and to ensure
effective protection for civilian populations.
The situation in the Great Lakes region is a silent
catastrophe that is taking place outside the view of the
world. Very often, our gaze is clouded by the military
and political aspects of the conflicts in the region.
Perhaps the world has even become accustomed to
reports of losses of human life and the unimaginable
scale of the disasters that have been afflicting our
planet since December 2004.
As astronomic as those figures are, they seem no
longer to move us. Otherwise, how can we understand
the passivity of the international community when
faced with such a critical situation as that in northern
Uganda, where about 2 million people are internally
displaced and where more than 1,000 people die each
week — a total far beyond the emergency threshold. It
is said those figures are twice the mortality rate in
Darfur.
The organizational policies of the camps, where
freedom of movement has been curbed, thus promoting
overcrowding, have lead to the spread of diseases such
as malaria and HIV/AIDS, not to mention the
enormous stress that has also resulted. If the
emergency level has been passed, we must immediately
sound the alarm to mobilize the international
community to save human lives.
We would like to thank the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Jan Egeland, for
his efforts to draw the attention of the international
community to the everyday or forgotten hardships,
which constitute violations of human dignity. We must
deplore the fact that in a number of countries of the

6

Great Lakes region, returning refugees are becoming
displaced persons in their countries of origin, due to
the lack of adequate reintegration policies and, above
all, because there is no possibility for those people to
recover their property in order to rebuild their lives.
Those are all issues that deserve the active
commitment of the international community.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
internal displacement of populations continues,
especially in Katanga, where an offensive attack by the
Government army is under way to dislodge the MaiMai from certain areas. That is taking place in a
country where the United Nations is present and is
maintaining one of the largest missions ever deployed.
That presence should guarantee respect for
international humanitarian law and for the effective
protection of humanitarian workers and of population
affected by the military operations.
The critical situation of refugees and internally
displaced persons requires that we develop a
comprehensive approach to their problems and that
humanitarian assistance encompass not only the
provision of survival resources but also the restoration
of basic social services. For that reason, we welcome
the new approach adopted in preparing for the
consolidated humanitarian appeal that has just been
launched for Burundi, which envisions involving
humanitarian assistance in conjunction with longerterm goals.
In addition, we should give special attention to
the increased risks for humanitarian workers in the
region, who are more and more often mistaken, at
worst, for combatants or, in the best of cases, for Blue
Helmets. We must find ways to ensure more effective
protection for humanitarian aid workers.
Furthermore, the negative impact of the crossborder flow of displaced persons and refugees on the
social situation in the countries receiving them
constitutes a very harmful factor for destabilization,
which can lead to insecurity and the proliferation of
armed bands, because mass cross-border movements
are difficult to control and foment the circulation of
arms and cross-border crime. We need a coordinated,
consistent response to those concerns.
Special attention should be given to the problem
of the reintegration of child soldiers. We should
increase resources for the social reintegration of child
soldiers, because, as is the case in numerous countries

S/PV.5331

of the Great Lakes region, the lack of assistance
programmes results in child soldiers becoming
involved in organized crime. We must break that
vicious circle and establish a virtuous circle that
ensures a more promising future for the affected
countries.
Finally, we welcome the General Assembly’s
establishment of the Central Emergency Response
Fund to respond to disasters and humanitarian
emergencies.
Ms. Løj (Denmark): I would like to begin by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Jan Egeland for his
comprehensive briefing. I commend the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and Mr. Egeland
for the active role that they have played.
Given their gravity and magnitude, the
humanitarian crises of Africa merit more of our
attention and our political and financial resources.
Some of the humanitarian crises highlighted by Mr.
Egeland have been with us for much too long, while
others have only recently become a major concern.
Violent conflicts, food shortages and governance crises
are among the most widespread causes. If we have the
collective will, all those causes can be influenced and
corrected through concerted action by all parties
involved.
Let me take this opportunity to comment on the
situations of Zimbabwe and northern Uganda. But let
me underline that the humanitarian situation in Darfur
also requires the close attention of the international
community, and I thank Mr. Egeland for his update on
the situation in Darfur.
With respect to Zimbabwe, I am afraid that
President Mugabe’s statements concerning Mr.
Egeland’s person and the United Nations family in
general speak their own tragic language. We once again
urge the Government of Zimbabwe to allow the
international community to alleviate the suffering of
the Zimbabwean people. We request a minimum of
respect for Mr. Egeland’s commendable efforts to assist
the people of Zimbabwe.
The situation in Zimbabwe is getting worse every
day. There is a real risk that, unless the international
community
starts
making
operational
plans
immediately, thousands of people in Zimbabwe will die
of hunger within the next couple of months. Zimbabwe
is not the only country facing that dire prospect. The

food situation is indeed precarious in neighbouring
countries as well. But the food shortage in Zimbabwe,
which is amplified by ill-conceived economic policies,
could have disastrous consequences if nothing is done.
The food shortage is particularly disturbing since only
a few years ago Zimbabwe was a net exporter of food
supplies. The disastrous situation will only intensify
the current stream of people fleeing from Zimbabwe,
adding new burdens to the neighbouring countries.
In that regard, we urge the Governments and the
international institutions of the region to address this
issue urgently and to make an extra effort to develop a
common approach to Zimbabwe. Such an approach
should be guided by the overarching goal of alleviating
the plight of the people of Zimbabwe and restoring the
rule of law.
Similarly, the United Nations should play a key
role in trying to re-establish a mutually respectful
dialogue with the Government of Zimbabwe. To the
extent that the present climate of mistrust spurred by
the outrageous recriminations of the Government of
Zimbabwe can be replaced by a respectful dialogue, we
would like to suggest the consideration of a visit to
Zimbabwe by the Secretary-General as soon as
possible. I would appreciate it if Mr. Egeland could
comment on that, including his views on how a
possible visit by the Secretary-General could help
lubricate relations with the Government of Zimbabwe.
Let me now turn briefly to the situation in
northern Uganda. As the Council has just heard from
Mr. Egeland, this is one of the most tragic conflicts in
Africa. Approximately 1.5 million people are suffering,
and there is an urgent need to strengthen our efforts to
identify ways and means to end the conflict.
It seems to be an annual pattern on the part of the
Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) to express willingness
to negotiate for peace as the festive season approaches
and as the rainy season complicates operations on the
ground. This time, the LRA must combine its
expressed wish for peace with concrete proof by
declaring a ceasefire and by putting a definite end to
the despicable, cruel acts continually being carried out
in northern Uganda and southern Sudan. There is no
reason for the LRA fighters not to disarm. A welldesigned
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration programme is in place and provides an
important incentive, at least for lower- and middleranked LRA members.

7

S/PV.5331

The Government of Uganda, for its part, is
encouraged to vigorously pursue a peaceful approach
to the conclusion of the conflict. We would welcome
any attempt on the part of the Ugandan Government to
enter into dialogue with the LRA, while taking the
necessary steps to ensure the protection of the
vulnerable civilians living in northern Uganda. People
are killed not only by bullets. The majority of deaths
occur in the camps of the internally displaced persons
as a result of the extremely poor living conditions. That
is intolerable and simply has to stop.
Finally, let me take this opportunity also to assure
the Council of the Danish Government’s continued
willingness to provide funds in response to the
numerous humanitarian crises in Africa. With respect
to northern Uganda, the Danish humanitarian
contribution amounted to $2.6 million in 2005. And
with respect to Southern Africa, our humanitarian
assistance is expected to exceed $12 million before the
end of the year.
Mr. Oshima (Japan): I wish to express my
gratitude for the convening of this timely meeting on
the humanitarian situation in Africa. I also thank
Under-Secretary-General Jan Egeland for his
comprehensive briefing, which follows his briefing to
the Council two weeks ago on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict (see S/PV.5319). My
delegation welcomes the practice of regular briefings
by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs on behalf of the United Nations humanitarian
community in order to bring the Security Council up to
date on those issues of grave concern to the
international community.
With respect to the situation in Zimbabwe, we
appreciate the sustained efforts of the SecretaryGeneral to engage with the Government in order to
improve the overall situation in that country. The justconcluded visit by the Emergency Relief Coordinator,
focused on the humanitarian situation, was also
welcome.
As was made clear by Mr. Egeland, dialogue
efforts with the Government to develop a sound
cooperative relationship between the authorities and
the United Nations and other humanitarian actors have
been difficult, and that is to be regretted. However, we
encourage those efforts to continue, despite the
apparent lack of progress at the present time.

8

We are concerned at the deepening humanitarian
crisis in Zimbabwe. The crisis is not limited to the
problem of housing those affected by the Government’s
Operation Restore Order but includes the everworsening situation in food and non-food areas, where
privations and shortages are reaching critical
proportions. The reported fact that the average life
expectancy of the people has been reduced by almost
half, from 60 to 36 years, is a clear indication of how
bad the situation in the country has become.
We expect the Government in Harare to pay
serious heed to the voice of the international
community and to cooperate effectively and in a spirit
of sincerity with the United Nations and other
humanitarian actors to help those affected by the
eviction campaign and those in need of life-saving
assistance. The international community, for its part,
should respond to that dire humanitarian situation by
stepping up its assistance and engaging with the
Government with a view to promoting dialogue.
For our part, Japan has provided humanitarian
assistance in the form of blankets and food aid. We
strongly hope that the Government of Zimbabwe will
demonstrate a greater willingness to work with the
international community in a joint effort to provide
protection and assistance to its own men, women and
children in need. We would like also to see a more
active engagement on the part of African Governments
in the region with the Zimbabwean Government to
improve the situation.
We remain seriously concerned at the situation in
Darfur, where humanitarian conditions appear to be
worsening, not improving. The only way to alleviate
that situation is to ensure tangible progress in the
ongoing negotiations in Abuja among the parties, and
we hope to see those negotiations lead to concrete
results without delay.
In the meantime, we deeply appreciate the
activities undertaken by the African Union to maintain
security in the region, which is a prerequisite for
humanitarian assistance. We are also concerned at the
fact that Sudanese refugees have fled to neighbouring
Chad, causing many problems there.
The humanitarian situation in northern Uganda
and in southern Sudan, involving close to 2 million
internally displaced persons and where the Lord’s
Resistance Army is wreaking havoc on populations, is
equally worrying. We commend the humanitarian

S/PV.5331

personnel who are engaged in humanitarian aid work
and protection activities there in spite of the adverse
security conditions. We are concerned at the present
stalemate in the dialogue between the Government of
Uganda and the Lord’s Resistance Army, and we call
on both parties to work to bring about positive results
urgently.
Here again, neighbouring countries also have
important responsibilities and critical roles to play in
improving the situation. We expect them to exercise as
much influence as possible to that end.
In that regard, Mr. Egeland suggested several
potential practical steps that the Council could take to
help address the regional dimension of the crisis,
including the idea of appointing a panel of experts. I
believe that those suggestions deserve our support and
careful consideration.
Lastly, there is a clear need to do as much as
possible to bring lifesaving humanitarian relief to
people in dire need of assistance — internally
displaced persons, refugees and others who are
affected. The Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and humanitarian
agencies therefore deserve our fullest support — moral,
political and financial — and should be provided with
what they need.
At the same time, it is clear that the root causes
and compounding factors of these more serious
humanitarian crises, whether they occur in Africa or
elsewhere, do not lend themselves to an easy solution.
Conflict, underdevelopment and poverty, the scourge
of HIV/AIDS, poor governance and neglect, policy
failures, criminality and natural disasters are some of
the causes and complicating factors which are routinely
observed. Humanitarian aid agencies and aid workers
are doing excellent work in many areas, but these
problems are beyond the power of humanitarians to
resolve. As Mr. Egeland said, humanitarian aid cannot
be an alibi for unwillingness to address the root causes
of conflict.
Only through the concerted efforts of the entire
international community can the root causes of these
problems be addressed, and the Security Council has
an obvious and critical role to play in that effort. At the
same time, the international donor community — both
traditional and emerging donors — have a shared
responsibility to assist and scale up their contributions
as much as possible.

For its part, Japan will continue to work
bilaterally
with
the
countries
affected
and
multilaterally, through the United Nations and other
avenues, to play its role in the context of this shared
responsibility. In Africa, our efforts will consist mainly
of promoting good governance and economic
development on the basis of the twin notions of
encouraging Africa’s ownership and of promoting its
partnership with the international community,
consistent with the spirit of the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development (NEPAD).
The
now-established
Tokyo
International
Conference on African Development (TICAD)
continues to be an important avenue for our
cooperation with Africa. Yet another potential vehicle
for effective cooperation in that regard is the
promotion of the idea of human security, the key
concept of which was endorsed in the September
summit outcome document. Our support for Africa and
our cooperation with African States will be
strengthened, and this includes working through the
United Nations whenever possible and necessary.
Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): Mr. President, allow
me at the outset to thank you for having convened this
meeting. I wish also to thank Under-Secretary-General
Jan Egeland for his comprehensive briefing today,
which is indeed the third one this year on the
humanitarian situation in Africa.
As observed during earlier meetings, millions of
people in Africa continue to bear the brunt of famine,
extreme poverty and pandemics, and they survive each
day in squalor. Children are hungry and suffer from
illnesses that often would cost very little to treat.
Millions living with HIV/AIDS do not have access to
lifesaving medicines.
I should like to touch on a few issues relating to
the humanitarian crisis in Africa. In some situations,
people in Africa also suffer from all kinds of violence
during insurgencies and armed conflicts. It is troubling
that conflict kills more people in Africa than anywhere
else and that the African continent hosts the largest
displaced population in the world. We should not
overlook the devastating costs for countries in conflict
or the impact on their neighbours.
Much remains to be done by the States affected
and by the international community as a whole. The
United Nations, including the Security Council, has
rightly given priority to Africa, which is underscored

9

S/PV.5331

by the fact that African issues now constitute more
than 60 per cent of the Council’s agenda. However,
most of the humanitarian crises in Africa result, to a
large extent, from a combination of interrelated factors.
We must continue to devise true multidimensional
approaches to address such crises.
It is necessary to recognize that decisive
questions in the humanitarian and development
assistance sphere, such as financing, do not fall under
the purview of the Council. In that respect, it is
encouraging that the General Assembly decided last
week to upgrade the current Central Emergency
Revolving Fund to the Central Emergency Response
Fund, so as to ensure swifter and more predictable
responses to humanitarian emergencies. Let us not
forget, for instance, that, after access restrictions were
lifted in Darfur, it took four months for funds to be
committed to the relief appeal.
It is also encouraging that the Fund will continue
to operate in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 46/182. We hope that this new mechanism
will help ensure that humanitarian assistance is
provided on the basis of existing need and allocated in
a non-discriminatory, balanced and proportionate
manner.
We must continue to work with the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council, since
those bodies address humanitarian issues in a
comprehensive manner. At the same time, we hope that
the establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission
will provide for better coordination among United
Nations bodies and other actors, so that deep-rooted
social and economic causes of conflict can be tackled
in order to prevent the emergence, spread or recurrence
of conflict. We need to continue to focus on effective
approaches to break the destructive and vicious circles
in which conflict, banditism, lack of development and
dire social conditions perpetuate one another.
We thank Mr. Egeland for his detailed account of
the humanitarian situation in the region, which
deserves our careful examination.
Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): Like others, we wish to
thank the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Jan
Egeland, for today’s enlightening and detailed briefing.
We welcome this discussion and we thank you, Mr.
President, for convening this meeting on the
humanitarian situation in Africa.

10

Humanitarian crises in Africa, as elsewhere, are
multifaceted. They are often the result of different but
mutually reinforcing factors, such as conflicts, natural
disasters, pandemics, poverty and bad governance.
Like many processes that lead to death and destruction
on a large scale, humanitarian disasters often
undermine States as the basic unit of the international
system and have a wide range of regional
repercussions.
Until recently, conflict and, usually, civil strife
were the most important factors causing humanitarian
disasters in Africa. Fortunately, however, remarkable
progress has been made in this domain in the past
decade. Conflicts have ended in Angola, Liberia, Sierra
Leone and Burundi, to name a few. In addition, in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, after decades of
war the country is now in a transitional phase and is
rigorously preparing for national elections, while in
Sudan the 20-year civil war ended this year with the
signing of the comprehensive peace agreement.
Nevertheless, our efforts are not as successful as
we would have liked them to be, and there are still a
number of ongoing conflicts that have created
protracted humanitarian crises.
The situation in Darfur continues to be a source
of great concern and presents additional challenges on
the humanitarian level. According to the SecretaryGeneral’s November report on Darfur, 3.4 million
people are affected by the crisis, while the number of
internally displaced persons is 1.75 million. In this
respect, we welcome the recent launching of the 2006
work plan for Sudan, which has called for $1.7 billion
in resources to face the enormous humanitarian
recovery challenges in the country.
In northern Uganda, the horrific war waged for
the last 18 years by the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA)
has targeted civilians, especially children. During the
course of the conflict, over 25,000 children have been
abducted, while 1.7 million people have been
displaced.
The examples of both Sudan and northern
Uganda highlight the regional implications of conflicts
and the humanitarian spillover that they often create.
For example, since the conflict in Darfur began in early
2003, more than 200,000 Sudanese have fled over the
border to Chad, while the LRA has been operating in
three countries — Uganda, Sudan and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. These examples underscore the

S/PV.5331

need for regional cooperation in order to target
humanitarian crises and address the root causes of the
conflicts. They also demonstrate that individual States
cannot be indifferent to the problems facing their
neighbours. Regional partners have come to understand
the importance of regional and transborder
cooperation, as the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region clearly demonstrates. The growing
importance of the regional dimension of humanitarian
crises has also affected the Security Council in its
conduct of work. The promotion of inter-mission
cooperation is a clear example.
According to many Africa analysts, crises of
governance, often coupled with natural disasters or
pandemics, are the main root of humanitarian disasters
on the continent. Counterproductive economic policies
and a lack of political will to address the problems
created by these policies are common phenomena.
Zimbabwe, for example, is facing a critical
economic situation involving food shortages and a
ballooning budget deficit, together with inflation,
unemployment and the HIV/AIDS pandemic.
Approximately 20 per cent of the population is infected
with AIDS, while there are 1.5 million AIDS orphans.
It is obvious that Zimbabwe is in urgent need of
international humanitarian assistance in order to face a
real emergency affecting a large section of the
population.
We welcome the fact that the United Nations is
making significant efforts to address the situation. We
welcome Mr. Egeland’s recent visit to Zimbabwe, as
well as the agreement signed by United Nations
agencies and the Government of Zimbabwe for food
assistance and HIV/AIDS programmes. We also note
the exchange between the Government of Zimbabwe
and the United Nations over the need for assistance
with shelter.
Today’s discussion once again demonstrates the
need for the United Nations to have a comprehensive
approach towards resolving humanitarian crises.
Greece will contribute its share, commensurate with its
possibilities, and we will consider positively the steps
proposed by Mr. Egeland. The three pillars of
development, security and human rights are especially
relevant in addressing humanitarian problems. In this
approach, the role of the Security Council as guarantor
of international peace and security is of vital
importance.

Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania): We
too join in thanking Mr. Egeland for his insightful
briefing this morning. We also wish to commend the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for
the great work it is doing in Africa.
Millions of Africans live in countries where there
is ongoing armed conflict or the imminent risk of such
a conflict breaking out. This is a legitimate concern for
all of us. On the other hand, many encouraging peace
processes are currently in progress with respect to all
major conflicts in Africa, despite continued instability.
Increased commitment to peace and security on the
part of African organizations is an example of this, as
is the cooperation between the United Nations and our
organizations in Africa.
Mr. Egeland has just informed us that no amount
of humanitarian relief can provide what those who are
threatened by conflict have wanted most from Day
One, namely, effective protection against violence of
the most vicious kind, and the ability to return to their
homes. We agree. Indeed, strengthening Africans’
capacity in conflict prevention in crisis situations and
in crisis management must remain our main objective.
Reactive military interventions and humanitarian
measures are necessary to prevent further loss of life in
emergencies, but even at their best, such efforts can
only control a situation, not resolve it. Investment in
tools that focus on development, capacity-building for
mediation and peacebuilding is needed to ensure that
existing conflicts are resolved, as well as future ones
prevented. Without such investment, the demand for
reactive measures can only increase.
Mr. Egeland illustrated how expensive such
investment can be. It is noteworthy that Africa received
around $7 billion in humanitarian aid between 1995
and 2001. The cost of United Nations peacekeeping is
estimated at $2.8 billion for the period from July 2004
to June 2005.
Africa has demonstrated its willingness to deal
with conflicts in the region. The Under-SecretaryGeneral has also observed that we have not done
enough in relation to Uganda. We have not done
enough to create the “pull factor” that could draw the
Lord’s Resistance Army to disarmament and
reintegration programmes.
Among the African Union’s principles is respect
for the sanctity of human life. It is in this regard that
we reiterate the New Partnership for Africa’s

11

S/PV.5331

Development view on how best to assist Africa to build
its capacity to manage conflicts. This focuses on four
key areas: the prevention and resolution of conflicts;
peacekeeping and peace enforcement; post-conflict
reconciliation; and combating the illicit proliferation of
small arms, light weapons and landmines.

atrocities, as well as being a lead donor on
humanitarian assistance, with more than $506 million
in food aid to Darfur and eastern Chad since the Darfur
crisis began. We appreciate Under-Secretary-General
Egeland’s reminder of what remains to be done by us
all.

There are many complex and interconnected
causes of humanitarian crisis in Africa. While we
accept that policy choices can play a role, natural
phenomena such as drought and the HIV/AIDS
pandemic are factors as well. All these factors
compound one another. It is on this totality of factors
that we must focus.

Economic collapse and food insecurity are now
chronic conditions in Zimbabwe, as we heard. Millions
of Zimbabweans have fled to South Africa and
elsewhere. Given the shortage of fertilizer and inputs
during the current planting season, next year’s harvest
will be worse than this year’s, with grave implications
for food security. Food insecurity and economic
meltdown are the result of bad policies, nontransparency and the breakdown of the rule of law.

Mr. Wolf (United States of America): First, I
want to thank Under-Secretary-General Egeland for his
thorough and troubling report, and in particular for his
helpful suggestions for action.
We are pleased that the United Nations has
remained engaged on the grave humanitarian problems
facing Africa in general, and Zimbabwe, Uganda and
Darfur in particular. The United States believes that a
food crisis is a threat not only to the welfare of the
peoples of Africa but also to regional stability and
security, which is one reason we have tripled our
commitment of aid to Africa in the past year.
The misery and terror sown by the actions of the
Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) in northern Uganda are
perhaps not as well known to the world as the
situations in Darfur and Zimbabwe, but its murderous
assaults, kidnappings, burnings of villages and fields
and, especially, its kidnapping of children for use as
soldiers or sexual and economic slaves marks the LRA
as one of the most detestable groups of its kind, one
that we should all be looking for ways to counter in
order to bring its atrocities and interference to an end.
The Sudan remains a top priority for the United
States. Among our international partners, the United
States plays a lead role in supporting the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement and the Abuja talks,
providing life-saving humanitarian assistance in Darfur
and southern Sudan, and spearheading efforts to end
the violence in Darfur and to hold accountable those
responsible for atrocities. President Bush was the first
head of State to speak out publicly on the humanitarian
crisis in Darfur. We were the first to highlight Darfur at
the Security Council, the first to state that genocide
had occurred in Darfur and the first to call for
accountability for perpetrators of violence and

12

The United Nations should remain engaged with
the Government of Zimbabwe on fundamental
economic and policy reform. The United Nations
should continue to press the Government of Zimbabwe
on the urgent need for dialogue with donors and
international financial institutions. United Nations
engagement can influence the behaviour of that
Government, as we saw when the Government of
Zimbabwe signed a memorandum of understanding
with the World Food Programme on the eve of UnderSecretary-General Egeland’s visit, and when Special
Envoy Tibaijuka’s intervention helped to end
Operation Restore Order.
The United Nations should also urge the
Government of Zimbabwe to reach out to all
Zimbabweans, political parties and civil society groups
to engage in a dialogue aimed at reaching a sustainable
political settlement. Repressive legislation should be
repealed.
Zimbabwe
needs
a
broad-based
representative Government to face the country’s huge
economic and humanitarian challenges.
We believe that a visit by Under-SecretaryGeneral Gambari to Zimbabwe early in 2006 would
keep up the momentum of Under-Secretary-General
Egeland’s visit and should include the Sudan, Uganda
and other countries in the region. Under-SecretaryGeneral Gambari should encourage African nations to
step up their engagement with all Zimbabwean parties
to promote timely solutions to Zimbabwe’s economic
crisis. For example, South Africa’s $470 million loan,
if conditioned on political and economic reforms in
Zimbabwe, could be an element of a possible African
solution.

S/PV.5331

The important thing is to restore democracy,
economic growth and food security in Zimbabwe. If
the conditions are right for genuine progress,
Secretary-General Annan should visit Zimbabwe
himself following Under-Secretary-General Gambari’s
visit.
We also believe there is an important — indeed,
leading — role for African countries to play in
resolving the crisis in Zimbabwe, and we encourage
them to work with the United Nations and the
international community to engage the Government of
Zimbabwe in a constructive dialogue.
Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like once again to thank the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Mr. Jan Egeland, for the complete
briefing, his third, on the humanitarian situation in
Africa, which clearly shows the critical situation facing
many populations in that continent.
Given the seriousness of the situation, we need to
ask ourselves the source of this recurring humanitarian
crisis and why it takes place repeatedly. While it is true
the reasons are deeply rooted in history relating to the
continent as a whole, today they are also related to
political elements that have been made worse by
climatic disasters, famine, long-standing diseases such
as malaria and cholera and newer pandemics such as
HIV/AIDS that still have no immediate solution.
Unfortunately, Mr. Egeland’s report reaffirmed
the existence of continuing humanitarian crises in,
among other areas, the Great Lakes region, Zimbabwe,
Malawi, Niger and, as we have heard on a number of
occasions, Darfur.
In this regard, we wish once again to stress the
need for the Council to bear particularly in mind the
human dimension of conflict. We cannot remain
indifferent to the suffering of innocent civilians or to
violations of human rights or international
humanitarian law. We, therefore, affirm that no security
consideration can override the obligation of all States
to comply with those norms.
Similarly, we believe it vital to emphasize that
parties to a conflict also have a direct responsibility to
ensure respect for international humanitarian law,
whatever the circumstances may be.
In the light of Mr. Egeland’s comments, we
would like to raise the following points. First of all, we

are particularly concerned about the relationship
between recent incidents affecting the safety of
humanitarian staff and the difficulties encountered by
those humanitarian workers in gaining access to needy
populations.
In that context, we should not underestimate the
seriousness of the attacks against humanitarian workers
in recent months in northern Uganda and Darfur, as
well as their practical impact on access to affected
peoples. In addition to the criminality of those
attacks — which fall under the purview of the
International Criminal Court — we should recall that
Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, the Court’s Prosecutor, referred
to the issue last Monday during his briefing to the
Council. We must underscore the fact that, in
resolution 1296 (2000), the Council expressed its
readiness to adopt appropriate measures in cases where
assistance to civilians is obstructed, including
evaluating situations in which impeding free access
may constitute a threat to international peace and
security.
Secondly, we are closely following with great
attention and concern the situation of various groups of
refugees and internally displaced persons. We realize
the sensibilities that raising the issue of displaced
persons may arouse, but we cannot forget that
populations of displaced civilians are among the most
vulnerable groups in conflict situations. It should be
recalled that the Council has a subsidiary role to
protect those people.
With regard to the specific situations mentioned
by Mr. Egeland, we would also like to know his views
regarding a possible agreement in the context of the
Abuja process, including how he believes that could
affect the critical humanitarian situation in Darfur and
its possible impact on northern Africa.
In conclusion, we would like to say that
establishing a new body within the United Nations may
help to resolve, or at least alleviate, humanitarian
situations, in particular on the African continent.
We would also like once again to express our
gratitude to Mr. Egeland for his efforts to improve the
situation for civilian populations. We reiterate
Argentina’s support for his ongoing work to provide
protection for civilians in armed conflicts.
Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would first like to thank Under-Secretary-General

13

S/PV.5331

Egeland for his briefing on the humanitarian situation
in several African regions. In listening to his briefings
on many occasions, we have noted a common thread
running through his presentations: his great sympathy
and concern for suffering people and his willingness to
fully carry out the role of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in order to
alleviate that suffering.
As the Under-Secretary-General has told us, the
humanitarian situation in certain parts of Africa is very
serious. People are experiencing great suffering on a
daily basis — including hunger, poverty, death and
pandemics. China is very sympathetic to their plight
and is concerned about the difficulties facing affected
countries and peoples. We call on the international
community to make a common effort to provide
intensified humanitarian assistance to help those
countries through these difficult times.
We should also realize that there are numerous
reasons for humanitarian crises. Armed conflicts,
natural disasters, epidemics and other factors all play a
role. In providing material assistance, the international
community should pay greater attention to the actual
situations in the countries concerned, take the
necessary steps to address the problems and emphasize
the elimination of the root causes of humanitarian
crises.
The alleviation of the humanitarian crises
throughout Africa should rely mainly on the efforts of
the countries concerned, while respecting their
opinions and leadership and allowing their respective
initiatives to be fully carried out. The international
community should support and cooperate with the
efforts of the Governments of the countries concerned.
At the same time, we should also fully involve regional
and subregional organizations, such as the African
Union. We must also avoid politicizing humanitarian
issues. Not only is that not conducive to resolving
problems, it can also further complicate them. It is
therefore not desirable.
Mr. Chuasoto (Philippines): My delegation joins
others in thanking Under-Secretary-General Jan
Egeland for his comprehensive briefing today.
Africa is facing huge political and humanitarian
challenges. Continuing conflict in Africa has caused
immense suffering. Civilians are often the main targets
in conflict situations and have been denied
fundamental peace and security. The outgrowths of

14

humanitarian crises usually have potentially disastrous
consequences for peace and security. However, efforts
to respond to such emergencies have often not been
given proper attention, nor have adequate resources
been provided to aid vulnerable populations in need.
Ensuring peace and security is the primary
responsibility of the Security Council. Although the
Council is the most responsive body of the United
Nations system, addressing humanitarian crises is an
endeavour that is best handled through the coordination
and cooperation of all United Nations bodies and
agencies. However, through the attention given to those
crises, the Council’s leadership can spur action, ensure
sustained engagement and garner the support of
regional actors and donors. In particular, Council
action can provide the onus for achieving effective
protection against violence on the ground and for
addressing the root causes of conflict. In addition, the
Council’s support for initiatives aimed at strengthening
local and national capabilities in humanitarian crises
greatly increases the chance for success.
With the impending establishment of the
Peacebuilding Commission, we believe that the
opportunity has arisen for the Council to find ways to
contribute to strengthening the linkages between
humanitarian action and integration, rehabilitation and
peacebuilding. That will enable the Council to
strengthen its approach to humanitarian crises within
the larger framework of peacebuilding efforts.
The humanitarian crises in Africa are of serious
concern to my delegation, as are the obstacles that arise
in meeting humanitarian needs. It is clear that serious
challenges still lie ahead, especially in securing
predictable funding in order to respond to humanitarian
emergencies in a timely, efficient and effective manner.
International responses to crisis situations in Africa
need to be more forward-looking in their approach and
should be based on coordinated and integrated
partnerships between African Governments, regional
organizations, development partners and local nongovernmental organizations (NGOs).
We would like to take this opportunity to
recognize the untiring efforts of NGOs and the media
in raising the international community’s awareness
about these crises. Their advocacy continues to be an
important contribution to addressing the humanitarian
crises in Africa.

S/PV.5331

Lastly, my delegation reiterates its appreciation to
Mr. Egeland and his team. We assure him of our
continuing support for his humanitarian efforts in
Africa.
Mr. Dumitru (Romania): We are grateful for
your initiative, Mr. President, to convene this timely
briefing. I would like to join other members of the
Council in thanking Under-Secretary-General Jan
Egeland for his comprehensive presentation.
The humanitarian challenges facing the African
continent have once again called for the Council’s
attention and careful consideration. The practice of
providing periodic briefings to the Council on
humanitarian developments in Africa is indeed very
welcome and useful. We commend in particular the
work done by Mr. Egeland. The periodic missions he
has undertaken to Africa are proof of his dedication
and of the special emphasis placed by the United
Nations on the need to address, as effectively and
urgently as possible, the humanitarian needs of that
continent.
Against that backdrop, I should like to focus here
on three issues. First, with regard to the Sudan, we
were particularly anxious to hear the briefing on the
situation in Darfur, as the recent period has been rich in
developments. Among them, the most encouraging is
the seventh round of inter-Sudanese peace talks on the
situation in Darfur that started in Abuja in November
under the proficient mediation of the African Union.
While we seem to have progressed politically, we want
to see that translated on the ground into an improved
humanitarian situation in Darfur. It is unfortunate,
however, that violence and atrocities are daily
occurrences and that they are directed at civilians,
including women and children, humanitarian workers
and international peacekeepers. At the same time,
given the prevailing climate of insecurity in Darfur, it
has become considerably more difficult to provide
assistance to those who need it most.
We commend the crucial role played by the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan and the valiant
efforts of its personnel to provide comfort in that
human tragedy. We also appreciate the constant
presence of the African Union mission in Darfur. It is
encouraging indeed to see regional ownership at work.
Secondly, with regard to northern Uganda, we
agree that the conflict there has important regional
dimensions with the potential to further destabilize the

already fragile security in the region and to disrupt the
ongoing humanitarian efforts. It remains our belief that
the resolution of that conflict is possible only
politically, not militarily. Furthermore, the prospects
for humanitarian improvement depend closely on the
progress made on the political front, with the
Government living up to its responsibilities to protect
the population in the North and the Lord’s Resistance
Army ceasing immediately all acts of violence and
pursuing political talks.
Like others, we share a specific concern for the
situation of the nearly 2 million displaced people in
northern Uganda. In that regard, I would like to ask Mr.
Egeland about United Nations plans to meet the needs
of the internally displaced persons, given that the
majority of them relies extensively on international
assistance to survive.
Thirdly, regarding Zimbabwe, we highly value
the information just provided by Mr. Egeland,
following his timely visit there in December. Romania
shares the deep concern about the situation in
Zimbabwe. The humanitarian response seems critical
to that country, with the situation steadily worsening,
the food shortage becoming chronic and the number of
people in need of assistance increasing. In that regard,
we urge the Government to work with the international
community and the humanitarian agencies to address
the needs of the vulnerable population. We accordingly
welcome the progress reported by Mr. Egeland
concerning the agreements reached with the
Government on many issues, which will facilitate the
United Nations response to the humanitarian crisis in
Zimbabwe.
Finally, given that this is Romania’s last
intervention on this issue as an elected member of the
Security Council, we would like to emphasize that, be
it with respect to Zimbabwe or to northern Uganda,
Romania believes that there is no excuse for the
Security Council and the international community to
simply hide behind the label of so-called forgotten or
silent crises and to do nothing but neglect serious
ongoing developments that, although perhaps silent
and unknown, claim untold numbers of lives and cause
unspeakable levels of human suffering. That is true, of
course, not only for the African continent, but for other
parts of the world, too.
Mr. Smirnov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, I thank Under-Secretary-

15

S/PV.5331

General Egeland for his detailed briefing on the
humanitarian situation in several regions of Africa.

African Union’s intermediary
conflicts on the continent.

The real situation and the depth of crises in
Africa require us to look into the issue of increasing
humanitarian assistance. We pay tribute to the selfless
work of the United Nations humanitarian staff in very
difficult circumstances, in particular in Darfur and
elsewhere. However, of no less strategic importance is
the overall systemic approach that should allow us,
inter alia, to avoid the inequitable distribution of
humanitarian assistance on the continent and to put an
end to the phenomenon of so-called forgotten
emergency situations.

The world community’s attention to African
problems must not abate. In the United Nations and
other international structures, Russia will in future
pursue a policy in keeping with the interests of the
States of the continent and continue to participate in
agreed measures for comprehensive assistance to
Africa, including through the Group of Eight and other
multilateral forums. We will continue to actively
support efforts to settle crises and to enhance Africa’s
peacekeeping potential.

We believe that the situation should change in the
near future with the reorganization of the Central
Emergency Revolving Fund as the Central Emergency
Response Fund. The basic modalities of that
mechanism, as we all know, were established in a
resolution recently adopted by consensus by the
General Assembly. In particular, it provides for the
Fund’s resources to be allocated to natural disaster
warning and to meet the obvious humanitarian needs of
countries in which the necessary time frame is
inadequate to mobilize resources for a consolidated
conventional inter-agency appeal.
The United Nations and the Security Council are
actively involved in Africa’s problems. The
Organization, with its unique experience in settling
conflicts and in post-conflict recovery, can mobilize
the international community and various regional and
subregional machineries to achieve a comprehensive
solution to the problems of African countries. The
positive experience of increasingly fruitful cooperation
among the major United Nations organs, within their
mandates, is an important enhancing factor in that
regard. The forthcoming decision to establish a
peacebuilding commission will assuredly mark yet
another important step in that direction.
Russia welcomes the strengthening of the role of
African States in world policy and their efforts to settle
the remaining regional conflicts on the continent, to
promote economic and social development and to
reaffirm human rights and democracy. We understand
the magnitude of the problems facing Africa, and in
that connection we attach special significance to the
strengthening of the peacekeeping integration activities
of the African Union and African subregional
organizations. We note the fruitful results of the

16

efforts

in

settling

Mr. De La Sablière (France) (spoke in French): I
would like at the outset to thank Mr. Egeland and to
tell him how thankful we are for his commitment to the
humanitarian cause and to the African continent. His
regular reports on the humanitarian situation in Africa
are important. The Security Council correctly devotes
considerable time and effort to considering the
situation in Africa, in order to help African countries,
in coordination with the efforts of the African Union
and subregional organizations.
I believe it is important for us to be thoroughly
familiar with the humanitarian situation in various
regions. We need to know the causes of crises, as well
as their consequences, because often neighbouring
countries and subregional stability are affected. Too
many humanitarian crises are due to non-economic
causes, as Mr. Egeland has noted. Providing food aid
cannot be an alibi for a failure to recognize the causes
of crises in which millions of people suffer so terribly.
I fully support his comments on that point.
I wish to focus briefly on the main situations
referred to by Mr. Egeland in his briefing. First,
concerning Darfur, Mr. Egeland’s description reminds
us how disturbing that matter is. Undoubtedly, in 2006
the international community will need to continue to
provide humanitarian assistance, including to Chad.
The international community must make certain that
access to camps is guaranteed and that no obstacles
hamper the work of non-governmental organizations.
However, improvement in the humanitarian situation,
which is linked to the security situation, depends not
only on bringing the necessary pressure to bear, but,
also on an improved political situation.
Currently, pressure must be maintained on the
parties in Abuja. I believe that the Council should

S/PV.5331

review that issue regularly, and within the framework
of a comprehensive strategy.
One side note here is that I believe we tend too
often, when considering the situation in Darfur and in
the Sudan, to look at those problems separately. In fact,
in his briefing, Mr. Egeland spoke of those two matters
together, because they are related. Certainly those
issues are complex, and for technical reasons the
argument can sometimes be made that we should
consider separately the humanitarian situation, the
security situation, including the question of the United
Nations possibly replacing the remarkable efforts made
by the African Union, the political situation and,
finally, the implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement. However it seems to me that from
time to time we need to consider these matters
together, in order to strengthen our commitment. I
think we need a comprehensive view in order to assist
the Sudan more effectively.
The activities of the Lord’s Resistance Army
(LRA) in northern Uganda and in the region has
created an increasingly intolerable situation. It is clear
that the Council should look into that matter. There are
a number of issues beyond the humanitarian issue,
including access to populations, which is of interest to
the Security Council. There is also a regional
dimension that has gained greater prominence.
In his briefing today, Mr. Egeland offered some
proposals for the Council’s consideration. His
suggestions were interesting, and I assure him that we
will be looking at them closely. It is time for a solution
to the problem to be found. The solution can only be
military, as the Council has often recalled.
I have a question that I often ask and that I now
ask of Mr. Egeland once again. I do not understand
how a limited number of combatants, however
ferocious they may be, could have caused such tragic
consequences: 1.5 million displaced persons and a
contribution
to
regional
destabilization.
Any
information that Mr. Egeland could give us on the
number of these combatants would help us understand
the problem, which I must admit I do not comprehend.
I turn now to Zimbabwe. Following the
inexplicable and unpardonable operation to demolish
shanty towns, which was condemned by the
international community, the Council had to look at the
situation. We take note of signs that the Zimbabwean
authorities appear willing to work with the United

Nations. We believe that following Mr. Egeland’s visit
it would be useful for the Secretary-General to visit
Zimbabwe as well, as I understand has already been
suggested.
Limiting the measures taken by the European
Union in the framework of article 96 of the Cotonou
Agreement depend, we believe, on such dialogue and
on concrete efforts by the Zimbabwean authorities —
within the framework of the dialogue — towards
finding a solution to the problems that they themselves
created.
In conclusion, I echo a comment made by
Mr. Egeland and express our concern at the weak
response to some United Nations emergency appeals
regarding certain situations; here I refer in particular to
the Sahel. We need to find a solution to this problem,
so that aid levels will match the gravity of the
situation, rather than the media attention in donor
countries.
Mr. Katti (Algeria) (spoke in French): I too
would also like to express appreciation to Mr. Egeland
for the detailed briefing he has just given us on some
of the most serious humanitarian crises in Africa. We
agree with him that a regional approach needs to be
adopted in order to deal with the humanitarian crises to
which he has just referred, given their cross-border
implications. The Lord’s Resistance Army and the
refugee situation are examples of this.
I wish to make a few brief comments on
situations to which he referred in his briefing. I will
begin with Southern Africa, by welcoming the dialogue
with the Zimbabwean authorities that began during
Mr. Egeland’s visit to that country and the agreements
arrived at during that visit. But I want to stress one
point to which he referred in his briefing: that
regardless of the circumstances, humanitarian
assistance must remain neutral and impartial and
should not be used as a political tool.
We believe that it is important to take a
coordinated approach towards the Lord’s Resistance
Army. Mr. Egeland has made some suggestions that we
find interesting and which deserve further
consideration by the Security Council, in consultation
with the Governments concerned.
With respect to Darfur, we welcome a certain
stabilization of the situation, including the military
situation. The number of displaced persons has slightly

17

S/PV.5331

decreased. The malnutrition rate and the child
mortality rate have been reduced. That progress was
possible thanks to the mobilization of the international
community. But the situation clearly remains fragile,
because of the highly volatile security situation and the
lack of a political solution to the crisis. Restoring order
and security in Darfur will not be easy. However, it is
clear that the conclusion of a political agreement will
allow for a certain easing of tensions in the situation. It
is important to place pressure on the parties so that the
Abuja talks can lead to a lasting peace settlement.
The President: I shall make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
I join everyone who has thanked, Mr. Egeland for
what I thought was a very powerful briefing and for his
call for action to all of us.
First, with respect to western Sudan, the lack of
progress, the deterioration of the situation and the
problem of humanitarian access all demonstrate how
precarious the situation is. We really need to do more.
The results of the assessment mission of the African
Union Mission in the Sudan — which is, I think, just
now coming back from the region — are quite crucial.
We need for the Council to be in a position to be able
to consider the implications of that mission: what does
it mean for the present African Union Mission, how
does that Mission move forward next year to cover an
even bigger task, and how does that fit in with what the
United Nations is doing in the Sudan? All of those
aspects are crucial. At the same time, it is necessary to
exert maximum pressure on the parties to try to deliver
a peace agreement in Abuja as soon as possible.
Secondly, with respect to the Great Lakes region
and the humanitarian consequences of the activities of
the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, southern Sudan
and northern Uganda, we all share the concern at the
some 2 million displaced persons and at the impact that
the relatively small number of fighters have on
millions of people in those three countries. The LRA
activity is causing an instability that is wider than even
before. So, we must encourage the parties to try to
reach a peaceful solution. We, as the United Nations —
including the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) —
must do whatever we can to help the Governments of
the region actually tackle that problem. I think the

18

Council’s role
Governments.

should

be

supportive

of

the

Thirdly, with respect to Zimbabwe, the United
Kingdom shares the concerns that Mr. Egeland set out.
There is a humanitarian situation which, owing to a
natural disaster and man-made causes, is extremely
serious and getting worse. I do not think that we have
seen the improvements that we had hoped for,
following the July visit of Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General Anna Tibaijuka.
The fact is, the United Nations and its agencies
and non-governmental organizations are doing a very
good job in the most difficult of circumstances.
Mr. Egeland said very clearly that the action taken by
the Government of Zimbabwe in terms of the eviction
programme was the worst possible action at the worst
possible time. We can only welcome the agreements
that he was able to secure with the Government of
Zimbabwe during his visit. What has been done by
Mr. England on food security and what has been done
by the World Food Programme in obtaining better
access for non-governmental organizations are all
essential elements. I think we would all look to see the
Government of Zimbabwe now fulfil its obligations in
terms of the agreements that it has entered into. I think
that means that we should be encouraging an
accountable and democratic Government, the rule of
law and respect for human rights.
For my part, I would welcome greater
involvement by the United Nations in the dialogue on
the political relationship with the Government of
Zimbabwe. But I think we need to see substantial
progress before we could think of the SecretaryGeneral himself getting involved in that issue.
As for the part of the United Kingdom, let me be
clear too, we will provide significant assistance to the
needy Zimbabweans, both bilaterally and through the
European Union.
In conclusion, I would like to make a few
practical suggestions. First, Mr. Egeland’s briefing
demonstrates
how
humanitarian
crises
have
implications for regional stability and security and how
cross-border movements only underline the impact on
further insecurity. So, the Security Council and the
international community have a responsibility to
monitor such situations and to provide better assistance
to countries actually facing such crises. It seems to me
to be quite obvious. The aim, quite clearly, is to try to

S/PV.5331

tackle conflict and potential conflict, provide
protection for civilians and ensure the availability of
humanitarian assistance and the access of that
assistance to those who need it.
I thought Mr. Egeland’s last paragraph really
summed it up: security and stability actually go hand in
hand with humanitarian crises. Where the former do
not exist, crisis is more likely. The United Kingdom
commends UNMIS and MONUC for what they are
already doing to tackle armed groups, including the
LRA. But I think that the lesson is that we need to be
more involved in the efforts that we actually undertake
to tackle those problems, given the graphic map Mr.
Egeland has shown us of the path into the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the path out, and what
might be possible by way of interdiction. It would be
wholly consistent with everything that we have been
saying with reference to the role of the International
Criminal Court to say that the peacekeepers of the
United Nations should be more active in trying to
prevent the scourge of the LRA from contaminating
other countries.
In conclusion, it seems to me that Mr. Egeland
has provided the Council with a lot of material. I think
it is for the Council to decide, perhaps at a slightly
slower pace, how it can react to that. But certainly, it
would be the United Kingdom’s intention to put
forward some suggestions in due course.
I now resume my function as President of the
Council.
As there are no further requests for the floor, I
give the floor to Mr. Egeland to respond to the
comments raised so far.
Mr. Egeland: I thank you very much, Mr.
President, for organizing this meeting, and I give my
heartfelt thanks to the members of the Council for their
support for this type of briefing and for the work that
our colleagues are doing on the ground under very
difficult circumstances, often with their own lives at
stake as they try to prevent further suffering and a
further loss of lives among our beneficiaries.
There is a strong consensus around the Council
table that the situations that I have described must see
positive change in the year ahead. Indeed, as the
representative of China observed, our motive as
humanitarians in bringing this up is that we need to see
change. We want to see change. It is our job to bring to

the Council’s attention situations that are going badly
or which are deteriorating. In each of these three
situations, there is at the moment a crisis that is
deteriorating. What is happening in Darfur, in northern
Uganda and in the region at large, and also in the
southern African region, including Zimbabwe, is
indeed a moral outrage.
First, with respect to Darfur, the reports we are
getting from our colleagues in the field is that it all
could end tomorrow. Together we have built up a
remarkable humanitarian operation. Against all odds,
mortality rates are now one third of what they were in
the beginning of 2004. We have been able to provide
logistical changes — a camp management operation, a
food operation, a water sanitation operation, primary
health care and primary schooling, which is
remarkable. Now it is all in jeopardy. We are once
again down to levels of access that are comparable to
those we started with in 2004.
Our colleagues in the field say, therefore that they
are extremely worried that the major gains we have
made could be lost. Again, it goes back to not having
had political and security progress commensurate to
that made in the humanitarian area.
The parties — the armed groups, the armed
men — are outrageously irresponsible, at all levels, in
their acts against civilians and internally displaced
persons. Some of them are also outrageously
irresponsible in their whole attitude towards reaching a
negotiated settlement. A question was asked as to what
the consequences would be if no deal is reached in
Abuja. Well, I do not dare to even think of the
consequences, because the situation could potentially
totally unravel. We would have 13,000 humanitarian
workers caught in the crossfire and, of course,
operations would be paralysed. Within weeks, millions
would starve and be in the utmost peril.
We should therefore rather focus on how to
achieve success in Abuja, so that our progress can
continue and we can plan for the return of people.
Again, it is the kind of situation that is unsustainable in
the long term. We cannot have many millions of people
on regular food handouts in overcrowded camps. It has
to change for the better.
The same is, of course, true of the Ugandan
situation. Not nearly enough attention has been paid to
the crisis in northern Uganda. I hope that attention is
forthcoming, as the crisis has now become a regional

19

S/PV.5331

one. I have tried to describe the situation: millions of
people are being affected by the actions of as few as
1,000 combatants roaming around those areas. But
when they target humanitarian workers and civilians,
the consequence is immediate paralysis.

mission to engage in dialogue with the Government.
We hope to see progress on many fronts, so that both
Mr. Gambari’s visit and the possible visit by the
Secretary-General can advance our work and our
common agenda.

The representative of France asked how this
could be, how the situation could continue — how such
a small number of fighters could wreak such havoc. I
really do not know. It may be due to neglect and
ineffective action over so many years. The Lord’s
Resistance Army has been active in northern Uganda
for nearly 20 years, and now it is acting regionally.

I should like to make two final and general
points, which also surfaced during our debate. Indeed,
humanitarian work is, overall, making major progress.
We are thankful for the increased attention of Security
Council members and for their increased investment in
us. In 2005 we achieved an unprecedented number of
goals; we reached more people more effectively and
more speedily. With a new emergency Fund, we may
have more predictable funding. With a better
coordination
structure
among
ourselves
as
humanitarian workers, our work will be more effective
and we will have more leadership among humanitarian
coordinators on the ground.

It is really an outrage to see what has been
unfolding over the past 20 years. It must stop. It really
must stop. It is the kind of situation where we have to
say, it cannot continue like this in 2006, with yet
another generation of children being abducted to
become killing machines on behalf of that movement.
The proposed panel of experts would be one way
of finding out why it does not stop, why it continues,
why it is allowed to go on. I really urge the Council to
look at the other proposals as well, regarding both
northern Uganda and the regional dimension of the
crisis. As humanitarians, we have the hope that we can
now say, “Enough is enough. We have to see change.”
Zimbabwe could continue to deteriorate, but it
could also improve in the year ahead. If there is one
country in the world that should be able to feed itself,
it is Zimbabwe. As I tried to outline in my briefing, if
there are changes in the various areas where we see the
Government changing its policies and practices; if
donors invest not only in food handouts but in
financing agricultural production and livelihoods; if
there is a climate in which the Government and others
facilitate our work in all aspects so that we can become
effective in all aspects, including in the area of shelter;
and if the disastrous evictions and other practices
stop — if all of those things happen, I think that we
will see positive change in Zimbabwe. We need to see
positive change; indeed, cross-border migration is also
continuing, because the situation is becoming
intolerable for many people.
The representative of Denmark asked about a
future United Nations engagement with Zimbabwe.
The Secretary-General has been invited by President
Mugabe, who reiterated that invitation to me while I
was there. The Secretary-General is planning to send
Under-Secretary-General Ibrahim Gambari on a

20

The technological revolution makes it possible
for us to do miracles where before we had to be passive
observers to suffering. But too often we see that this
technological revolution is not being reflected in an
ethical, moral and political revolution that would make
it possible for us to really do our work.
Here I am very heartened to hear many members
say that yes, there has to be progress on the political
front, in terms of peacemaking and security. My first
mission was as a young assistant to Torvald
Stoltenberg and Lord Owen during the joint United
Nations-European Union effort in 1994 in the Balkans,
namely in Bosnia. I saw at that time how we discussed
safe areas in Bosnia and the provision of increased
food, water and sanitation to Srebrenica and to the
other safe areas. People were not disarmed at the time,
there was no political or security action commensurate
with a large humanitarian operation, and then
Srebrenica happened. Let us not repeat that in the
places that I have described. We have to have some
way of healing the wound, because we recognize we
are the plaster on the wound.
I would like to end on a positive note, because, as
the representative of Greece and others have noted,
there has also been a lot of positive change in Africa in
recent years. We as OCHA are phasing out of Angola,
Sierra Leone — of a number of areas. We are phasing
down in Liberia as we speak. We are discussing
handing over operations in places in southern Sudan to
our development colleagues in the course of next year.

S/PV.5331

Africa is the youngest continent, and it is one
with great promise for positive change. With increased
resources next year from the G-8, from the European
Union — all of those who have promised greatly
increased resources — I think we can do a lot. But then
we must make progress on the political and security
fronts. So I am very heartened to hear that Council
members will now study our proposals. You say,
Mr. President, that you will do it at a slightly slower
pace, but I hope that it will only be slightly slower than
the pace I have just suggested as being needed.

The President: Thank you very much indeed,
Mr. Egeland, for your briefing and for the way in
which you have dealt with the questions.
If there are no other comments from colleagues,
then the Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

21
