A /76/PV.37

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-sixth session

37th plenary meeting

Monday, 22 November 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Shahid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Maldives)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
High-level meeting of the General Assembly on
the appraisal of the United Nations Global Plan of
Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons
Agenda item 108 (continued)
Crime prevention and criminal justice
Draft resolution (A/76/L.11)
The President: I declare open the High-level
meeting of the General Assembly on the appraisal of
the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons. This meeting is being held in
accordance with resolution 75/283, of 7 June 2021, and
decisions 76/511, of 29 October 2021, and 76/513, of
11 November 2021.
The General Assembly has before it a draft
resolution issued as document A/76/L.11, entitled
“2021 Political Declaration on the Implementation of
the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons”. Before proceeding further, as
stated in my letters dated 26 October and 16 November,
I would like to remind members that action on the
draft political declaration will be taken following the
opening statements.
Statement by the President
The President: I welcome delegations to this
high-level meeting on the appraisal of the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons. In particular, I welcome the presence

among us of survivors of human trafficking, whose
voices are needed to remind us that that issue relates to
much more than mere policy — it is human tragedy. I
would like to thank one of those survivors — artist and
advocate, Ms. Kendall Alaimo — who has graciously
allowed her artwork, entitled Victims’ Voices Lead the
Way, to feature throughout the event and its associated
campaigns. We will hear more from Ms. Alaimo this
afternoon about the story behind that painting.
The United Nations Convention Against
Transnational Organized Crime and its supplementary
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking
in Persons, Especially Women and Children were
significant steps in recognizing and combating that
heinous crime. Since its adoption by the General
Assembly, the United Nations Global Plan of Action
to Combat Trafficking in Persons — with its focus
on preventing trafficking, prosecuting offenders
and protecting victims — has remained pivotal in
implementing the Convention and its Protocol. Yet
despite the progress made, trafficking in persons
persists. We must remain vigilant.
Human trafficking deprives millions worldwide
of their dignity and freedom. It undermines national
security, distorts markets and enriches transnational
criminals and terrorists and is an affront to our
universal values. Human trafficking is linked to a
number of crimes, including illicit money flows, the use
of fraudulent travel documents and cybercrime. While
there are many forms of trafficking, the one consistent
aspect is the abuse of the inherent vulnerability of
the victims. We must continue to improve capacities so

In accordance with decision 76/511, of 29 October 2021, the official records of the high-level
meeting will be supplemented by annexes containing pre-recorded statements submitted by
Heads of State or Government or other dignitaries, submitted to the President no later than the
day on which such statements are delivered in the Assembly Hall. Submissions in this regard
should be made to estatements@un.org.

21-34968 (E)

*2134968*

A/76/PV.37

as to prevent and respond to human trafficking. And
we must address the root causes that facilitate such
trafficking in the first place.
In adopting the Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons, Member States recognized
that poverty, unemployment, gender-based violence,
discrimination and marginalization are among the
contributing factors, all of which have been exacerbated
by the coronavirus disease pandemic. The continuing
pandemic has left the survivors of trafficking with less
support and beset by the weakened ability of States to
identify the perpetrators and hold them accountable. It
is imperative that the global community redouble its
efforts to better recover from the pandemic and build
resilient communities. That includes by obtaining
more research, data and analysis on the ways in which
the crime is being carried out, how it is evolving and
whom it is targeting and impacting. That will allow
us to make better decisions on preventative measures
and responses.
We must prioritize a victim- and survivor-centred
approach to combating trafficking in persons — one
that includes survivors in policy development; one that
considers how existing policies and practices impact
trafficking, including those on human rights, gender
equality, migration, labour, education and health;
and one that adopts a whole-of-society approach to
combating trafficking and that strengthens partnerships
among Governments, civil society and the private
sector, while integrating the perspectives of survivors
and recognizing trafficked persons as agents of change.
Through collaboration we can build strong legal and
policy frameworks, empower human rights defenders
and enhance victims’ access to justice. I am pleased
that stakeholders representing multiple sectors will
participate in this meeting, either virtually or in person.
Trafficking is first and foremost a severe human
rights violation — one that thrives on prejudices and
systemic inequalities, including gender inequality,
discrimination, racism and xenophobia. As we develop
anti-trafficking frameworks and devise new methods of
identifying and protecting victims, we must consider
how the interplay of various prejudices and iniquities
render individuals more vulnerable. We must also
recognize the unfortunate truth that migrants are
among the most discriminated against and marginalized
communities and therefore among the most vulnerable
to human trafficking. We have a responsibility to
implement policies that reduce the risk of migrants
2/50

22/11/2021

being trafficked during every stage of their journey.
And we must introduce additional measures to ensure
the effective protection of migrant workers within their
host societies.
Over the coming two days, this meeting will
provide an opportunity to focus our attention on how to
improve the responses to human trafficking. Over the
course of our discussions and deliberations, let us never
forget the human impact of that vile crime, including
the brutal realities experienced by victims and the
bravery and resilience of survivors. We will hear from
some of those survivors during this high-level meeting.
Their mere presence here testifies to the fortitude of
the human spirit. Their courage reminds us of our
obligations to do better in protecting our communities
and providing justice to the victims. Let us do right
by them. Let us ensure that others do not endure the
tragedies and deprivation that they have endured. Let
us empower their work and listen to them as we craft
and implement policy.
As President of the General Assembly under the
theme “Presidency of Hope”, I will do all that I can
to bring together and work with partners to mobilize
action against human trafficking. I look forward to the
opportunity over the coming two days to engage in
constructive dialogue so that we can collectively work
together to advance our efforts to address that crime.
In accordance with rule 70 of the rules of procedure
of the General Assembly, I now give the floor to the
Deputy Secretary-General of the United Nations, Her
Excellency Ms. Amina Mohammed.
The Deputy Secretary-General: I wish to express
my deep appreciation to the President of the General
Assembly for having convened this meeting on the
United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons. I also wish to congratulate
Member States on the successful negotiation of the
draft political declaration on which action will be taken
at today’s meeting (A/76/L.11, annex).
Renewed and reinvigorated global action against
the crime of human trafficking is needed more than
ever, as economic hardship, conflict and health and
climate emergencies are increasing and compounding
the vulnerabilities to trafficking, exploitation and abuse.
Global crises, including the continuing coronavirus
disease pandemic, have delayed progress on the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, including
important targets on preventing and combating all
21-34968

22/11/2021

forms of trafficking in persons. That is increasing the
suffering of victims. Survivors of trafficking in many
countries have encountered greater difficulties in
accessing shelter, food, health care, legal aid and other
essential services.
At the same time, law enforcement authorities face
additional challenges in detecting human trafficking in
the light of pandemic-related restrictions on travel and
movement. Human trafficking — a crime that is often
hidden in plain sight — has retreated further into the
shadows of our global economy and the dark corners
of the Internet. Information and communication
technologies, which have also become increasingly
important during the pandemic, are being misused by
traffickers to facilitate the recruitment, control and
exploitation of victims.
Women and girls are disproportionately targeted
by traffickers and forced into marriage, including child
marriage, as well as domestic servitude and forced
labour. The latest United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) Global Report on Trafficking
in Persons shows that around one third of all detected
victims are children — a proportion that has tripled
over the past 15 years. Tragically, more and more
children are being targeted by traffickers, who are
using social media to recruit new victims and profiting
from the demand for child sexual exploitation materials.
Refugees and migrants are especially vulnerable to
traffickers. They may be abused and exploited for
forced labour, sexual exploitation, domestic servitude
and even organ removal. According to the UNODC
Global Report on Trafficking in Persons, a significant
proportion of the victims of abuse in most regions of
the world are migrants.
Trafficking in global supply chains continues to
be under-detected and unpunished owing to a lack of
appropriate frameworks and reporting mechanisms
to tackle that complex issue. When trafficking cases
are detected, all too often the victims themselves face
punishment. Although many States now recognize
victims’ rights to assistance, protection and effective
remedies, they may also punish people for acts
committed as a consequence of being trafficked. To
put an end to that suffering and injustice, we need to
support all countries to build strong legal institutions
and frameworks in order to respond to that crime.
Survivors should be at the centre of policies to prevent
and counter human trafficking, bring perpetrators

A/76/PV.37

to justice and provide effective access to remedies,
including compensation.
We now have strong tools for international
cooperation on preventing and ending human trafficking.
The United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime is almost universally ratified, and 178
States are now parties to its supplementary Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children. The Global Plan
of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons, which
was adopted by the General Assembly in 2010, has
been decisive in promoting the implementation of the
Protocol. The biennial Global Report on Trafficking
in Persons has become a primary resource on global
trafficking trends and patterns. The Global Plan of
Action also established the United Nations Voluntary
Trust Fund for Victims of Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children and strengthened the
Inter-Agency Coordination Group against Trafficking
in Persons, which now brings together 30 United
Nations agencies and regional organizations.
Thanks to the Trafficking in Persons Protocol and
the Global Plan of Action, nearly all States parties
have enacted national legislation that criminalizes
trafficking in persons. However, practical responses
to human trafficking continue to vary widely. We
need increased technical assistance and support in
order to strengthen common action. Better responses
require improved cooperation among Member States on
information-sharing, joint criminal justice operations
and much more. And more needs to be done to protect
vulnerable migrants from falling prey to trafficking,
in line with the commitments made under the Global
Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration.
We need to strengthen the coordination between
United Nations entities and others in order to detect
and respond to the crime of human trafficking in
emergency situations and humanitarian crises. We also
need to strengthen private sector engagement so that
companies can manage their procurement processes in
an ethical and transparent way. The United Nations has
taken action to prevent and address human trafficking
risks in its own procurement processes. And finally, we
need to develop and promote partnerships with civil
society. Survivor-led organizations can support a shift
to holistic anti-trafficking responses, as well as victim
support and services.

21-349683/50

A/76/PV.37

Today’s appraisal meeting can reinforce the need
for greater cooperation and action against human
trafficking. The recently launched peer review process
for the Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and its Trafficking in Persons Protocol offers
ways to further improve and inform policies and action.
At this pivotal moment, the adoption by the General
Assembly of the draft political declaration could help to
generate the momentum needed to take decisive action
against that horrific crime. I urge Member States to
make the most of this opportunity to help us get back on
track in achieving the Sustainable Development Goals
in the decade of action and to work together to end the
scourge of trafficking once and for all.
The President: I thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral for her statement.
In accordance with General Assembly resolution
75/283 and decision 76/503, of 17 September 2021, I
now introduce the pre-recorded statement of Ms. Ghada
Waly, Executive Director of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (see annex 1 and A/76/569).

22/11/2021

(COVID-19) pandemic has had a gendered impact, with
rising poverty and unemployment disproportionately
affecting women and girls. We are receiving reports
of increases in child and forced marriages, which are
indicators of increases in trafficking. We also know
that men and boys are often ignored and invisible as
victims of trafficking and therefore not identified and
not provided with protection.
Despite the core norm of non-discrimination and
promises of the universal protection of the rights of
trafficked persons, racism and xenophobia continue
to limit access to protection for trafficked persons,
in particular at border crossings. If we are to be more
effective in our anti-trafficking action, we need to
ensure that such action is aligned with racial justice
movements globally. We also know that indigenous
peoples, minority communities, stateless persons,
refugees and internally displaced persons are targeted
by traffickers for exploitation. Such trafficking
persists with impunity because of State failures to
ensure protection without discrimination and failures
to take effective preventative action for groups and
communities that are already marginalized.

Ms. Mullally (Special Rapporteur on trafficking
in persons, especially women and children): This highlevel meeting to review the United Nations Global Plan
of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons comes at a
very critical time. More than a decade after the adoption
of the Global Plan of Action, trafficking in persons
continues with impunity. We need to ask why that is so.
What are we not doing as an international community
to combat that serious human rights violation?

The legal and policy tools are available to us.
However, the implementation of human rights law
to protect trafficked persons and prevent trafficking
remains weak. The rhetoric of combating modern
slavery is not being met with the reality of protecting
trafficked persons without discrimination or with
meaningful action to combat impunity. The effective
prevention of trafficking requires us to rethink our
approaches to migration. The adoption of the Global
Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration
was an important achievement for the international
community. Expanding safe, orderly and regular
migration reduces the risks of trafficking. We need to
move beyond responses to migration that are built on
pushbacks, the building of walls, the externalization of
asylum procedures and the criminalization of migration.

We know that women and girls in particular are
at risk of all forms of exploitation and often multiple
and intersecting forms of exploitation. They are at risk
because of the continuing systemic discrimination
and violence against women and girls globally and
the material consequences of such discrimination,
including poverty, a brutalizing modification of
women and girls’ bodies, restrictions on movement
and restrictions on access to education and decent
work. That is not new, but the coronavirus disease

However, regular migration is also risky for many
people. We need a more effective monitoring of labour
recruitment agencies in order to protect migrant workers.
We need to ensure that the gaps in the enforcement and
scope of labour laws and in the mandates of labour
inspectorates are addressed. Restrictive employer-tied
work permits, the failure to protect the rights of domestic
workers, the unlimited enforcement of labour laws and
restrictions on access to social protection for migrant
workers all create vulnerabilities to exploitation. Those

The President: In accordance with General
Assembly resolution 75/283, I now give the floor
to Ms. Siobhán Mullally, Special Rapporteur on
trafficking in persons, especially women and children,
to make a statement.

4/50

21-34968

22/11/2021

are failures of policy and failures of political will that
can be addressed.
The COVID-19 pandemic has brought into very
sharp relief the limited rights protections for migrant
workers, as well as the heightened risks of trafficking
for purposes of sexual exploitation and the targeting of
children online. As we continue to face humanitarian
crises in many parts of the world, we are seeing
increasing indicators of trafficking arising from a
continuum of exploitation and failures of everyday
rights protection. We know that digital technologies
can assist in preventing trafficking and combating
impunity. But effective action is not being taken by
technology companies or States to combat impunity
for trafficking through the use of technologies, in
particular with regard to sexual exploitation and the
targeting of women and girls online.
In my recent report to the General Assembly
(A/76/263), I highlighted the nexus between trafficking
and contexts of terrorism, as well as the targeting of
women and girls and men and boys online and the use of
digital technologies by terrorist groups for trafficking
for all purposes of exploitation. Young people in
particular are at risk. We need more effective action to
harness the benefits of digital technologies in order to
combat trafficking.
We also need to ensure that assistance to trafficked
persons and social protection are long-term and not
conditional if we are serious about breaking the cycles
of trafficking, exploitation and retrafficking. We
use the rhetoric of human rights-based approaches to
combat trafficking in persons, but we need to ensure
that is backed up in practice. The role of civil society
and human rights defenders is critical in supporting
trafficked persons, preventing trafficking and ensuring
protection. Imposing restrictions on civil society, the
shrinking of civil society space and the criminalization
of human rights defenders who assist migrants constitute
a failure of States to respect their obligations to build
partnerships with non-governmental organizations — a
core commitment of the Palermo Protocol.
The implementation of the non-punishment
principle is also critical to ensuring a human rightsbased approach and effective protection. It is also
essential to ensuring effective investigations and
combating impunity for trafficking. Yet we continue
to see victims of trafficking detained, imprisoned,
punished, denied the possibility of recovery and

A/76/PV.37

denied access to effective remedies. We need to
recognize all forms of punishment, including detention,
forced returns, arbitrary deprivations of citizenship,
exclusions from refugee status and exclusions from
social security protection.
Child trafficking in particular is an egregious and
serious human rights violation. We need to ensure the
full and effective implementation of the Convention on
the Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocols and
in particular the principle of non-discrimination. That
is essential to protecting all child victims of trafficking
and to moving towards more effective prevention action.
We must ensure the inclusion of children and child
protection language in peace processes and explicitly
identify measures to address child trafficking in peace
processes. We must also recognize that attacks against
schools and hospitals may be used by traffickers as
tactics to abduct or recruit children. In recognizing the
particular vulnerability of children, States must ensure
that effective prevention and protection measures are
in place for children in situations of conflict or forced
displacement. We must ensure that children who
are detained for association with armed groups are
recognized as victims of trafficking and as victims
of grave violations of human rights and humanitarian
law. We need to strengthen and resource child
protection systems.
We also need to ensure that measures to combat
trafficking in persons are disability-inclusive and
comply with the United Nations Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities and Security
Council resolution 2475 (2019), on the protection of
persons with disabilities in conflict. That is essential
to ensure effective access to justice, assistance and
protection and effective remedies for trafficked persons
with disabilities. We must ensure that actions to
combat trafficking are incorporated into the planning
of peacekeeping transition processes, in recognizing
that a time of transition may bring heightened risks.
Combating trafficking in persons for all purposes of
exploitation and ensuring the protection of trafficked
persons and persons at risk of trafficking must be
explicitly stated in the mandates of peacekeeping
missions that include the protection of civilians among
their directives. It is not enough to assume the inclusion
of those obligations in measures to combat conflictrelated sexual violence or sexual and gender-based
violence. Without explicit recognition of the obligations
to combat trafficking in persons, the indicators of

21-349685/50

A/76/PV.37

trafficking are missed. Children go missing with
impunity. There are no effective investigations and no
effective protection.
While the contexts of terrorism, conflict and forced
displacement contribute to heightened risks of trafficking
in persons, such risks are rooted in continuums of
exploitation that are linked to structural discrimination,
violence, poverty and exclusion, which are part of
the everyday and are not exceptional. It is therefore
essential that we continue to focus on the everyday
poverty, economic vulnerability, discrimination against
migrant workers and exploitation as the underlying
and persistent root causes of trafficking and recognize
the need for structural reforms in countries of origin
and countries of destination. Protecting the rights of
refugees through resettlement, humanitarian visas and
family reunification and the effective protection of the
right to seek and enjoy asylum also help ensure the
protection of trafficked persons who are refugees and
are essential to preventing the trafficking of refugees
and others who are forcibly displaced.
In the context of the climate crisis, we must
take seriously the heightened risks of trafficking
arising from climate-related conflicts and climate
displacement. We must also recognize that trafficking
in persons for forced labour in the agricultural sector,
extractive industries, garment industries and fisheries
is contributing to the climate crisis. In recognizing
those risks, my report to the General Assembly in 2022
will examine trafficking in persons in the context of the
climate crisis and forced displacement.
In conclusion, we know that trafficking treats
human beings as commodities to be bought and sold.
We know that it is a serious human rights violation and
one that demands urgent and meaningful action. That
action must be led by survivors. All anti-trafficking
actions must be informed by the experience and
expertise of survivors — not on an ad hoc basis but
on a continuing and systemic basis. I look forward
to continuing to work with all delegations to combat
trafficking in persons.
The President: In accordance with General
Assembly resolution 75/283, I now give the floor to
Ms. Yasmeen Hassan, Global Executive Director of
Equality Now, to make a statement.
Ms. Hassan: I would like to congratulate His
Excellency Mr. Abdulla Shahid, President of the
General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session, on
6/50

22/11/2021

having convened this high-level meeting. I am honoured
to participate in it.
When I was a young activist in the early 1990s,
sex trafficking was not an issue that most people
were aware of. There were no laws addressing it, and
the victims of sex trafficking had almost no support
in escaping their ordeal. To the contrary, they were
trapped, as they could be criminalized for prostitution
or immigration-related offences, and they were socially
stigmatized for what had been done to them. Criminal
enterprises that trafficked women and girls flourished
with the rise of the commercial sex trade, which created
an increased and normalized demand and a lucrative
market for traffickers. Women’s rights organizations,
especially those working in courts and in the provision
of services, sounded the alarm bell. We saw that the
women and girls who were victims of sex trafficking
were the most marginalized, whether due to poverty,
abuse, addiction, ethnicity or laws that disempowered
them on the basis of sex. We also saw that very little
was being done to help them.
A period of sustained advocacy with, and on behalf
of, victims and survivors led to the establishment of the
Palermo Protocol in 2003, which has been ratified by
178 countries, and to the introduction of laws against
sex trafficking in 93 per cent of countries. The Global
Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons was
created in 2010 to monitor progress, and in 2018 States
committed to a formal review process and to protecting
and supporting the victims of human trafficking by
adopting the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and
Regular Migration. So, yes, there has been significant
progress, but the current trends show that sex trafficking
is increasing in new and complex ways and that we are
failing vulnerable women and girls.
More than 50 per cent of detected trafficking
victims globally are sex trafficked. Seventy-seven per
cent of women and 72 per cent of girls who are trafficked
are trafficked for sexual exploitation. Sex trafficking
remains the most profitable for traffickers, who rake in
huge profits in a $99-billion-a-year global commercial
sex trade. And while countries have laws against
trafficking, those laws are not being implemented, and
prosecutions and convictions remain abysmally low.
At Equality Now, we have been working to combat sex
trafficking for more than a quarter of a century, and
we have seen the ways in which women and girls are
trafficked for sex and the devastating impact on their
lives — if they even make it out alive.
21-34968

22/11/2021

I will give a few examples. In Mexico, young
girls are recruited as models from rural areas and sold
into prostitution by drug cartels posing as modelling
agencies. Nigerian women are deceived, moved across
borders and then prostituted in Italy to pay off incurred
debts to their traffickers. Twelve- and 13-year-old
Pakistani girls are taken on virginity-sale tours to
countries in the Gulf region. And in Egypt there are cases
of young women being repeatedly sold into temporary
marriages by their families. The experiences of those
women and girls all have a common thread — they
have all experienced vulnerabilities, whether based on
sex, race, economic status or legal status, and those
vulnerabilities are exploited. The narrative that those
women and girls have a genuine choice or that they are
migrating for sex work misrepresents the lived realities
of survivors.
So, what can we do? First of all, Governments
must reduce people’s vulnerability to being trafficked
by establishing an ecosystem of laws and policies that
foster equality and provide real opportunity and options.
In addition to sex trafficking laws and anti-trafficking
laws, laws and policies must meaningfully address
inequality and the demand for prostitution, provide
equal rights, education and economic opportunities and
ensure the protection of migrants and displaced people,
among other things. Governments must also put an end
to impunity for traffickers and profiteers. That requires
more than paying lip service to the perspectives of
survivors. The implementation of anti-trafficking laws
is difficult and requires political will at every level, in
addition to sustained resourcing, training and, quite
frankly, a crackdown on apathy and corruption.
Moreover, urgent and collective action needs to be
taken to address the new threats posed by the misuse
of the Internet and digital technology. The Internet is
enabling sex trafficking and sexual exploitation to grow
at an alarming pace. That is particularly relevant in the
time of the coronavirus disease pandemic, in which
traffickers have adjusted their business models to the
new normal through the abuse of digital technology.
Governments must appropriately regulate the digital
space so as to protect against abuse. In doing so, they
must address the tension between the right to, and
freedom of, expression and privacy on the one hand and
protection from online harms on the other.
Traffickers are hiding behind the veil of online
anonymity on platforms that operate under very
limited regulation in order to groom and recruit

A/76/PV.37

their victims. The current national and international
laws are inadequate, as they have not kept pace with
technological advances. In our report, “Ending
Online Sexual Exploitation and Abuse of Women and
Girls: A Call for International Standards”, which was
published just last week, we call on Governments to
develop international standards, a guiding framework
for international cooperation and robust laws that
address the gendered and multijurisdictional nature of
online sexual exploitation. Equality Now is committed
to being a part of the global movement to address the
ongoing scourge that devastates the lives of so many.
There is no time to waste, and inaction is not an option.
The President: In accordance with General
Assembly resolution 75/283, I now give the floor to
Ms. Malaika Oringo, Founder and Chief Executive
Officer of Footprint to Freedom and a survivor of
trafficking in persons, to make a statement.
Ms. Oringo: When I was about 8 years old, in a
small suburb of Kampala back in Uganda, some friends
and I were playing a game called “let us dare to dream”,
where we would ask each other what they would like
to be when they grow up. One of my friends said he
wanted to be a minister so that he could own a convoy
of cars; some wanted to be superheroes; others wanted
to be princesses. I said, “When I grow up, I want to go
to the United Nations and speak about the war and what
it does to children”. I am honoured to be here today
and to be given a stage at this high-level meeting of the
General Assembly on trafficking in persons.
Unfortunately the story I wanted to tell has evolved.
Today I am here to tell the Assembly that the war opened
doors to being trafficked. But I also want to assert that
the journey of a trafficking victim does not begin at the
moment when the trafficker shows up. Most of the time
it is the result of generations or years of vulnerability
that has been insufficiently addressed and has gone
unreported and unnoticed. That is the reality for so
many survivors around the world and will continue to
be the reality for further victims in the future if we
do not work hard to address the causes of vulnerability
among children, especially in post-conflict areas, such
as the one in which I spent part of my childhood.
My name is Malaika Oringo, and I am from
the Netherlands. I am the founder of Footprint to
Freedom — a survivor-led organization that empowers
survivors to take to the front line in the fight against
human trafficking. I work with The Salvation Army

21-349687/50

A/76/PV.37

as an inclusion and engagement specialist, and I am
a serving member of the International Survivors of
Trafficking Advisory Council, which was inaugurated
by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe. Although I stand alone before the Assembly
today, I bring with me thousands of voices of survivors
from across the world.
First, I would like to acknowledge the efforts
undertaken by the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime in giving survivors a stage and amplifying our
voices in this year’s campaign, “Victims’ Voices Lead
the Way”. With regard to its impact, I would like to
share some quotes from resilient survivors. Marcela
Loaiza said, “The key to successful reintegration is
psychological support”. Shandra Woworuntu said,
“Our narratives must not merely be inspiring, but
the lessons that lie within them must be turned into
solutions”. Jerome Elam said, “I have put a face to
the crime of human trafficking and have begun to
shatter the stereotype that men are not being sold”.
Senga Jeanbaptiste from Footprint to Freedom said,
“I understand the importance of integration, so I offer
survivors the support I wanted to have as a victim”.
Kendall Alaimo said, “Learning from victims’
experiences and turning their suggestions into concrete
actions will lead to a more victim-centred and effective
approach in combating human trafficking”.
Hearing such wisdom from a diverse range of
survivors affirms that survivors are the most significant
stakeholders in the fight against human trafficking.
However, their voices are mainly centred around
sharing their stories as victims. Less than 10 per cent of
victims’ voices are included in the decisions that lead to
the implementation of policies and laws. Yet survivors’
narratives are very important in establishing effective
strategies that address the prosecution of traffickers,
the prevention of trafficking and the reintegration of
victims, because survivors know first-hand the tactics
and strategies that traffickers use to bind victims to
slavery. For that reason, I call on all Member States
to leverage the wisdom of survivors and invest in the
leadership of survivors.
I would like to make some recommendations
from a survivor perspective. We need to see more
meaningful partnerships with survivors and shift
from merely symbolic survivor engagement, which we
see as exploitation. We need to see an increase in the
quality of mental support for survivors, which should
be customized to their needs and provided over the
8/50

22/11/2021

long term. We also need to see an improvement in the
way victims are treated during legal proceedings. Such
proceedings need to be victim-centred and traumainformed. We need to put a stop to the narrative of a
“perfect victim”, because looking for a “perfect victim”
among victims is one of the major reasons for the low
rates of prosecution and conviction, as it blinds us from
seeing those that are standing before our very eyes. That
is a reality for migrant survivors of trafficking, because
their victimhood is addressed as a migration issue.
We need non-discriminatory support. In most
countries, the duration of the assistance offered to
victims is often linked to the duration of any ongoing
investigation. I myself became a victim of that notion.
I was left undocumented for 10 years, which left
me without the right to access medication, to go to
school or to access shelter. That left me vulnerable
to re-exploitation and exposed me to genderbased violence.
Most of all, we need to see accountability, not
only in bringing the traffickers to justice but on the
part of all parties involved. For example, we need the
civil service sector to be accountable for the quality
of the services it offers to victims and survivors. We
need the private sector to be accountable for addressing
the exploitation that is present in its supply chains. We
need law enforcement to be accountable for ensuring
that it is victim-centred and trauma-informed. And
above all, we need Governments to be accountable
for the systems in place that facilitate the demand for
exploitative services, such as the kafala system in the
Gulf States, the legalization of prostitution in Europe,
corruption and the impunity of traffickers. Lastly, the
United Nations should foster survivor engagement and
inclusion among Member States as part of the mandate
when forming research policies and holding discussions
on reintegration.
Finally, we need to value the lived experience — we
should not undermine it. Even when I was 8 years
old, back in Uganda, where the voices of children are
undermined, I still felt and understood the importance
of lived experience and the need for victims of human
trafficking to be at the table when it comes to discussing
matters that affect our lives. Now that I have a voice,
a stage and an agency, I want to call the Assembly to
action. When delegations come to discuss the issue
of human trafficking, I want them to ask themselves
whose voice they are representing, whose voice is
missing from the table and why that voice is missing.
21-34968

22/11/2021

A/76/PV.37

Answering those questions is key to achieving genuine
survivor inclusion.

The President: We have heard the only speaker in
explanation of position before adoption.

We need to look beyond compassion and turn our
empathy into action. Sharing stories of trauma is not
enough; we need to share stories of resilience and hope.
We need to make greater efforts to provide survivors
with access to restoration programmes, education and
employment and to fund survivor-led initiatives. Pity
is not enough. Survivors need more opportunities
to thrive.

The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution.

The President: We have heard the last speaker for
the opening segment of the high-level meeting.
The Assembly will now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/76/L.11, entitled “2021 Political
Declaration on the Implementation of the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons”.
Before giving the floor for explanations of position
before adoption, may I remind delegations that
explanations of position are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Johnstone (United States of America): The
United States welcomes the adoption of the draft
political declaration (A/76/L.11, annex). We have
long been committed to preventing and combating
trafficking in persons and advocating for survivors. The
United States affirms its commitment to protecting the
privacy and identity of victims of trafficking in persons
before, during and after criminal proceedings subject to
our national laws, rules and regulations, including the
protection of the rights of criminal defendants under
the United States Constitution.
The United States supports fully and effectively
implementing obligations under the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
and its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children,
including the provisions on granting assistance to, and
the protection of, victims of trafficking. There is no
obligation to implement the non-mandatory provisions
of those instruments, and the United States does not
consider the language contained in the draft political
declaration as amending or expanding its obligations
under either of them. Nevertheless, the United States
will continue to act in accordance with its obligations
to prevent and combat transnational organized crime
and trafficking in persons.

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/76/L.11?
Draft resolution
(resolution 76/7).

A/76/L.11

was

adopted

The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of position after adoption, may I remind
delegations that explanations of position are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Ms. Pongor (Hungary): First of all, allow me
to express our appreciation to the Republic of the
Philippines and the Dominican Republic for their
leadership as co-facilitators of the 2021 Political
Declaration just adopted (resolution 76/7, annex).
Hungary supported the adoption of the Political
Declaration, as a Member State that is deeply committed
to the prevention and elimination of all forms of human
trafficking, with special regard to trafficking in women
and girls. We stand firm in the fight against that
horrendous crime and in protecting and supporting the
survivors of human trafficking, as well as in holding
the perpetrators to account.
At the same time, we would like to take this
opportunity to put on the record Hungary’s position
concerning paragraphs 7 and 24 (b), which include
references to the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and
Regular Migration. We wish to recall that Hungary did
not adopt the Global Compact and does not take part in
its implementation. We therefore dissociate ourselves
from the aforementioned paragraphs. We further
emphasize that the fight against human trafficking
should focus on combating organized crime, holding
the perpetrators to account, raising awareness among
at-risk populations and tackling the root causes of
their vulnerability. We wish to stress that expanding
the legal channels for migration is not an appropriate
way to tackle human trafficking, and we recall that
defining migration policy remains the prerogative of
Member States.
Hungary remains actively engaged in providing
protection and assistance to the survivors and potential
victims of human trafficking, with special regard to
women and girls.

21-349689/50

A/76/PV.37

Ms. Charikhi (Algeria) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the adoption of the 2021 Political
Declaration on the Implementation of the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons (resolution 76/7, annex). We would like to
thank the Permanent Representatives of the Philippines
and the Dominican Republic, respectively, for their
efforts as co-facilitators, which enabled us to adopt the
Political Declaration by consensus.
Algeria engaged in good faith and a constructive
spirit throughout the process and submitted a number
of proposals to help arrive at a strong political
declaration that addresses the consequences of human
trafficking and establishes preventative measures in a
comprehensive and targeted manner. Algeria is fully
committed to combating and preventing trafficking
in persons, which is why we joined the consensus
in adopting the 2021 Political Declaration despite
the fact that certain paragraphs are not supported
by my delegation, specifically, those that make
reference to the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and
Regular Migration.
In that regard, my delegation would like to express
its reservations over, and dissociate itself from, all
paragraphs containing a reference to the Global
Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration,
on which my country abstained in the voting and the
provisions of which do not apply to us. Hence nothing
contained in those paragraphs should be interpreted as
my country’s tacit endorsement of the commitments set
out in the Global Compact.
I would like to take this opportunity to recall
Algeria’s position regarding the Global Compact for
Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration. My delegation
believes that the Compact does not distinguish between
regular migrants and those in an irregular situation. The
absence of such a distinction in an international context
is incongruous as it constitutes a failure to effectively
contribute to the fight against illegal migration, which
is a complex reality that may deteriorate in the future
if the necessary measures are not taken to combat the
causes of that phenomenon.
Moreover, the Global Compact ignores the
root causes of the migration phenomenon. Without
concrete and jointly developed measures to combat the
resurgence of armed conflict and the eradication of
poverty and food insecurity, as well as comprehensive
solutions to combat the adverse effects of natural
10/50

22/11/2021

disasters, illegal migration will remain a danger for
thousands of migrants.
I would like this statement to be included in the
verbatim record of this meeting.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position after adoption.
I would like to express my sincere appreciation
to His Excellency Mr. José Alfonso Blanco Conde,
Permanent Representative of the Dominican Republic
to the United Nations, and His Excellency Mr. Enrique
Austria Manalo, Permanent Representative of the
Philippines to the United Nations, who ably and patiently
conducted the discussions and complex negotiations
in the informal consultations on draft resolution
A/76/L.11. I am sure that the members of the Assembly
join me in extending to them our sincere appreciation.
As members are aware, pursuant to resolution
75/283, this high-level meeting consists of an opening
segment and a plenary meeting today from 10 a.m.
to 1 p.m.; plenary meetings tomorrow, 23 November,
from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 p.m. to 5.30 p.m.;
a closing plenary meeting tomorrow at 5.30 p.m.; as
well as two consecutive interactive panel discussions
this afternoon.
As indicated in my letter of 1 November, I have
invited His Excellency Mr. José Alfonso Blanco Conde,
Permanent Representative of the Dominican Republic
to the United Nations, to chair panel discussion one,
to be held from 3 p.m. to 4.30 p.m. in this Hall. The
panel discussion will address the theme, “The Global
Plan of Action and enduring trafficking issues and
gaps, including, inter alia, the trafficking of women
and children, particularly girls, for the purpose of
sexual exploitation”.
As further indicated in the same letter, I have
invited His Excellency Mr. Enrique Austria Manalo,
Permanent Representative of the Philippines to the
United Nations, to chair panel discussion two, which is
to be held immediately following panel discussion one
and will address the theme, “The Global Plan of Action
and emerging issues, such as trafficking in persons in
the context of the coronavirus disease pandemic, and the
misuse of information and communication technologies
to facilitate trafficking, including trafficking in
children, for the purpose of sexual exploitation on
the Internet”.
21-34968

22/11/2021

Before we begin with the list of speakers, I would
like to address important organizational matters
pertaining to the conduct of the plenary meetings.
The introduction of pre-recorded statements will
be made by the representatives from their national
seats. Due to time constraints, it is expected that the
introductory remarks be kept concise. Statements
delivered by high-level representatives who are
physically present in the Assembly Hall can be made
from their national seats or from the rostrum.
As set out in resolution 75/283, statements will be
limited to three minutes for individual delegations and
five minutes for statements made on behalf of a group
of States. In the case of pre-recorded statements, the
introductory remarks and the length of the video itself
will be counted in the allocated time limit.
In accordance with decision 76/511, in addition
to the verbatim records of the high-level meeting, the
President of the General Assembly will circulate as a
document of the Assembly a compilation document
of the statements delivered by means of pre-recorded
statements during the high-level meeting and submitted
to the President no later than the day on which the
pre-recorded statement is played in the Assembly Hall,
and such pre-recorded statements will be attached to
the verbatim records of the meeting. Submissions in
that regard should be made to estatements@un.org.
Address by Ms. Marta Lucía Ramírez,
Vice-President and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Colombia
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia to introduce an address by
the Vice-President and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Colombia.
Ms. Quintero Correa (Colombia) (spoke
in Spanish): I have the pleasure to introduce the
pre-recorded statement of the Vice-President and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Colombia, Her Excellency Ms. Marta Lucía Ramírez.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (see annex 2 and A/76/569).
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Alfonso Nsue Mokuy, Third Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister in Charge of Human
Rights of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea.

A/76/PV.37

Mr. Mokuy (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish):
It is an honour for me to take the floor on behalf of the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea at this high-level meeting
on the appraisal of the United Nations Global Plan of
Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons. I should like
to thank the Secretariat for all of the provisions and
arrangements put in place to facilitate the participation
of my delegation in this forum.
Equatorial Guinea joins previous speakers in
acknowledging the difficulties that States have been
experiencing owing to the restrictions imposed as a
result of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic,
which continues to thwart the effective fulfilment of
our international commitments.
At the outset, I would like to thank the Government
of the United States of America for the assistance
provided to our Government to combat trafficking in
persons in all its forms. That fight must be a collective
effort among all governmental and non-governmental
stakeholders geared towards the full protection of the
victims of that phenomenon. Hence having effective
partners such as the Government of the United States
facilitates the implementation of more finely tuned
actions against trafficking in persons.
The Government of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea has made it a priority of its public policies to
ensure the protection of all victims of trafficking in
persons, especially women and children. That can be
seen in our 2019-2021 national action plan to prevent
and combat trafficking in persons, which has served as
a guide in channelling the Government’s efforts over
the past two years, even amid the challenges posed
by the COVID-19 pandemic. The action plan will
conclude at the end of this year, and the Government
of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea has therefore seen
fit to modify it with a view to adapting it to current
needs and to the new dynamics that have arisen from
the pandemic.
Moreover, we have focused on addressing various
gaps that we had yet to resolve, including by establishing
an inter-agency protocol of action to protect and assist
the victims of trafficking in persons, which is currently
undergoing the relevant legislative process and will
be adopted in the near future. We have also deemed it
appropriate to amend Law No. 1/2004 of 14 September
2004, on the smuggling of migrants and trafficking in
persons, to bring it in line with the Palermo Protocol
and thereby resolve certain shortcomings identified

21-3496811/50

A/76/PV.37

22/11/2021

by legal experts from our public administration, at the
request of the United States Department of State.

I now invite the Assembly to hear the pre-recorded
statement of Mr. Chang.

We have recently set out to register foreign citizens
in my country. Certain media outlets wrongly interpreted
that measure as an attack on foreign citizens, when in
reality the intention of the Government was merely
to verify the situation of all non-national residents.
An agreement was reached to grant a three-month
moratorium to allow all expatriates to regularize
their status in Equatorial Guinea. It was far from the
Government’s intention to mistreat or crack down on
non-national citizens residing in our national territory.

A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (see annex 3 and A/76/569).

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea expresses its
willingness to constantly maintain close cooperation
with the United Nations system in matters of human
rights in order to achieve a world that is more respectful
and committed to sustainable development based on the
principles of equality, justice and peace. We therefore
reaffirm our political will and pledge to devote greater
efforts and capacities in working with the Assembly to
prevent trafficking in persons, prosecute the traffickers
and protect and provide assistance to all victims,
thereby achieving a national society in which human
rights represent the highest values of peaceful and
democratic coexistence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jamaica to introduce a statement by
the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of National
Security of Jamaica.
Mr. Williams (Jamaica): I have the honour to
introduce the pre-recorded statement of the Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister of National Security of
Jamaica, the Honourable Mr. Horace Chang.
Mr. Chang has been serving as Jamaica’s Minister
of National Security since 2018 and as Deputy Prime
Minister since September 2020. His vast experience
in various areas of Government brings a dynamic
and inspirational way of thinking to the Ministry of
National Security. He is committed to reducing crime
and violence in Jamaica through strategic thinking
that is geared towards a holistic transformation of our
national security apparatus. The subject of trafficking
in persons falls within his portfolio as Minister of
National Security, and in that vein he is well-placed to
address the Assembly on Jamaica’s efforts to tackle the
issue of trafficking in persons.
12/50

Mr. Blanco Conde (Dominican
Vice-President, took the Chair.

Republic),

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the European Union, in its capacity
as observer, to introduce a statement by the European
Commissioner for Home Affairs of the European Union.
Mr. Skoog (European Union): I would like to
thank the President of the General Assembly for having
convened this high-level meeting. I wish to extend a
special word of appreciation to Ms. Malaika Oringo
for her very powerful statement, which provided a
survivor’s perspective to our debate.
I now have the honour to introduce the pre-recorded
statement delivered by Her Excellency Ms. Ylva
Johansson, European Commissioner for Home Affairs
of the European Union, on behalf of the European
Union and its States members.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (see annex 4 and A/76/569).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
give the floor to the representative of my country, the
Dominican Republic, to introduce a statement by our
Minister for Foreign Affairs.
Ms. Andújar (Dominican Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): I have the honour to introduce the pre-recorded
statement of His Excellency Mr. Roberto Álvarez Gil,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Dominican Republic.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (see annex 5 and A/76/569).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba to introduce a statement by the
Minister of Justice of the Republic of Cuba.
Mr. Pedroso Cuesta (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): I
have the honour to introduce the pre-recorded statement
of His Excellency Mr. Oscar Silvera Martínez, Minister
of Justice of the Republic of Cuba.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (see annex 6 and A/76/569).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein to introduce a statement
21-34968

22/11/2021

by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Education and
Sport of the Principality of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): I have the
pleasure and honour to introduce the pre-recorded
statement of Her Excellency Ms. Dominique Hasler,
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Education and Sport of
the Principality of Liechtenstein, who will address the
Assembly on behalf of my country.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (see annex 7 and A/76/569).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar to introduce a statement by the
Minister of Labour of the State of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Nesf (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I have the
pleasure to introduce the pre-recorded statement of His
Excellency Mr. Ali bin Saeed bin Smaikh Al Marri,
Minister of Labour of the State of Qatar.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (see annex 8 and A/76/569).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Peru to introduce a statement by the
Minister of Justice and Human Rights of the Republic
of Peru.
Ms. Laso Geldres (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
have the honour to introduce to the Assembly the
pre-recorded statement of His Excellency Mr. Aníbal
Torres Vásquez, Minister of Justice and Human Rights
of the Republic of Peru.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (see annex 9 and A/76/569).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Luxembourg to introduce a statement
by the Minister for Foreign and European Affairs and
Minister for Immigration and Asylum of the Grand
Duchy of Luxembourg.
Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to introduce the pre-recorded message of His
Excellency Mr. Jean Asselborn, Minister for Foreign
and European Affairs and Minister for Immigration
and Asylum of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (see annex 10 and A/76/569).

A/76/PV.37

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belarus to introduce a statement by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Belarus.
Mr. Rybakov (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): I have
the honour to introduce the pre-recorded statement
of His Excellency Mr. Vladimir Makei, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Belarus.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (see annex 11 and /76/569).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Burkina Faso to introduce a statement
by the Minister of Justice, Human Rights and Civic
Promotion and Keeper of the Seals of Burkina Faso.
Mrs. Niamba Congo (Burkina Faso) (spoke in
French): I have the honour to introduce the pre-recorded
statement of Ms. Victoria Ouédraogo Kibora, Minister
of Justice, Human Rights and Civic Promotion and
Keeper of the Seals of Burkina Faso.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in
the General Assembly Hall (see annex 12 and
A/76/569).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of the Philippines to introduce a
statement by the Secretary for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of the Philippines.
Mr. Manalo (Philippines): It is my honour to
introduce the pre-recorded statement of the Secretary
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of the Philippines,
His Excellency Mr. Teodoro L. Locsin, Jr.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in
the General Assembly Hall (see annex 13 and
A/76/569).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malta to introduce a statement by the
Minister of Equality, Research and Innovation of Malta.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I have the pleasure and
honour to introduce the pre-recorded statement of
the Honourable Owen Bonnici, Malta’s Minister of
Equality, Research and Innovation, who will address
the Assembly today on behalf of my country.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (see annex 14 and A/76/569).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of the Netherlands to introduce

21-3496813/50

A/76/PV.37

a statement by the Minister of Foreign Trade and
Development Cooperation of the Kingdom of
the Netherlands.
Mr. Zellenrath (Netherlands): I have the honour
to introduce a pre-recorded statement by the Minister
of Foreign Trade and Development Cooperation of the
Kingdom of the Netherlands, His Excellency Mr. Tom
De Bruijn.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (see annex 15 and A/76/569).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ireland to introduce a statement by the
Minister of Justice of Ireland.
Ms. Staunton (Ireland): I have the honour of
introducing the pre-recorded statement of the Minister
of Justice of Ireland, Her Excellency Ms. Helen McEntee.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (see annex 16 and A/76/569).
The Acting President: I now call on His Excellency
Mr. Albert Fabrice Puela, Minister of Human Rights of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Puela (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
(spoke in French): The Democratic Republic of the
Congo, under the leadership of His Excellency the
President of the Republic, Mr. Félix-Antoine Tshisekedi
Tshilombo, and his Government — which we in the
Ministry of Human Rights are honoured to be a part
of — is committed to effectively combating the scourge
of trafficking in persons.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, numerous
criminal networks involved in human trafficking carry
out illicit trafficking in several sectors, including in
drugs and weapons. Child victims of human trafficking
work in mines and are recruited as child soldiers by
those criminal organizations. Others are forced to
work, often in unacceptable conditions. Building on
the privileged partnership for peace and prosperity
between the United States — to which we express our
gratitude — and the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the President of our country created a specialized
service within his Cabinet in 2019, namely, the agency
to prevent and combat trafficking in persons — whose
coordinator and deputy we are pleased to count among
our delegation. In that endeavour, the agency’s work
seeks, inter alia, to strengthen the capacity of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to investigate crimes,
14/50

22/11/2021

prosecute the perpetrators and inform the Government
and judicial bodies with regard to trafficking in persons.
I should like to extend special thanks to the
General Assembly for having convened this high-level
meeting on the appraisal of the United Nations Global
Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons.
That was done through the modalities set forth in
resolution 75/283, but also with a view to pooling our
efforts to combat trafficking in persons. Addressing
the various challenges of human trafficking requires,
first and foremost, putting legal instruments in place
so that potential criminals are arrested, brought to
justice and sentenced under law. In that connection,
a significant and essential step was recently taken by
our Government, which approved, during its Council
of Ministers meeting of 12 November, a draft law
submitted by my Ministry — the Ministry of Human
Rights — that amends and supplements the Congolese
criminal code with respect to preventing and clamping
down on trafficking in persons.
Given the determination of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to bolster its competence by
enacting that law in Parliament in the coming days, my
country will undoubtedly move into a higher level of
proficiency in that area. In particular, the Congolese
Government has taken certain measures to prevent
trafficking in persons, protect potential victims and
cooperate with other countries, as well as to facilitate
criminal prosecutions. In the context of combating the
scourge of human trafficking, a group of traffickers
was recently arrested and prosecuted, in accordance
with the legal provisions of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, and a sentence was recently handed down
by the Congolese courts against those thugs.
While many of our fellow citizens, in particular
women and girls, travel or are taken to other countries
around the world by criminal networks that falsely
promise them a better future, the sad reality is that
once there our female compatriots are turned into sex
slaves. The Congolese Government has already begun
and will continue to fight to eradicate that scourge from
our national territory. However, we will not be doing
so alone. One of the very reasons for our participation
in this high-level meeting is to ensure that together
we can move towards a single objective, specifically,
that of making our world a global village in which all
men are born truly free and equal in dignity and rights
and called to live in a peaceful world free from acts
of trafficking, modern slavery and all other acts that
21-34968

22/11/2021

undermine the relations between peoples. Only together
can we effectively combat this scourge.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guyana to introduce a statement by
the Minister of Human Services and Social Security
of Guyana.
Mrs. Rodrigues-Birkett (Guyana): I have the
honour to introduce Her Excellency Dr. Vindhya
Persaud, Minister of Human Services and Social
Security of Guyana, to deliver a pre-recorded statement.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (see annex 17 and A/76/569).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Algeria to introduce a statement by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and National Community
Abroad of Algeria.
Ms. Charikhi (Algeria): I have the honour to
introduce the pre-recorded statement of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and National Community Abroad of
Algeria, His Excellency Mr. Ramtane Lamamra.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (see annex 18 and A/76/569).

A/76/PV.37

A pre-recorded video statement was shown in
the General Assembly Hall (see annex 20 and
A/76/569).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria to introduce a statement by the
Vice Minister and National Coordinator for Combating
Trafficking in Persons of the Republic of Austria.
Mr. Almoslechner (Austria): I have the honour to
introduce a pre-recorded statement by Her Excellency
Ms. Petra Schneebauer, National Coordinator for
Combating Trafficking in Persons of the Republic
of Austria.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (see annex 21 and A/76/569).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of China to introduce a statement by the

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Greece to introduce a statement by the
Alternate Minister for Foreign Affairs of Greece.

Vice Minister of Public Security of China.

Mr. Kezas (Greece): I have the honour of
introducing the Alternate Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Greece, Mr. Miltiadis Vavitsiotis, who will deliver
the national statement of Greece via pre-recorded video.

have the honour to introduce the pre-recorded statement

A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (see annex 19 and A/76/569).

A pre-recorded video statement was shown in

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Thailand to introduce a statement by
the Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom
of Thailand.
Mr. Prongthura (Thailand): I have the honour
to introduce His Excellency Mr. Vijavat Isarabhakdi,
Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of
Thailand, to deliver a pre-recorded statement.

Mrs. Zhang Jiarui (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
of the Vice Minister of Public Security of China, His
Excellency Mr. Du Hangwei.

the General Assembly Hall (see annex 22 and
A/76/569).
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker for this meeting. We shall hear the remaining
speakers tomorrow morning at 10 a.m. in this Hall.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

21-3496815/50

A/76/PV.37

Annex 1

22/11/2021

Statement by Ms. Ghada Waly, Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen,
I am honoured to address this high-level meeting on the appraisal of the Global
Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons.
I thank the President of the General Assembly for bringing us together, and I
congratulate the Permanent Representatives of the Dominican Republic and of the
Philippines on successfully guiding the intergovernmental negotiations in their role
as co-facilitators.
This meeting is an important opportunity for countries to take stock of
achievements under the Global Plan of Action, identify gaps and pledge to ensure
that joint responses are adapted to the needs of victims.
The COVID-19 crisis has deprived many victims of access to essential
services. It has increased trafficking risks and vulnerabilities due to lockdowns,
learning disruptions and loss of livelihoods. More time spent online has also led to
more exploitation and to the misuse of technology.
The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime supports your work to align
responses to the reality of trafficking in the pandemic and beyond.
Preventing and combating trafficking is a key priority of the UNODC Strategy
2021-2025, our Strategic Vision for Africa 2030 and our upcoming Strategic Vision
for Latin America and the Caribbean.
In our latest Global Report on Trafficking in Persons, we analysed how
socioeconomic conditions, such as those caused by the COVID-19 recession, make
people more vulnerable to trafficking. This summer, we published a landmark
study identifying ways of better supporting victims and frontline organizations in
future crises.
Our dedicated global programmes have already assisted 55 countries in 2021
to advance implementation of the United Nations Trafficking Protocol by enhancing
anti-trafficking laws, conducting successful prosecutions across jurisdictions and
training practitioners.
Our support further includes building digital capacity and helping Member
States leverage financial evidence to detect and prosecute trafficking. We also
assist countries in adopting sustainable public procurement processes and policies
addressing human trafficking in supply chains.
On all those fronts, we encourage public-private partnerships, including with
technology companies and the financial sector, to promote ethical practices, inform
investigations and help end impunity for traffickers.
Throughout its work, UNODC promotes victim-centred approaches and I
very much welcome the commitment in the Declaration to recognizing victims and
ensuring their access to justice.
The United Nations Trust Fund for Victims of Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, managed by UNODC, continues to directly assist

16/50

21-34968

22/11/2021

A/76/PV.37

more than 5,000 victims per year through front-line NGOs, carefully selected under
its small grants programme.
UNODC has celebrated and supported trafficking survivors as agents of
change through its campaign for the 2021 World Day against Trafficking in Persons,
which called on the international community to let victims’ voices lead the way.
I commend you for having listened to survivors in the elaboration of the
Political Declaration and for your consultations with experts, civil society and the 30
member organizations of the Inter-Agency Coordination Group against Trafficking
in Persons, which our Office is proud to coordinate.
UNODC will continue working with you and with all our partners to put an
end to the exploitation of people for profit, prosecute traffickers and help victims find
justice and rebuild their lives. Thank you.

21-3496817/50

A/76/PV.37

22/11/2021

Annex 2
Statement by Mrs. Marta Lucía Ramírez, Vice-President and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia
[Original: Spanish]
His Excellency António Guterres, Secretary-General;
His Excellency Abdulla Shahid, Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Maldives and President of the General Assembly;
Ms. Ghada Waly, Executive Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime;
Ms. Grazia Giammarinaro, Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council
on trafficking in persons, especially women and children;
Distinguished representatives of Member States and civil society; To all those
who are with us,
On behalf of the President of Colombia, Iván Duque Márquez, and all the
Colombian people, and today in my capacity as Vice-President and Minister for
Foreign Affairs, I would like to express my gratitude for the invitation to participate
in this High-level Meeting on the appraisal of the United Nations Global Plan of
Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons. This Plan constitutes a road map to prevent
and combat trafficking in persons, and it rightly stresses the importance of protecting
and assisting victims, as well as prosecuting those responsible for committing such
heinous crimes. I am confident that the declaration that we will adopt today will
be conducive to furthering the efforts made by each Member State in the fight
against trafficking in human beings with more partnerships and greater cooperation.
However, I must insist on the need to focus our efforts above all on prevention. That
is the real strategy that will enable us to reduce this abominable crime of trafficking
in human beings.
According to the 2020 Global Report on Trafficking in Persons, 65 per cent of
the victims of this criminal activity remain women and girls, and sexual exploitation
is the main cause of exploitation in the world, representing 50 per cent of the cases
identified, followed by forced labour as well as begging.
The economic recession resulting from the pandemic has increased the crime of
human trafficking and has exacerbated the conditions of vulnerability of the victims,
which means minimal opportunities for access to education and employment, as well
as increased cases of domestic violence — aspects that create an environment of
heightened vulnerability, which is pitifully exploited by these networks and criminal
mafias that trade in human beings.
Even more serious, the current irregular migratory situation has put the lives
of migrants at risk and exposes them to sexual and labour exploitation, human
trafficking and kidnapping, among many other crimes. On this occasion, I call
on States to redouble their efforts and to form a common front to address the new
challenges arising from irregular migratory flows. It is necessary to have effective
and coordinated responses to confront transnational human trafficking networks.
With regard to our hemisphere, Colombia proposed the establishment of an expert
group in which the Prosecutor’s Offices of all our countries and the police work
together in the region to detect and act in a coordinated and resolute forceful manner
against these human trafficking mafias.
18/50

21-34968

22/11/2021

A/76/PV.37

Tackling migration in a comprehensive and coordinated manner is a priority for
Colombia. That is why the Government of President Iván Duque Márquez made the
most ambitious commitment that the world has ever known by adopting the temporary
protection status for Venezuelan migrants, with the precise aim of regularizing the
status of 2 million migrants who have been forced to leave their country due to the
dictatorship of Nicolás Maduro Moros. This temporary protection status allows for
the comprehensive and humanitarian care of this population, opening the way for
Venezuelans to have access to education, health care and decent work under equal
conditions, particularly in terms of dignity for those people — a genuine commitment
to ensuring human rights.
In response to our Government’s commitment to the fight against human
trafficking, we are making very significant efforts, including the implementation
in 2020 of a strategy to combat human trafficking, which is being developed by
the Ministry of the Interior in Colombia, and was developed with the participation
of civil society. Likewise, the Intersectoral Commission for the prevention of
recruitment, use, utilization and sexual violation of children and adolescents has
been strengthened. This strategy has been in place since 2019.
The greatest challenge facing all States is to increase technical capacities to
deal with the new forms of the crime of trafficking in persons. To that end, it is
essential to constantly exchange experiences, lessons learned and best practices and,
in the context of the Global Plan of Action that brings us together today, to redouble
our efforts to confront criminal networks and to place respect for, and the guarantee
of, the human rights of victims at the centre of the discussion in order to provide them
with assistance and appropriate and comprehensive protection.
Today the migratory events that we are experiencing throughout the world
are a response to the economic need and the lack of opportunities that many human
beings face in their countries. That is why we, as States, must act, first, based on the
principle of humanity, not forgetting that these are human beings who are in need and
who are looking for a place on Earth where they and their families can find stability.
Secondly, it is also a principle of security for States, both the receiving States and
the transit States. There is a security issue involved, and we must clearly verify that
these migrants are not also being exploited by drug-trafficking networks and others,
precisely to threaten States. Thirdly, it is a principle of solidarity. No State, however
rich or important it may be, has the capacity to endlessly absorb all the migrants who
arrive at its borders. We must therefore adopt the principle of shared responsibility.
At the regional level, Colombia has been leading the efforts towards a common,
coordinated and complementary policy among us given this massive migration that
has been increasing from Haiti, Venezuela and, unfortunately, in some cases also
from Cuba, as well as a number of African migrants. This is an issue that is just
beginning for our hemisphere. We do not have the same experience as Europe in
managing migratory crises, but we must be coordinated, support each other and
understand the principle of humanity, the principle of security and the principle of
solidarity among all States.
Thank you very much.

21-3496819/50

A/76/PV.37

22/11/2021

Annex 3
Statement by the Honourable Mr. Horace Chang, Minister of
National Security and Deputy Prime Minister of Jamaica
Mr. President, Excellencies, distinguished delegates,
Jamaica welcomes the convening of this High-Level Meeting of the General
Assembly to review the progress achieved in the implementation of the Global Plan
of Action (GPA) to Combat Trafficking in Persons. As we collectively reflect on
the achievements, gaps and challenges, we also recognize the mutually reinforcing
relationship of the progress we are making to implement the SDGs, Objective 10 of
the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration and the Global Plan
of Action.
This meeting is therefore relevant and timely given shifts in the security
landscape as a result of the ongoing global coronavirus pandemic. Jamaica applauds
the global efforts made in the fight to combat trafficking in persons in all forms.
We are resolute in our commitment to do our part to advance a comprehensive antitrafficking response to protect, prevent, prosecute and to foster partnerships towards
the elimination of this scourge.
Jamaica accords the highest level of political commitment to this fight.
Cognizant of the impact of the ongoing coronavirus pandemic to push victims of
trafficking further underground, we continue to implement public education and
awareness-raising campaigns to inform the general public and persons at risk of
being trafficked.
Mr. President,
At the same time, Jamaica continues to strengthen the institutional framework
to tackle trafficking in persons. Since its establishment in 2015, the Office of the
National Rapporteur for Trafficking in Persons has been resourced to allow it to
function more effectively. In 2019, an Anti-Human Trafficking Officer post was
created in the organization, and the team was further strengthened in 2020, with the
addition of a Research Analyst who provides research strategy and undertakes data
analysis, collection and reporting.
We are mindful that there are global challenges in implementing the Global
Plan of Action. There is still insufficient data collection on trafficking in persons
to inform proper data analysis across jurisdictions. We fully support a system that
allows for standardized data collection across Member States. There is further an
urgent need to establish mechanisms for cooperation between source, transit and
destination countries. This can be achieved only through information-sharing and
greater collaboration and partnership at the global level.
Mr. President, within the context of the ongoing global coronavirus pandemic,
which has exacerbated vulnerability of individuals at risk globally, we must address
the root causes of trafficking in persons, eliminate the conditions of poverty
and underdevelopment.
Mr. President, the Global Plan of Action is one vehicle through which the global
community can achieve success. However, in the words of the former SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, Kofi Annan,
20/50

21-34968

22/11/2021

A/76/PV.37

“These conventions will not end trafficking on their own, but they are
part of the legal framework necessary for our efforts. Policies and practices
must also be strengthened at the regional and national levels.”
Mr. President, Jamaica is fully committed to fulfilling our responsibilities as
part of the global community recognizing that addressing this global challenge of
human trafficking requires a global response. We must build on the progress we have
made and urgently translate our words into action that has to be the commitment of
all Member States.
I thank you.

21-3496821/50

A/76/PV.37

22/11/2021

Annex 4
Statement by Ms. Ylva Johansson, European Commissioner for
Home Affairs of the European Union
Dear President,
Honourable members of the General Assembly,
Dear participants in this high-level meeting,
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States.
Trafficking in human beings is a serious crime. A severe violation of human
rights. Of fundamental rights, affecting thousands of people in the European Union
and worldwide.
As a transnational and global crime, it demands a united approach. The EU
stands firm behind the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and the Trafficking in Persons Protocol, to which the EU and its member
States are parties.
Trafficking in human beings is not in the first place about people smuggling.
It is about exploiting people.
But victims of trafficking are sometimes smuggled. Migrant smugglers are
often organised criminals — who also engage in other crimes like trafficking. And
irregular migration increases the risks of trafficking, with traffickers targeting and
abusing vulnerable migrants.
It is highly concerning that Belarus, is currently instrumentalizing migration
on a large scale for political purposes — a practice that amounts to migrant smuggling.
The dire situation in Belarus increases the risk of people being trafficked. This is
unacceptable. The EU condemns the instrumentalization and abuse of migrants by
the regime in Belarus.
The fight against trafficking in human beings is a European Union priority.
The EU Strategy on Combating Trafficking in Human Beings lays down concrete
actions to combat this crime. In a comprehensive way, from prevention and protection
of victims, to the prosecution and conviction of perpetrators. The strategy takes into
account in particular women and children, as well as trafficking for sexual exploitation.
The EU Strategy focuses on four main areas of action: reducing the demand that
fosters trafficking in human beings for all forms of exploitation. Breaking the business
model of traffickers, online and offline. Protecting, supporting and empowering
victims, especially women and children. And promoting international cooperation.
In the European Union, criminals mainly traffic their victims for sexual
exploitation. Nearly three quarters of all victims in the EU and 92 per cent of the
victims trafficked for sexual exploitation are women and girls. One in four victims of
trafficking is a child. These trends are also reflected at the global level.
Demand fosters exploitation of vulnerable people, taken advantage of by
traffickers. Especially in high-risk sectors and high-risk environments. Bringing
huge revenues to organized-crime groups and others who profit from the exploitation
of the bodies, services and labour of trafficked victims.
22/50

21-34968

22/11/2021

A/76/PV.37

€14 billion — that is the estimated criminal revenue of trafficking for sexual
exploitation in the European Union. In one single year. Reducing demand is essential
to deprive traffickers of their criminal profits and to make sure crime does not pay.
The EU is committed to addressing the gender dimension of trafficking
in human beings and the specific vulnerabilities of women and children. Early
identification of victims is crucial to promptly assist, support and protect victims of
trafficking in human beings and to enable police and prosecution authorities to better
investigate and punish traffickers.
It is key to train professionals who are likely to come into contact with victims,
and essential to exchange best practices among practitioners to improve cooperation
for assistance and support to victims.
During the COVID-19 pandemic, traffickers increasingly moved online for
every phase of trafficking. Recruitment and exploitation of victims. Organization
of transport and accommodation. Advertising victims online and reaching out to
potential clients. Controlling victims. Communicating between perpetrators and
hiding the criminal proceeds.
Children are at particular risk of falling victim to traffickers online. Internet
and technology companies have a role to play to reduce the use of online platforms
for the recruitment and exploitation of victims.
We must also increase law enforcement and judicial authorities’ capacity to
tackle the digital business model of traffickers. That includes detection of signs of
exploitation in the growing number of online advertisements and obtaining crucial
digital evidence. The prosecution and conviction of criminals has to improve, online
and offline.
A comprehensive approach is clearly needed. In this context, the adoption
of the Political Declaration on the implementation of the Global Plan of Action to
Combat Trafficking in Persons is crucial in our joint and multilateral effort to fight
this horrible crime.

21-3496823/50

A/76/PV.37

22/11/2021

Annex 5
Dominican Republic
[no statement submited]

24/50

21-34968

22/11/2021

A/76/PV.37

Annex 6
Statement by Mr. Oscar Silvera Martínez, Minister of Justice of the
Republic of Cuba
[Original: Spanish]
Mr. President:
As a State party to the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and the Protocols Thereto, Cuba is firmly committed to preventing
and confronting this crime.
Trafficking in persons is rarely seen in our country. The implementation of
a zero-tolerance policy, based on the pillars of prevention, confrontation and the
protection of victims, has been key to achieving that record.
As part of Cuba’s firm commitment to combating this scourge, a national
report on human trafficking in the country has been published since 2013.
Mr. President:
Promoting effective international cooperation in confronting human trafficking
is a priority for Cuba.
In 2017, we welcomed the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons,
especially women and children, who was able to confirm the very high priority given
by the Cuban State and Government to addressing the crime.
Politicizing the issue in no way contributes to increasing or improving
international cooperation in this area.
We reject the unjustified and discriminatory inclusion of Cuba, for entirely
political reasons, in the Trafficking in Persons Report, issued unilaterally by the
United States Department of State.
It is unacceptable for the United States to charge Cuba with promoting human
trafficking and slavery on completely baseless grounds. Its goal is to discredit the
laudable work of the hundreds of thousands of Cuban health professionals and
technicians who, with their profound humanistic dedication and sense of solidarity,
have for decades volunteered their expertise in dozens of countries, including most
recently in the fight against the HIV/AIDS pandemic.
Our response to those absurd allegations is firm: we will continue to save lives
and foster the health and welfare of others wherever we are requested throughout the
world to the best of our abilities.
In conclusion, I reiterate Cuba’s firm commitment to improving the prevention
of and response to human trafficking and the protection of victims and cooperating
at the international level against this scourge.
Thank you very much.

21-3496825/50

A/76/PV.37

22/11/2021

Annex 7
Statement by Ms. Dominique Hasler, Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Education, and Sport of the Principality of Liechtenstein
Mr. President,
Liechtenstein is happy to take part in this important appraisal of the United
Nations (UN) Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons. Human
trafficking and modern slavery are defining human rights challenges of our time.
They are global — affecting all regions of the world. They thrive in conditions
conducive to vulnerability, exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic. They are the
most extreme expression of economic inequality. And they disproportionately affect
women and girls. These crimes are of enormous and gruesome proportions, and they
undermine our efforts to achieve sustainable development. In shaping our response
and strategy to take action, victims and survivors must have a strong voice.
Mr. President,
The international community agreed, long ago, on the universal abolition of
slavery in all its forms. And yet, to this day, modern slavery and human trafficking
persist around the world, with shocking levels of impunity. Ending human trafficking
and modern slavery is a priority for Liechtenstein, in line with the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, which provides us with a framework to make the world
socially, economically and environmentally more sustainable The fight against
modern slavery and human trafficking is a key component of the Agenda.
The COVID-19 pandemic has been a call on all our societies to build back
better. This must include redoubling our efforts to end trafficking and modern slavery.
Leveraging the essential role of the financial sector in ending human trafficking must
be a crucial part of this effort. We welcome that this year’s Political Declaration on
Trafficking in Persons clearly references the need for public-private partnerships
to prevent and detect human trafficking and the recognition of the important role
played by financial institutions and initiatives of Member States to contribute to
ending trafficking in persons. In this regard, we are happy to recall Liechtenstein’s
flagship Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) initiative FAST (Finance Against
Slavery and Trafficking), a public-private partnership embedded in the UN system.
FAST places financial institutions at the heart of the fight against human trafficking
and modern slavery by outlining action in the areas of compliance, responsible
investment and financial innovation. It is supported by Australia, the Netherlands,
the Norwegian Agency for Development Cooperation, as well as various private
sector partners, and carried out by the United Nations University Centre for Policy
Research. FAST is expanding its reach and making progress in its dissemination and
implementation efforts. Enhancing partnerships for FAST will remain a key objective
of Liechtenstein’s engagement on the 2030 Agenda, in particular in meeting target
8.7 of the Sustainable Development Goals, but also Goals 5, 8, 16 and 17. Sustainable
finance, meaning increased attention to environmental, social and governance (ESG)
factors, can create new pathways for investment that are key in helping us achieve
the SDGs. It is of essential importance that we treat the ESG framework in a holistic
manner, as it was conceived for the 2030 Agenda. The “S” or “Social” components
of ESG are among least measured factors in corporate sustainability despite being
among the most impactful. We need to do more to amplify the “S” in ESG, in
particular in the context of ending human trafficking and modern slavery. This is as
26/50

21-34968

22/11/2021

A/76/PV.37

much a policy issue as it is a national commitment for Liechtenstein. I look forward
to the discussions during this important appraisal and invite all of you to approach us
if you would like to join forces on the FAST Initiative.
I thank you.

21-3496827/50

A/76/PV.37

22/11/2021

Annex 8
Statement by Mr. Ali bin Saeed bin Smaikh Al Marri, Minister of
Labour of Qatar
[Original: Arabic]
Mr. President,
At the outset, I should like to thank you for your efforts in convening
this important meeting. I should also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
participation and support in opening the meeting.
Mr. President,
Qatar has supported the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons since it was adopted, in keeping with the country’s commitment
to the promotion and protection of human rights, which are central to the Qatar
National Vision 2030.
My country welcomes the adoption of the political declaration issued at this
meeting. We have affirmed our support for the declaration through the joint statement
issued by the high-level side event organized by Qatar in the margins of this meeting,
in cooperation with the United Kingdom, Austria, Bangladesh and Nigeria and the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), on accelerating the level
of commitment to fight human trafficking and modern slavery during COVID-19
and beyond.
Mr. President,
Qatar took an important step towards combating trafficking in persons by
establishing the National Committee to Combat Trafficking in Persons in 2017. The
Committee has facilitated the adoption of a national plan on combating trafficking
in persons and the follow-up to its implementation. It also coordinates the efforts of
various national agencies to prevent trafficking, bring the perpetrators to justice,
protect victims and provide them with suitable shelter and rehabilitation and form
national and international partnerships to combat trafficking in persons.
Recently, in cooperation with the office of the International Labour
Organization in Qatar, the Committee published a handbook, entitled “Our Fight
Against Forced Labour and Trafficking for Labour Exploitation in Qatar”. In
addition, the National Commission, UNODC and the mission of the International
Organization for Migration in Qatar are working together to strengthen awarenessraising, education and capacity-building efforts.
Qatar has recently taken legislative and executive measures to promote and
protect the rights of foreign migrant workers. Those measures, ground-breaking in
the region, include abolishing the kafala system and exit permits, facilitating the free
movement of labourers, setting a non-discriminatory minimum wage for labourers
and domestic workers, giving workers a more prominent voice, granting them access
to effective remedies and establishing a workers’ support and insurance fund.
Mr. President,
My country has been unstinting in its support of international efforts to combat
trafficking in persons. Qatar was one of the first countries to donate to the United
28/50

21-34968

22/11/2021

A/76/PV.37

Nations voluntary trust fund for victims of trafficking in persons, especially women
and children.
In closing, we reaffirm the commitment of Qatar to implement the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons and advance the
effort to fight this scourge at the national, regional and international levels.

21-3496829/50

A/76/PV.37

22/11/2021

Annex 9
Statement by Mr. Aníbal Torres Vásquez, Minister of Justice and
Human Rights of Peru
[Original: Spanish]
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I would like to begin my speech by mentioning that, in line with international
human rights obligations regarding human trafficking and its forms of exploitation,
the Peruvian State has adopted public policies and regulatory measures for the
prevention, prosecution and protection of victims. Specifically, I will refer to two
public policy instruments of the highest level that were adopted this year, which will
guide the actions of the State until 2030.
Both public policy instruments have considered the recommendations the
United Nations system made to Peru. Similarly, in order to address the issue in a
more effective manner and to strengthen the actions of the State, civil society is
now involved.
Specifically, the National Policy against Trafficking in Persons and its Forms
of Exploitation aims to coordinate the efforts of all public entities so as to address the
issue through various local, regional and national methods and approaches.
In addition, recognizing the impact of human trafficking on children, the
Multisectoral Policy for Children and Adolescents complements the intervention of
the State to ensure the comprehensive provision of services.
Acknowledging human trafficking as a crime that violates the human rights
and dignity of persons and hinders their development and progress, as well as their
physical and socioemotional integrity, is essential in determining the impact of
State intervention.
In this regard, Peruvian criminal legislation has specified that the consent
given by the victim in any form of exploitation lacks effect and violates human
dignity. In addition, parameters have been established for civil reparation, which
includes costs related to medical and psychological treatment, physical, social and
occupational rehabilitation and compensation for loss of opportunities, employment,
education and social benefits.
The Ministry of Justice and Human Rights provides legal assistance and
sponsorship free of charge to victims of human trafficking and other forms of
exploitation at the national level. Therefore, it should be noted that from 2018 to August
2021, 3,806 sponsorships have been provided to alleged victims of human trafficking.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I would like to thank you for inviting Peru to this space for dialogue that
enables us to share valuable experiences, identify tools to combat human trafficking,
protect victims and prosecute the perpetrators accordingly and, at the same time,
promote the important cooperation and coordination among States.
Thank you for your attention.

30/50

21-34968

22/11/2021

A/76/PV.37

Annex 10
Statement by Mr. Jean Asselborn, Minister for Foreign and
European Affairs and Minister for Immigration and Asylum of the
Grand Duchy of Luxembourg
[Original: French]
Mr. President,
We welcome the adoption of the Political Declaration on the Implementation
of the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons. The
Declaration is timely and rightly commits us to redouble our collective efforts to end
that scourge.
The COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated human trafficking through loss of
livelihoods, school closures, significant cuts in assistance programmes for trafficked
persons and travel restrictions, to name but a few. Restrictive migration policies have
also increased the vulnerability of migrants to trafficking and exploitation.
In that context, Luxembourg condemns the instrumentalization of migrants
for political purposes by the Belarusian authorities at the border of EU member
States. Such actions constitute a clear violation of international human rights law.
Luxembourg stands in solidarity with the member States that are suffering from that
hybrid attack.
We continue to make the protection of the human rights of migrants a priority.
In that regard, we recall our commitment to the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly
and Regular Migration and to the creation of regular migration routes in order to
reduce the vulnerability of migrants to trafficking.
Mr. President,
A multidisciplinary human rights approach is a fundamental element in the
fight against human trafficking. Indeed, trafficking is a multifaceted phenomenon,
the motivations for which vary considerably. First and foremost, vulnerability to
trafficking stems from intergenerational poverty, socioeconomic marginalization and
discrimination. Therefore, the fight against that scourge cannot be anchored solely
in a criminal law model, but must also pursue an approach that is based on gender
equality, decent work, social protection, sustainable development and human rights.
Luxembourg remains firmly committed to the fight against human trafficking
and is currently developing a second national action plan against trafficking. Our
action plan recognizes that the fight against trafficking requires a multidisciplinary
human rights policy. To that end, we have appointed the Consultative Human Rights
Commission of Luxembourg as the rapporteur on the prevention of trafficking at the
national level to ensure that human rights are taken into account.
Furthermore, in order to ensure the transversality of our anti-trafficking policy
and to target all forms of exploitation motivated by trafficking, including modern
slavery and forced labour, we have established an inter-ministerial monitoring
committee composed of a dozen ministries and administrations, which will facilitate
more coordinated and effective action to end the phenomenon of trafficking by
bringing together all relevant actors.
Thank you for your attention.
21-3496831/50

A/76/PV.37

22/11/2021

Annex 11
Statement by Mr. Vladimir Makei, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Belarus
[Original: Russian]
Mr. President,
At the 2005 World Summit, the President of the Republic of Belarus called for
the establishment of a global partnership to combat trafficking in persons, marking
the beginning of many years of active work by the Republic of Belarus in that area.
Resolutions initiated by Belarus resulted in the adoption by the General
Assembly of the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in
Persons, the designation of 30 July as the World Day against Trafficking in Persons
and the establishment of the United Nations voluntary trust fund for victims of
trafficking in persons. By decision of the Head of State, Belarus has made three
voluntary contributions to the fund.
We believe that those initiatives of the United Nations deserve continued support.
Despite significant progress, new forms and methods of exploiting people, new
schemes for recruiting adults and children and new mechanisms for re-trafficking
rehabilitated victims are observed every year.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has led to further tragic
developments in the ways in which those crimes are committed, pushing them into
the shadow of the digital space and making them increasingly cross-border in nature.
Trafficking in persons has also become a weapon in armed conflicts. The
Security Council must pay attention to that issue in the context of the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Efforts should also be made to increase the efficiency of cross-border
collaboration to solve crimes of trafficking in persons.
In that context, the Group of Friends United against Human Trafficking
continues to call for strengthened coordination of international efforts in that area.
At the current session of the General Assembly, Belarus submitted its
traditional resolution on improving the coordination of efforts against trafficking in
persons. We are grateful to all States for their sponsorship.
That resolution, the Global Plan of Action and today’s high-level meeting all
serve the same purpose, namely, to maintain a clear focus on trafficking in persons
and to foster international cooperation that leads to progress in combating trafficking
in persons. Dialogue and joint efforts are key to progress in any endeavour.
Thank you.

32/50

21-34968

22/11/2021

A/76/PV.37

Annex 12
Statement by Mrs. Victoria Ouédraogo Kibora, Minister of
Justice, Human Rights and Civic Promotion, Keeper of the Seals of
Burkina Faso
[Original: French]
Mr. President,
Distinguished representatives,
It is always with renewed pleasure that Burkina Faso takes part in this
important high-level event on the appraisal of the United Nations Global Plan of
Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons.
Trafficking, especially in women and children, has become an increasing
concern for West African countries, in general, and for Burkina Faso, in particular.
Indeed, the problem is increasing in an unprecedented way in my country, which is
regarded as a place of origin, transit and destination for victims of trafficking.
This reality reminds us once again of the urgent need to develop concrete and
effective measures to enhance the effectiveness of the fight, thereby strengthening
the technical and operational capacities of the bodies responsible for detecting,
prosecuting and punishing trafficking in persons.
Mr. President, Distinguished representatives,
In that regard, Burkina Faso has put in place a legal and institutional system of
enforcement, on which a national strategy to combat the problem is based. Through
this strategy, my country’s efforts are focused on four priority areas, which are set
out in the United Nations Protocol, and which also correspond to internationally
approved good practices. These four components of the fight include:
–

the prevention of trafficking in persons;

–

the protection of victims;

–

the rehabilitation of victims;

–

cooperation, both nationally and internationally.

Mr. President,
Distinguished representatives,
Since 2015, the situation in my country has been marked by the continued
presence of criminal organizations and the resurgence of the terrorist phenomenon.
This situation is not without consequences for our efforts to combat human
trafficking, such that one of the major challenges facing my country is to establish
a synergy of action among the various actors in the fight to prevent links being
established between criminal recruitment networks and internally displaced persons,
particularly women and children.
Mr. President, Distinguished representatives,
Finally, I would like to reiterate my country’s readiness to strengthen
cooperation with the other States Members of the United Nations and international
21-3496833/50

A/76/PV.37

22/11/2021

organizations to ensure the full effectiveness of the Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons.
I thank you.

34/50

21-34968

22/11/2021

A/76/PV.37

Annex 13
Statement by Mr. Teodoro L. Locsin Jr., Secretary for Foreign
Affairs of the Philippines
Trafficking in persons is antithetical to humanity. It treats humans not as
fellows but trades them as chattel; indeed, the most profitable object of commerce.
Trafficking affronts every distinguishing mark of humanity; its practice –
predatory. At a Munich Security Conference, an expert who watched them closeup noted the pleasure traffickers took in their trade and concluded that there is no
solution for it but the most drastic corrective. Globalization has only made it more
wicked with the progression of technology, communication, financial transactions
and transport.
It exists in all societies. Unlike regular commerce, it thrives even in failing
economies, especially conflict-riven countries and in the current pandemic. It points
to the once shocking, now resigned reality that demand is high and constant.
Despite its pervasiveness, trafficking in persons, says UNODC, remains a
hidden crime because societies are complicit. Effective suppression always falls short
of voluminous outrage. We know the why — the gross profit and grosser pleasure
of abusing the weak. Erasing poverty would erase it; no one wants to be treated like
an animal; but that is a long and tall order. Societies with wider rich-poor gaps have
more cases of sex trafficking. For every ten victims, five are women and two are
girls, mostly migrants. One-third are children; half for sex.
We are a labor-sending country of mostly women; but most victims are not
Filipinos. My country has protected them.
Anti-trafficking protocols are observed mostly in the talk than observance. We
have consistently ranked Tier 1 in the US Trafficking in Persons Report.
We call for increasing extra budgetary resources for UNODC and ICAT, and
for protecting rather than punishing victims for acts they are made to commit on pain
of prison where they are raped by the authorities or traded forward by them. Human
trafficking will only end with the traffickers and their enablers in governments.
Thank you.

21-3496835/50

A/76/PV.37

22/11/2021

Annex 14
Statement by the Honourable Owen Bonnici, Minister for Equality,
Research andd Innovation of the Republic of Malta
Trafficking in human beings takes many forms and affects people of all
ages, genders, and races. From the physical violence and torture of victims, to
the psychological and emotional trauma endured and the economic and political
implication of the relentless crime, the repercussions of human trafficking are
extensive and far-reaching.
As a result, it is evident that this crime has an undeniable impact on every one
of us and the fight against it needs to be stronger and more effective.
We are aware that, most of the time, traffickers search for those people who
are vulnerable or find themselves in a vulnerable situation. They prey on the poor,
isolated and weak. It is evident that certain factors contribute and make individuals,
social groups, and communities more vulnerable to trafficking and exploitation.
As a nation we are raising awareness of factors which are known to be the
underlying cause of inadequate employment opportunities, political and economic
insecurity, as well as violations of human rights such as discrimination and genderbased violence.
Over the past years, the problem of human trafficking has become a focus of
the Maltese Government, which joins advocacy agendas worldwide. The Government
of Malta remains committed to suppressing this crime through several initiatives,
including the development of victim assistance services, training of government
officials, and raising of public awareness through national campaigns.
Furthermore, the legislative framework related to actions against trafficking
in human beings has also evolved considerably. As a way of example, in 2018, the
minimum penalty for this crime was increased from four to six years, while the
maximum penalty is that of 12 years. Moreover, the Victims of Crime Act was further
amended to introduce two new services to the list of minimum services offered to
victims of crimes, namely medical treatment, and protection measures against the
risks of intimidation and retaliation. In this regard, it is important to emphasize that
these services are provided to human trafficking victims even when the offence was
committed outside the Maltese territories.
Special support measures for child victims of trafficking are also incorporated
in Maltese legislation. The Minor Protection (Alternative Care) Act allows for the
formulation of a comprehensible child-friendly framework aligned with children’s
rights, specifically aimed at addressing abuse, neglect, harassment, ill-treatment,
exploitation, abandonment, exposure, and trafficking of minors. The act contains
several important protection measures that are delineated in the council of Europe’s
Guidelines of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe on Child-friendly
Justice. It covers various aspects of child protection, including a review of the
childcare system, protection of children during judicial procedures, the availability
of children’s advocates and issues related to foster care.
In September 2019, a public consultation was launched with a view to carrying
out a reform on human trafficking and prostitution. As part of this process, the
Government intends to develop a comprehensive National Strategy against this
crime. The anti-trafficking portfolio was recently transferred from the Ministry for
36/50

21-34968

22/11/2021

A/76/PV.37

Home Affairs, National Security, and Law Enforcement (MHSE) to the Ministry for
Equality, Research, and Innovation (MFER), to the Human Rights Directorate. The
Human Rights Directorate took over reporting duties in relation to human trafficking
for questionnaires and surveys both at the national and international levels. It also
coordinates and collaborates with other ministries as necessary to ensure that the
Government procures the necessary resources to spearhead the anti-human trafficking
policy and succeed in its endeavors.
The newly created Human Rights Initiatives unit is coordinating the reform on
human trafficking. In this regard, Malta is expected to achieve its ultimate objective
of designing and implementing a new strategy and to strengthen the existing action
plan, to address and deter the phenomenon of this crime. This reform requires special
attention and expertise due to its complex, urgent, and transnational nature. Once
implemented, the strategy should present strategic goals and specific objectives
which are clearly defined both qualitatively and quantitatively and which are based
on public measures and activities to be supported institutionally and financially,
and it will include measures which are verifiable through a detailed monitoring and
assessment process.
To conclude, it is essential to state that the Maltese Government takes a
comprehensive approach in combating this crime and enlists all relevant stakeholders
that can help fight this phenomenon. Several initiatives and programmes have enabled
the Government to strengthen the capacity of national and local authorities, as well
as civil society organizations, in preventing thatat crime, protecting the victims,
and prosecuting the perpetrators. In this regard, the “Human like you” campaign
is a national campaign intended to raise awareness off the offence and encourages
victims to reach out for help. Moreover, training law enforcement agencies and other
practitioners have also aided and strengthened the prosecution’s efforts to enable
them to bring the perpetrators of this crime to justice.
Thank you.

21-3496837/50

A/76/PV.37

22/11/2021

Annex 15
Netherlands
[no statement submitted]

38/50

21-34968

22/11/2021

A/76/PV.37

Annex 16
Statement by Ms. Helen McEntee, Minister of Justice of Ireland
Human trafficking is a particularly heinous crime, based on deception and
exploitation of vulnerable people.
The Irish Government is serious about preventing and prosecuting human
trafficking, and we are confident that the victim-centred policy approach we are
taking will encourage more victims to come forward which will, in turn, strengthen
prosecutions and convictions.
There are two areas of progress in particular that I wish to highlight.
The first is the approval by Government earlier this year to revise the National
Referral Mechanism (NRM) to make it easier for victims of trafficking to come
forward, be identified and access advice, accommodation and support, which is a
significant advancement.
The NRM provides a way for all agencies, both State and civil society, to
co-operate, share information about potential victims, identify those victims and
facilitate their access to advice, accommodation and support.
Currently, when suspected victims of human trafficking are encountered
by, or referred to, An Garda Síochána — Irish police — they are provided with a
wide range of services by both the Government and NGOs through the NRM. It is
widely accepted that having the Gardaí as the sole competent authority for the formal
recognition of people as victims of human trafficking is not an adequate response.
The new approach acknowledges other state bodies and NGOs have a role in
identifying victims of human trafficking and referring them to the NRM.
We want to be sure that every victim of trafficking is identified and helped
so we can support them. Doing this will also help us gather more information and
evidence in order to bring to justice the traffickers who prey on vulnerable people
with no regard for the lives and safety of their victims.
I also want to note today the development of a new National Action Plan on
human trafficking. A consultant has produced a short and focussed analysis of the
current position in relation to human trafficking in Ireland. The analysis includes a
research review, a synopsis of the extent of trafficking in Ireland and a summary of
issues to address.
The Department of Justice is now engaged with a working group to draft the
new National Action Plan high-level goals and outcomes.
Finally, I want to briefly mention a number of other initiatives to combat
this crime.
The development of training, through NGOs, targeting front line staff in
industries such as hospitality, airline, shipping and security who may come into
contact with trafficked persons is under way.
There has been an increase in funding for supporting victims of crime generally
and increased funding dedicated specifically to supporting victims of trafficking.
21-3496839/50

A/76/PV.37

22/11/2021

Also, the Department of Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth
intends to procure and open a dedicated shelter for victims of human trafficking, in
particular for female victims of sexual exploitation.
A specialised Garda Unit, the Human Trafficking Investigation and
Coordination Unit (HTICU), has been in place since 2009 to conduct investigations
into human trafficking. It also provides advice, support and where necessary,
operational assistance to investigations at district level.
This Government is aware that vulnerable people are trafficked into Ireland
for exploitation reasons including sexual exploitation, forced labour and forced
criminality. This Government is determined to combat this insidious crime.

40/50

21-34968

22/11/2021

A/76/PV.37

Annex 17
Statement by Dr. Vindhya Persaud, Minister of Human Services
and Social Security of the Co-operative Republic of Guyana
Mr. President,
Guyana is pleased to participate in this critical high-level meeting and to
provide an update on our national efforts in combating trafficking in persons.
The 2020 Global Report on Trafficking in Persons by the UNODC paints a
grim picture which all Member States should take very seriously.
Guyana recognizes that trafficking in persons transcends borders and requires
a coordinated global effort among Member States through bilateral, regional and
international mechanisms in partnerships with the United Nations system and other
relevant stakeholders.
Mr. President,
The Government of Guyana has a zero-tolerance policy for trafficking in
persons and is committed to the prevention of trafficking and protection of victims
within its available resources and to the prosecution of traffickers. Over the years,
Guyana has incrementally increased its budgeted allocations to fight trafficking
in persons.
Guyana’s national anti-trafficking efforts are coordinated by a broad-based
ministerial task force comprised of government and non- government entities.
The national action plan includes a strong training component that aims to
prepare front-line workers, police and community policing groups, customs officers,
transport operators and members of civil society with the skills to identify victims
of trafficking.
Guyana has improved its capacity to collect information and report on
suspected cases of trafficking, conduct undercover operations, provide support to
victims to rebuild their lives and/or facilitate their repatriation when requested.
Ongoing public awareness programmes are conducted in foreign languages and some
indigenous languages.
Recent initiatives include offering a bilingual anti-trafficking 24-hour hotline
to assist Spanish-speaking victims and the development of standard operating
procedures for victim identification. There has also been progress in dismantling
some criminal networks in Guyana involved in trafficking.
Government shelters offer specialized care for victims, including training,
translation, legal and medical services, and psychological therapy. Government also
provides financial support to NGO-managed shelters while direct financial and other
assistance are provided to victims who opt not to stay in a shelter.
The government is currently finalizing our 2021-2025 National Action Plan
for the Prevention and Response to Trafficking in Persons. The revised CombatingTrafficking in Persons Act will be presented to the National Assembly before year end.
Mr. President
Despite the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, Guyana has maintained its
anti-trafficking programme.
21-3496841/50

A/76/PV.37

22/11/2021

In conclusion, Guyana remains committed to working at all levels to reduce
trafficking of persons within our available resources. Guyana welcomes the
consensual adoption of the 2021 Political Declaration.
I thank you.

42/50

21-34968

22/11/2021

A/76/PV.37

Annex 18
Statement by Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, Minister for Foreign Affairs
and National Community Abroad of the People’s Democratic
Republic of Algeria
Mr. President of the General Assembly,
Mr. Secretary-General,
Excellencies,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
At the outset, I would like to commend the Organization on this important
meeting dedicated to the fight against human trafficking, a crime targeting the most
vulnerable persons, especially women and children, and which constitutes an abject
violation of human dignity, a crime that UNODC considers as the third most lucrative
criminal trafficking after the trafficking in arms and drugs.
I would like also to express our support to the Political Declaration of this
high-level meeting, which reinvigorates our common will and resolve to put an end to
this horrific crime, through the implementation of the necessary measures upstream
and downstream.
We strongly believe that time has come to translate this political will into
concrete actions that will strengthen international cooperation with the aim of
preventing this crime, protecting the victims and ensuring that impunity will no
longer prevail.
Excellencies,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Let me reiterate Algeria’s full commitment and support to the Global Plan
of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons, as this comprehensive and concerted
framework remains the cornerstone of our collective efforts against this crime. From
our perspective, more efforts are needed to tackle the root causes of this crime, as
well as the factors aggravating its devastating consequences.
Indeed, armed conflicts, political crises, terrorism and violent extremism, as
well as the increased levels of poverty and the widening development gap within and
among countries, are all factors that constitute the underlying causes and the fueling
factors which turn vulnerable people into easy prey for transnational organized
crime networks.
Against the depth and complexity of the root causes of this evil, preventive
measures remain, in our opinion, the best remedy, which requires the commitment
of all States to redouble their efforts in order to fight poverty, economic inequalities
and underdevelopment, while promoting democratic values and the rule of law, as
part of a holistic approach that addresses both the causes of human trafficking and
its consequences.
Excellencies,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
21-3496843/50

A/76/PV.37

22/11/2021

It goes without saying that human trafficking is, nowadays, a global crisis
affecting countries of origin, transit, and destination alike.
Algeria has not been spared by this borderless phenomenon, mainly because of
the proliferation of conflicts and crises in its neighboring region and in the continent
that is also plagued by terrorism and trafficking in arms and drugs.
I would like to highlight, in this regard, that the Algerian Government continues
to devote the necessary resources to combat trafficking in persons, in particular
through the establishment since 2015, of the National Committee for the Prevention
and Fight against Trafficking in Persons. This committee has greatly contributed to
expand the legal framework and improve the operational aspect of our efforts.
In addition, the Government is in the process of finalizing the Law on the
prevention, protection, and prosecution of the crime of trafficking in persons. This
law will pull together all the relevant legal provisions provided in the penal code and
the law on the protection of children, in addition to establishing a specific global
framework for victims, through the creation of accommodation centers to protect
them and preserve their dignity, in full compliance with our international obligations,
in particular those emanating from the Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and the Protocols thereto, aimed at preventing, suppressing and punishing
trafficking in persons, in particular against women and children.
Furthermore, being the Government’s focal point in the fight against
trafficking in persons, the National Committee plays a key role in raising awareness
among all national actors about the nature and multiple facets of this crime, with the
involvement of the civil society, which remains a key player in this regard.
However, in the face of the complex interconnections between the different
branches of transnational organized crime, our separate efforts will have little impact
if not combined together.
Algeria is, therefore, convinced that no country alone can beat this scourge,
which requires targeted global partnerships and international solidarity anchored in
the vision of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Algeria, which remains fully committed to the fight against trafficking in
persons, calls for the full implementation of United Nations policies and programs
against trafficking in persons, including the commitments deriving from the Political
Declaration that we have just adopted.
I thank you for your kind attention.

44/50

21-34968

22/11/2021

A/76/PV.37

Annex 19
Statement by Mr. Miltiadis Varvitsiotis, Alternate Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Greece
Excellencies, Dear Colleagues,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
It is a privilege for me today to address the plenary of the High-Level Meeting
of the General Assembly on the implementation of the UN Global Plan of Action to
combat trafficking in persons.
Human trafficking is indeed one of the major challenges faced by the global
community. The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted new dangers for victims of
human trafficking and smuggling, especially for more vulnerable groups, like women
and unaccompanied minors. This becomes even worse, according to the World
Bank, since the pandemic and the ensuing global recession will force some forty to
sixty million people into extreme poverty and that, at the same time, international
remittances have been reduced by twenty percent. The travel restrictions can lead
many migrants or asylum seekers to look for more dangerous migration routes. In
Greece, due to our geographical location, as a gateway to the EU and Schengen Area,
we are familiar with the inhumane practices of human traffickers.
So, we followed concrete steps in order to fight human trafficking with a
special emphasis on unaccompanied minors. The Office of the National Rapporteur
on trafficking in persons, at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, was established in
2013. The national referral mechanism for the protection and support of victims of
trafficking was officially launched in 2019. The Greek Penal Code was amended in
July 2019 and November 2021 in order to enhance harmonization with European and
international standards. In addition, a new law on asylum and referral procedures
contains provisions for vulnerable populations on the move, including the victims of
trafficking. Greece has also ratified the Council of Europe Convention on preventing
and combating violence against women and domestic violence (the so-called Istanbul
Convention) and I would like to express at this point our disappointment that certain
Member States of the United Nations, European Union and of the Council of Europe
have withdrawn from this important convention.
Ladies and gentlemen, we remain committed to achieving the main goals
emanating from the UN Global Plan of Action. However, the instrumentalization of
migrants for political motives sends vulnerable persons, like women and children,
into the hands of traffickers. We have been on the front lines for years now, in our land
and maritime borders, which are at the same time external borders of the European
Union. In the Aegean Sea, we have become familiar with the inhumane practices
followed by human traffickers and supported or encouraged by authorities of third
countries. We have saved thousands of human lives at sea, and we are determined to
continue to do so. As long as human trafficking is permitted or encouraged by third
parties, it is vital to maintain our humanity and do everything we can for the victims.
It is crucial to send a message today that the cooperation and understanding among
neighbouring countries is vital.
Thank you for your attention.
21-3496845/50

A/76/PV.37

22/11/2021

Annex 20
Statement by Mr. Vijavat Isarabhakdi, Vice Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Kingdom of Thailand
Mr. President, Excellencies, Distinguished Delegates,
Human trafficking is a violation of basic human rights. It is akin to modernday slavery when victims are deprived of their rights over their own bodies and their
lives. The continuing trend of trafficking in persons in all regions of the world is
highly worrisome. This must not be tolerated. The international community must
redouble its efforts and take action to fight this heinous crime.
The Global Plan of Action has provided us with a comprehensive framework
for action, with the call for prevention, protection of victims, prosecution of recruiters
and traffickers, and partnership. Its people-centered, victim-focused, gender-specific
and rights-based approaches continue to be our guiding principles in moving forward.
For Thailand, combating human trafficking is a national agenda. The
COVID-19 situation has led to an overall decline of cross-border human trafficking
cases in Thailand due to strict border controls. However, online sexual exploitation
and trafficking through the Internet have significantly increased to around 30 — 50
per cent of the total human trafficking cases in the last 2 years.
Information technology and the Internet have made it easy to access a much
larger group of potential victims. Traffickers are currently using technology to
profile, recruit, control and exploit their victim, while being able to hide illegal
materials stemming from trafficking and their real identities from investigators.
They can also operate in multiple locations at the same time. Law enforcement has
become increasingly challenging, since any investigation requires cooperation across
borders, as well as digital expertise. Therefore, capacity-building and cooperation
among countries are much needed in this area.
We also need to address human trafficking at its root causes, namely the
demand side, social and economic inequality worldwide,and the vulnerabilities
of people, especially during the COVID-19 pandemic. Governments must address
poverty and underdevelopment, as well as invest in people through education, health
care, jobs and livelihood opportunities.
The implementation of the Global Plan of Action should be further
strengthened and integrated in our continued efforts to advance the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
Prevention of human trafficking and protection of victims must be a part of
our inclusive response to the pandemic as well as our recovery strategy to ensure that
no one is left behind.
Thank you, Mr. President.

46/50

21-34968

22/11/2021

A/76/PV.37

Annex 21
Statement by Ms. Petra Schneebauer, Vice-Minister and National
Coordinator for Combating Human Trafficking of the Federal
Ministry for European and International Affairs of the Republic of
Austria
Mr. President,
Mr. Secretary-General,
Excellences, distinguished delegates, esteemed colleagues,
Having been a member of the United Nations family in New York for more
than four years at the turn of the millennium, I am more than pleased to join you after
a very long time — even if only virtually.
The United Nations Organization is, of course, a frontrunner in the global
fight against trafficking in human beings — it does so in the General Assembly in
New York as well as in Vienna through UNODC.
As we gather today at the General Assembly, let me thank the Permanent
Representatives of the Philippines and the Dominican Republic as the co-facilitators
of the Political Declaration.
The fight against human trafficking is international in nature. But the three
key elements — the three Cs of coordination, cooperation and commitment, as I call
them — must start with and within every single Member State of the United Nations.
That is the reason why the Austrian Government set up a task force on
combatting human trafficking in 2004, which I have had the honour to chair the past
couple of years.
The task force brings together all relevant Austrian stakeholders. Let me
underline the importance of specialized non-governmental organizations in that
regard. They are essential and key as they are the ones working on the ground,
bringing to life the victim-centred approach by really creating a space of trust for
those affected by human trafficking.
Austria’s major tool against human trafficking is a national triannual action
plan. It presents a set of measures against human trafficking — of which there are
currently 109 — based on past experiences and on future research and monitoring.
It includes goals for cooperation, prevention, the protection of victims, prosecution,
and, as already mentioned, research and monitoring.
A second tool complements the national action plan: an anti-trafficking
conference organized every year. At the conference, national and international
experts alike come together to discuss pertinent aspects of that complex topic. After
featuring the links between trafficking and digitalization in 2019 and COVID-19 in
2020, this year´s conference held in Vienna in October shed a light on the various
financial aspects of human trafficking, from detecting transfers of illicit proceeds to
fair compensation for victims.
At the conference, a participant asked me what the benefit of conferences like
ours was. My answer was clear: coordination, cooperation and commitment. Those
are our best tools to fight cross-border organized crimes such as human trafficking.
21-3496847/50

A/76/PV.37

22/11/2021

Therefore, I want to reiterate Austria´s commitment to the fight against trafficking
together with the United Nations, its Member States, other international organizations
and civil society and I want to extend to all of you — already today — an invitation
to next year’s anti-trafficking conference to be held again in October on a topic of
special interest.
Thank you for your attention.

48/50

21-34968

22/11/2021

A/76/PV.37

Annex 22
Statement by Mr. Du Hangwei, Vice Minister of Public Security of
the People’s Republic of China
[Original: Chinese]
The crime of trafficking in persons is a common challenge for all countries in
the world. China highly commends the important role played by the United Nations
in coordinating the positions of all parties and promoting the fight against human
trafficking, and expresses its heartfelt thanks to colleagues from different countries
for their long-standing persistent efforts in that regard.
The Chinese Government has always attached great importance to antitrafficking work, and actively implemented the United Nations Global Plan of Action
to Combat Trafficking in Persons. China has made a sustained effort in enhancing
integrated management, human rights protection and practical international
cooperation, and provided China’s experience in promoting joint anti-trafficking
efforts, thereby contributing to safeguarding the rights and interests of women and
children around the world and building a community of shared future for mankind.
The Chinese Government has issued and implemented three action plans against
human trafficking, continuously improved the anti-trafficking mechanism led by the
Government and with the broad participation by all sectors of the society and built
a solid mechanism for preventing and combating human trafficking, rescuing and
protecting victims. In 2021, under the guidance of the Chinese Government, China
secured a complete victory in the fight against poverty, eradicating extreme poverty,
which marks a miracle in human history of poverty reduction, and represents a big
step forward in eliminating the breeding grounds of human trafficking. In 2021,
the Chinese Government revised and implemented the new law on the protection of
minors, promulgated and implemented the framework for the development of women
for 2021-2030 and the framework for the development of children for 2021-2030 to
effectively protect the legitimate rights and interests of women and children.
China’s public security organs have sustained the crackdown on human
trafficking. In 2021, China launched a reunion operation to solve the long-pending
cases of child abduction and trafficking, arrest the suspected offenders and locate and
rescue the missing and abducted children, which achieved good results. The reunion
system, an emergency information release platform on missing children developed
and built by the Ministry of Public Security, uses high technology and IT to quickly
solve cases and locate children, achieving a recover rate of 98.5 per cent.
The Chinese Government attaches great importance to international
cooperation in combating human trafficking. China’s Ministry of Public Security has
established hotlines with its counterparts from 34 countries and, regular workinglevel meeting mechanisms with 27 countries, signed 177 cooperation documents,
including cooperation agreements and MOUs with 54 countries, set up eight antitrafficking liaison offices in the border areas of Guangxi and Yunnan provinces,
and strengthened joint law enforcement operations with 13 countries and regions,
including Viet Nam.
Combating human trafficking is the common responsibility of the whole world.
The Chinese Government supports the United Nations anti-trafficking cooperation
process and will continue to promote the implementation of the following measures.
21-3496849/50

A/76/PV.37

22/11/2021

First, support United Nations anti-trafficking cooperation process through
financial contributions and other means.
Secondly, conduct bilateral and multilateral joint anti-trafficking operations
under the framework of the United Nations to vigorously combat transnational human
trafficking, and timely rescue and make proper arrangements for victims.
Thirdly, provide free technical support to countries that are willing to use the
“internet + anti-trafficking” technology to establish the mechanism to find missing
children for mutual improvement of professional capabilities in that regard.
The Chinese Government calls on all countries to deepen cooperation, improve
the mechanisms and break new grounds in the fight against human trafficking. We
stand ready to work with other countries to fully implement the United Nations
Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons and continue our efforts
towards building a community with a shared future for mankind and a world without
human trafficking.

50/50

21-34968
