General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

38

3. Any State Party to this Convention which has reason to
believe that any other State Party is acting in breach of
obligations deriving from the provisions of the Convention
may lodge a complaint with the Security Council of the
United Nations. Such a complaint should include all relevant
information as well as all possible evidence supporting its
validity.
4. Each State Party to this Convention undertakes to cooperate in carrying out any investigation which the Security
Council may initiate, in accordance with the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations, on the basis of the complaint
received by the Council. The Security Council shall inform
the States Parties of the results of the investigation.
5. Each State Party to this Convention undertakes to
provide or support assistance, in accordance with the provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations, to any State Party
which so requests, if the Security Council decides that such
Party has been harmed or is likely to be harmed as a result
of violation of the Convention.
ARTICLE

deposit of each instrument of ratification or accession and the
date of the entry into force of this Convention and of any
amendments thereto, as well as of the receipt of other notices.
6. This Convention shall be registered by the Depositary in
accordance with Article 102 of the Charter of the United
Nations.
ARTICLE

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned, being duly authorized
thereto, have signed this Convention.
DONE at ... , on the ... day of ... , ....so
Annex to the Convention

VI

Any State Party to this Convention may propose amendments to the Convention. The text of any proposed amendment
shall be submitted to the Depositary, who shall promptly
circulate it to all States Parties.
2. An amendment shall enter into force for all States
Parties to this Convention which have accepted it, upon the
deposit with the Depositary of instruments of acceptance by
a majority of States Parties. Thereafter it shall enter into
force for any remaining State Party on the date of deposit
of its instrument of acceptance.
1.

ARTICLE VII

This Convention shall be of unlimited duration.
ARTICLE VIII

1. Five years after the entry into force of this Convention,
a conference of the States Parties to the Convention shall be
convened by the Depositary at Geneva, Switzerland. The
conference shall review the operation of the Convention with
a view to ensuring that its purposes and provisions are being
realized, and shall in particular examine the effectiveness of
the provisions of paragraph 1 of article I in eliminating the
dangers of military or any other hostile use of environmental
modification techniques.
2. At intervals of not less than five years thereafter, a
majority of the States Parties to this Convention may obtain,
by submitting a proposal to this effect to the Depositary, the
convening of a conference with the same objectives.
3. If no conference has been convened pursuant to paragraph 2 of this article within ten years following the conclusion
of a previous conference, the Depositary shall solicit the views
of all States Parties to this Convention concerning the convening of such a conference. If one third or ten of the States
Parties, whichever number is less, respond affirmatively, the
Depositary shall take immediate steps to convene the conference.
ARTICLE IX
1. This Convention shall be open to all States for signature.
Any State which does not sign the Convention before its entry
into force in accordance with paragraph 3 of this article may
accede to it at any time.
2. This Convention shall be subject to ratification by
signatory States. Instruments of ratification or accession shall
be deposited with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
3. This Convention shall enter into force upon the deposit
of instruments of ratification by twenty Governments in accordance with paragraph 2 of this article.
4. For those States whose instruments of ratification or
accession are deposited after the entry into force of this Convention, it shall enter into force on the date of the deposit of
their instruments of ratification or accession.
5. The Depositary shall promptly inform all signatory and
acceding States of the date of each signature, the date of

X

This Convention, of which the Arabic, Chinese, English,
French, Russian and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall
be deposited with the Secretary-General of the United Nations,
who shall send duly certified copies thereof to the Governments of the signatory and acceding States.

Consultative Committee of Experts
The Consultative Committee of Experts shall undertake
to make appropriate findings of fact and provide expert views
relevant to any problem raised pursuant to paragraph 1 of
article V of this Convention by the State Party requesting the
convening of the Committee.
1.

2. The work of the Consultative Committee of Experts
shall be organized in such a way as to permit it to perform
the functions set forth in paragraph 1 of this annex. The Committee shall decide procedural questions relative to the organization of its work, where possible by consensus, but otherwise
by a majority of those present and voting. There shall be no
voting on matters of substance.
3. The Depositary or his representative shall serve as the
Chairman of the Committee.
4. Each expert may be assisted at meetings by one or more
advisers.

5. Each expert shall have the right, through the Chairman,
to request from States, and from international organizations,
such information and assistance as the expert considers desirable for the accomplishment of the Committee's work.

31/73.

Establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free
zone in South Asia

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3265 B (XXIX) of 9 December 1974 and 3476 B (XXX) of 11 December
197 5 concerning the establishment of a nuclear-weaponfree zone in South Asia,
Reiterating its conviction that the establishment of
nuclear-weapon-free zones in various regions of the
world is one of the measures which can contribute
most effectively to halting the proliferation of nuclear
weapons and to promoting progress towards nuclear
disarmament as a step towards general and complete
disarmament under effective international control, with
the ultimate goal of total destruction of all nuclear
weapons and their means of delivery,
Bearing in mind the comprehensive study prepared
by the Ad Hoe Group of Qualified Governmental Experts for the Study of the Question of Nuclear-WeaponFree Zones, 31
Believing that the establishment of a nuclear-weaponfrec zone in South Asia, as in other regions, will
30 The Convention was opened for signature at Geneva on
18 May 1977.
31 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 27A (A/10027/Add.1), annex I.

III.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

strengthen the security of the States of the region
against nuclear threat or attack,
Noting the affirmation by the States of South Asia
not to acquire or manufacture nuclear weapons and
to devote their nuclear programmes exclusively to the
economic and social advancement of their peoples,
Recalling that in the above-mentioned resolutions
the General Assembly had called upon the States of the
South Asian region and such other neighbouring nonnuclear-weapon States as might be interested to initiate,
without delay, necessary consultations with a view to
establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone and urged
them, in the interim, to refrain from any action contrary
to the achievement of the objectives of such a nuclearweapon-free zone,
Recalling that in resolution 3265 B (XXIX) the
General Assembly had requested the Secretary-General
to convene a meeting for the purpose of the abovementioned consultations to render such assistance as
might be required,
1. Reaffirms its endorsement in principle of the
concept of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in South Asia;
2. Urges once again the States of South Asia and
such other neighbouring non-nuclear-weapon States as
may be interested to continue to make all possible efforts to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in South
Asia and to refrain, in the meantime, from any action
contrary to this objective;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to render such
assistance as may be required to promote the above
efforts for the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free
zone in South Asia and to report on the subject to the
General Assembly at its thirty-second session;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-second session the item entitled "Establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in South Asia".
96th plenary meeting
JO December 1976
31/74.

Prohibition of the development and manufacture of new types of weapons of
mass destruction and new systems of
such weapons

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3479 (XXX) of 11 December 1975, in which it requested the Conference of the
Committee on Disarmament to proceed as soon as possible to work out the text of an agreement on the prohibition of the development and manufacture of new
types of weapons of mass destruction and new systems
of such weapons,
Being convinced of the importance of concluding an
agreement to prevent the use of scientific and technological progress for the development of new types and
systems of weapons of mass destruction,
Taking into account the report of the Conference
of the Committee on Disarmament with regard to this
question, 32
Taking note of the discussion at the Conference of
the Committee on Disarmament of the question of the
32 Ibid., Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/31/27),
paras. 178-198.

39

prohibition of the development and manufacture of new
types of weapons of mass destruction and new systems
of such weapons,
Taking into account the suggestions and relevant
documents submitted to the General Assembly on this
subject at its thirty-first session,
1. Requests the Conference of the Committee on
Disarmament to continue the negotiations, with the
assistance of qualified governmental experts, aimed at
working out the text of an agreement on the prohibition
of the development and manufacture of new types of
weapons of mass destruction and new systems of such
weapons and to submit a report on the results achieved
for consideration by the General Assembly at its thirtysecond session;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament all
documents relating to the discussion of this item by
the General Assembly at its thirty-first session;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-second session the item entitled "Prohibition
of the development and manufacture of new types of
weapons of mass destruction and new systems of such
weapons: report of the Conference of the Committee
on Disarmament".
96th plenary meeting
10 December 1976
31/75.

Implementation of the conclusions of
the first Review Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons

The General Assembly,
Recognizing that the danger of nuclear warfare remains a grave threat to the survival of mankind,
Convinced that the prevention of any further proliferation of nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive
devices remains a vital element in efforts to avert nuclear warfare,
Convinced that the promotion of this objective will
be furthered by more rapid progress towards the cessation of the nuclear-arms race and the initiation of eff cctive measures of nuclear disarmament,
Further convinced that the discontinuance of all test
explosions of nuclear weapons for all time would constitute an important step in these efforts,
Noting that the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, 27 to which about one hundred States
are parties, implies a balance of mutual responsibilities
and obligations of all States parties to the Treaty,
nuclear-weapon as well as non-nuclear-weapon States,
Recalling that the States parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons met at Geneva
from 5 to 30 May 1975 to review the operation of the
Treaty with a view to assuring that the purposes of the
preamble and the provisions of the Treaty were being
realized,
Further recalling that the Final Document of the
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 33 includes, inter
alia, a Final Declaration and a number of interpretative
statements in connexion with the Final Declaration,
:13 See

A/C. J /31/ 4.
