83
-------------

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

-------------

eral's report on youth and the conclusions of the
Seminar on Youth and Human Rights 43 that was held
at San Remo, Italy, from 28 August to 10 September
1973;
2. Appeals to Member States to intensify their
efforts to implement the principies contained in international instruments adopted in various fields regarding
youth by the United N ations and the specialized agencies and to implement the proposals for action contained
in the Secretary-General's report, particularly:
(a) To gear their educational policies and programmes to the task of ensuring educational opportunities and education more relevant to the preparation
of youth for full participation in all aspects of life and
development;
(b) To formulate health policies, imp1ement health
programmes and, where appropriate and in accordance
v. ith national priorities, make ,available information and
services relating to communicable diseases, narcotic
drugs and population programmes, in arder to ensure
that young people are able to take advantage of the
opportunities open to them;
(e) To adopt all possible means to increase work
opportunities in order to reduce or eliminate unemployment among young people;
(d) To increase opportunities for youth to participate in all aspects of national and international life,
especially in the implementation of the International
Development Strategy for the Second United Nations
Development Decade;
3. Calls upan the competent bodies of the United
Nations to provide more educational and training facilities at ali lcvels to the youth of southern Africa and of
the Non-Self-Governing Territories;
4. Calls upan international, regional and non-governmental organizations, in co-operation with youth
and youth organizations, to undertake a concerted review and appraisal of their policies and programmes
for youth, both in rural and urban areas, in the light
of the report of the Sccretary-General, with particular
relevance to education, training, ,employment and participation in decision-making, in order to enable them
to meet more satisfactorily the needs of youth and to
enable it to play a more effective role in promoting
economic and social development and peace in the
world;
5. Recommends that Unit-ed Nations reports on
youth should give more attention to the role of youth
in the world of today and its role in the actions of
peoples aimed at realizing fully the principies of the
Charter of the United Nations for peace and intemational co-operation and for the liquidation of colonialism, alien domination, racial discrimination and
apartheid, and at promoting progress and justice
throughout the world;
6. Requests the competent and concemed organizations of the United Nations system to give continued
att~ntion to regional and international meetings on the
maJor problems of concern to the young generation
and to other appropriate actions in which youth and
national and international youth organizations may effectively participate;
7. Requests the Economic and Social Council to invite the Commission for Social Development to study
the possiibility of redefining an intemational policy con43 ST/TAO/HR.47, para.

137.

cerning the involvement of youth at the national and
international levels, inoluding the advisability of an
international document on youth, taking into consideration, inter alia, relcvant provisions contained in existing intemational instruments and the views expressed
by Governments of Member States and by interested
non-governmental organizations in consultative status
with thc Council, and to submit recommendations to
the Counoil at its fifty-eighth session, to be transmitted
to the General Assembly at its thirtieth session;
. 8. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
w1th Governments, the specialized agencies, interested
non-governmenta~ organizations in consultative status
wit~ th_e Economic and Social Council and youth orgaruzat1ons, to assemble data on the problems confronting youth and on the manner in which these problem~ are being treated by the organs and executive
bod1es of the United Nations system, to prepare a report designed to facilitate planning, especially for developing countries, and to submit it to the Economic
and Social _C-=mncil at its sixty-second session, through
the Comm1ss1on for Social Development, and to the
General Assembly at its thirty-second session.
2201 st plenary meeting
14 December 1973

3141 (XXVIII). Youth, its education and its
responsibilities in the world of today

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2445 (XXIII) and 2447
(XXIII) of 19 December 1968,
Recalling further its resolution 2497 (XXIV) of 28
October 1969 on youth, its education in the respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms, its problems and needs, and its participation in national development,
Recalling, inter alia, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, the International Covenants on Human
Rights, 41 the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination45 and
the Declaration on the Promotion among Y outh of the
Ideals of Peace, Mutual Respect and Understanding
between Pcoples, 46
Recognizing the important role which the United
N ations, the specializcd agencies and the Govemments
of Member States must play to enable youth to meet
the chaHenge of the unprecedented development of
science and technology,
Recognizing further the importance of the role of
youth and its contribution to economic and social progress and to peace and international solidarity,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-Genera147
on the world social situation of youth,
l. Invites the attention of Member States to
~hcir responsi?il~ty for maintaining a policy conformmg to the prmc1ples of respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms and conducive to the elimina!i?n of coloniaI,ism: racism, apartheid and simi,!ar pol1c1es, thus preservmg and strengthening the faith of
youth in these values;
4 4 Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
4 5 Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.
46 Resolution 2037 (XX).
47 E/CN.5/486 and Om.1, E/CN.5/486/Add.1 and Oorr.1;
E/CN.5/486/Summary and Corr.1.

General Assembly-Twenty-eighth Session

84

2. Emphasizes the jmportanoe of increased co-ordination between United Nations organs and the specialized agencies in the activities and programmes relating
to youth and of continuing co-operation with the Govemments of Member States, in order to achieve an
effective and harmonious approach to the problems
confronting youth;
3. Solemnly invites ali young people to affirm their
faith in the purposes and principies of the Charter of
the United Nations in order to further the ideals of
peace, mutual respect and understanding among
peoples;
4·_ Reaffirms the importance for the administering
Powers of urgently undertaking aII necessary measures
to_ further by all appropriate means and in conformity
w1th the Charter the education and training of youth
in the countries and territories still under colonial
and alien domination and foreign occupation, with a
view to expediting their liberation and the full exercise
of their right to self-determination;
5. Urges Governments to ensure to youth:
(a) More favourable conditions in the fields of
education, training, health, social welfare and employment;
(b) An appropriate opportunity to participate in
the preparation and implementation of national development plans and in programmes of intemational cooperation;
(e) Toe possibility of participating in decisions on
questions of national interest, particularly those which
concem youth;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirtieth session on the implementation of the present resolution.

2201st plenary meeting
14 December 1973
3142 (XXVDI). Status of the lnternational Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights, the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol to the lnternational Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights

The General Assembly,
Having noted the report of the Secretary-General48
on the status of the Intemational Covenant on Econornic, Social and Cultural Rights, the Intemational
{?ovenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant ~n Civil
and Political Rights,49
Convinced that the coming into force of the International Covenants on Human Rights will greatly enhance the ability of the United Nations to promote and
encourage respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all, without distinction as to race, sex,
language or religion, and will contribute to the attainment of the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations,
Recalling its resolution 3025 (XXVII) of 18 December 1972, and in particular the hope expressed
that Member States would find it possible to take apo A/9140 and Add.1.
4.11 Resolution 2200 A

(XXI), annex.

propriate action with a view to accelerating the process
of ratification or accession to the Intemational Covenants on Human Rights,
Noting with appreciation that following its appeal
sorne Member States have acceded to the lnternational
Covenants on Human Rights,
Recalling also that, in its resolution 3060 (XXVIII)
of 2 November 1973 relating to the observance of the
twenty-fifth anniversary of the Universal Declaration
of ~-Juman Rights, the General Assembly invited States
wh1ch_ had not yet done so to ratify, inter alía, the Intemational Covenant on Economic Social and Cultural
Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol to the Inter- ·
national Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
l. Reiterates its hope that such action on the part
of Member States will be further continued;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, pursuant to
General Assembly resolutions 2200 A (XXI) of 16
December 1966 and 2788 (XXVI) of 6 December
1971, to prepare, on the basis of reports from Gov~
e~ments, . and submit to the Assembly at its twentyn~th sess1on a report on the measures taken or env1saged_ by ~ember States with a view to accelerating
the ratification of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the International
Covenant on Civil and P~litical Rights and the Optional
Protocol to the Internat10nal Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights.
2201 st plenary meeting
14 December 1973
3143 (XXVID). Report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
1-p~ Com1?1issioner50 for Refugees concerning the act1vit1es of h1s Office and having heard his statement,n
_Noting with appreciation the manner in which the
High Commissioner has, in accordance with the relevant re~olutions of the General Assembly and the
Econoffilc and Social Council and the directives of
the Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's
Programme, carried out essential humanitarian actions
Bearing in mi~d the importance of the increasingly'
useful co-operation between the High Commissioner
and. oth~r members of t~e United Nations system, result1?g ID. better co-ordmation of action and greater
effic1ency ID fields of common interest
'
Recognizing the importance of voluntary
repatriation as a permanent solution to the refugee problem
and the useful role played by the High Commissioner
in co-operation with other members of the United
~ a~ions system and non-govemmental agencies in ass1stmg them,
Noting with satisfaction the increasing number of
Governments contributing to the High Comrnissioner's
Programme and the generous attitude adopted by Govr,o_official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-eighth
Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/9012 and Corr.1), Supplement
No. 12A (A/9012/Add.1) and Supplement No. 12B (A/9012/
Add.2).
51 /bid., Twenty-eighth Session, Third Committee, 2038th
meeting, paras. 1-8.
