S/2020/609

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 June 2020
English
Original: French

Letter dated 26 June 2020 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit herewith a note verbale dated 12 June 2020 from
the Permanent Mission of France to the United Nations (see annex), enclosing a report
on the actions carried out by French forces in support of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
from 1 February to 1 June 2020.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

20-08678 (E)

020720

*2008678*

020720

S/2020/609

Annex
The Permanent Mission of France to the United Nations presents its
compliments to the Office of the Secretary-General, United Nations Secretariat, and
has the honour to transmit the following information.
Pursuant to paragraphs 52 and 54 of Security Council resolution 2499 (2019),
adopted on 15 November 2019, France is enclosing herewith the report on the actions
carried out by French forces in support of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), from
1 February to 1 June 2020 (see enclosure).
The Permanent Mission of France to the United Nations would be grateful if the
Secretary-General could bring the report to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.

2/4

20-08678

S/2020/609

Enclosure
Report on the operational support provided by French forces to
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic, from 1 February to
1 June 2020
References
• Security Council resolution 2499 (2019) of 15 November 2019 (paragraph 52)
• Agreement of 24 July 2014 between the Government of the French Republic
and the United Nations on the provision of goods and services, on a
reimbursable basis, in support of the operations of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) in the Central African Republic
• Technical agreement of 3 October 2014 between the United Nations and the
Minister of Defence of the French Republic concerning the operational support
of French forces to MINUSCA
France has deployed eight officers and one non-commissioned officer (i.e. nine
who are integrated) within the MINUSCA military staff, including the Chief of Staff,
Brigadier General Franck Chateleus.
Four gendarmes (two non-commissioned officers and two officers), including
Major General Pascal Champion, Head of the United Nations police, are also
deployed within the United Nations police. They numbered seven until April, but
several deployments ended due to the health crisis.
Operations support
Direct support
French fighter jets stationed in N’Djamena can provide ad hoc air support to
MINUSCA. Coordination between the Air Adviser of the operational support
detachment in the Central African Republic and the Head of Air Operations (France)
of MINUSCA is particularly important and necessary for the se interventions, in order
to minimize the risks when the operations are carried out (related to flight safety and
the organization of combat search and rescue missions). A show of force took place
on 13 February 2020 in the Birao region.
In addition, France is promoting joint close air support training with the Joint
Tactical Air Controllers of the Portuguese contingent to ensure that the two units are
capable of working together. Such an exercise was held on 16 May 2020 in the Ndélé
region with two Mirage 2000 jets and a tanker aircraft, together with increased
personnel recovery alert coverage by mobilizing a CASA CN -235 aircraft and a
dedicated unit from Air Parachute Commando No. 30. The Air Adviser will transmit
an official letter from the Commander of the operational support detachment to the
Joint Force Air Command of Operation Barkhane in order for these training exercises
to be carried out once every two or three months.
More generally, the combined mechanism for the operational support
detachment in the Central African Republic, the French forces in Gabon and
Operation Barkhane allows for a rapid intervention by French forces in support of
MINUSCA, should this prove necessary.

20-08678

3/4

S/2020/609

Concurrent actions
In addition, the Air Adviser and the Air Traffic Controllers are providing
assistance in terms of aeronautical expertise for the benefit of MINUSCA, particularly
with regard to the future use of class I drones in Bangui.
Training support, operational military partnership and training of the
Gabonese battalion of the Mission
The Chief Medical Officer of the operational support detachment in the Central
African Republic participated in coronavirus disease (COVID -19) training for health
actors at MINUSCA clinics over two sessions in May 2020, with 17 pa rticipants per
session. This participation was at the request of the Pasteur Institute.
Although no training was carried out over the period from February to May 2020
because of the COVID-19 health crisis, the operational military partnership in Central
and West Africa is contributing to the long-term training of the units deployed from
Gabon, Senegal, Burundi, Cameroon and Mauritania. This training will resume as
soon as conditions allow, including the training of the Gabonese battalion in the
second half of 2020.
Logistical support
Ammunition support
• In accordance with the protocol signed between France and the United Nations,
the operational support detachment in the Central African Republic provides the
Mission with an ammunition storage area, eight 20-foot containers and three
ABC dry powder fire extinguishers. It also has the tall grass mowed.
Transport-transit route
• For the period in question, the operational support detachment in the Central
African Republic managed the passenger and freight route for the Gabonese
battalion of MINUSCA:
Personnel members

Freight (in kg)

Arrival

3

850

Departure

6

328

Prevention and control of risks during operations
• Fire support: the operational support detachment in the Central African Republic
has provided the Portuguese Quick Reaction Force with 15 fire extinguishers.
• Vector control campaign: carried out every three months, led by the operational
support detachment in the Central African Republic for the Portuguese Quick
Reaction Force.

4/4

20-08678
