s

UNITED
NATIONS'

Security Council

PROVISIONAL
S/PV,3046
31 January 1992
ENGLISH

PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE THREE THOUSAND AND
FORTY-SIXTH MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York,
on Friday, 31 January 1992, at 10.30 a.m.
President:

Members:

Mr, MAJOR

(United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern
Ireland)

Austria
Belgium
Cape Verde
China
Ecuador
France
Hungary
India
Japan
Morocco
Russian Federation
United States
Venezuela
Zimbabwe

Mr. VRANITZKY
Mr. MARTENS
Mr, VEIGA
Mr. LI Peng
President BORJA
President MITTERRAND
Mr. JESZENSZKY
Mr. RAO
Mr. MIYAZAWA

King HASSAN II
President YELTSIN
President BUSH
President PEREZ
Mr. SHAMIJYARIRA

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English
and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will
be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should
be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within
one week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Department of
Conference Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in
a copy of the record.
92-60198

8295-96V (E)

.. ,.

"'

)!,

S/PV. 3046
2

RM/2

·-·

The meeting was called to order at 10.45 a.m.
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
The agenda was adopted.

THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL IN THE MAINTENANCE OF INTERNATIONAL
PEACE AND SECURITY
The PRESIDENT:

The Security Council will now begin its

consideration of the item on its agenda.
With the permission of my colleagues, I shall make a brief introductory
statement to our meeting today.
a time of momentous change.

This is a unique meeting,

We are meeting at

Just a year ago1 the Council met the challenge of

Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, and the Council did that with great success.

But

today we face new challenges, and to set a new course in tackling them, it is
right, I believe, that we should meet for the first time ever at the level of
Heads of State or Government.

Today, we must show that the Security Council

is working with a common purpose.
I welcome very much the presence today of so many Heads of State or
Government.

It is proof of the importance we all attach to the United Nations

and of our commitment to the ideals of the United Nations.
all parts of the world.
its own concerns.

We come today from

Each of our countries has its own characteristics,

But we are united in one particular aspect.

We are united

by our commitment to strengthen the wider community to which we belong, to

reinforce collective security and to maintain international peace and security,
In convening this extraordinary meeting this morning, I intended that our
discussion could serve four important purposes.

First, our presence today

marks a turning-point in the world and at the United Nations.
international scene, we have witnessed the end of the cold war.

On the
States

Members of this Organization have divided and reformed themselves;

This

/"p~';~"e'*,~immense opportunities, but it carries with it also new risks,

At the

RM/2

S/PV.3046
3-5

(The President>
United Nations, the term of office of Mr. Perez de Cuellar has come to a
close.

He has served the international community for many years with

outstanding distinction, and I am delighted to be able to thank him for that
work,

We are here not only to wish his successor, Dr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali,

well, but to give him our full backing in carrying out his man~ate,
situation in the world needs new ideas and a new impetus.

A new

BCT/ed

S/PV. 3046

6

(The President)
Secondly, we should today reaffirm 9ur_attachment to the principle of
collective security, and to the resolution of disputes in accordance with the
principles of the United Nations Charter.

We should, send a clear signal that

it is through the United Nations and its Security Council that we intend to
deal with threats to international peace and security.
Thirdly, we should today consider anew the means by which collective
security is upheld through the United Nations and consider how best to update
and to develop them.

It is time to review all the instruments at our

disposal - preventive action: to avert crises by monitoring and addressing the
causes of conflict;

peacemaking: to restore peace by diplomatic means;

peace-keeping: to reduce tensions, to consolidate and underpin efforts to
restore peace.
now.

These, I believe, are the matters that we should consider

Even today, as we meet here, peace-keeping operations are under way in

Africa, the Middle East, Latin America, Asia and Europe.
likely to decrease in the future.

The need is not

We must consider how we can enhance the

ability of the United Nations to respond effectively and ensure that it has
the necessary resources, both financial and material, to enable it to do so.
In all of these, of course, the role of the Secretary-General is vital.
Fourthly, we should today commit ourselves anew to upholding
international peace and security through reinforced measures of arms control,
Activity to restrain the accumulation and transfer of arms, to prevent the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, affects all Members of the
United Nations.

Arms-control policy has become genuinely global.

The role of

this Organization - not just the Security Council, but the whole of the
Organization - is an increasingly important one.
As we meet to consider the specific responsibilities of the Security
Council, the wider concerns of the international community - even if we shall

BCT/ed

S/PV.3046
7

(The President)
not discuss all of them today~ are also in our minds.

It is of course true

that without economic development and prosperity we cannot hope to achieve
lasting peace and stability.

But it is every bit as true thpt only when

conditions of security and peace are assured can sustained economic
development take place.

Both are needed.

Only when we have both can

resources be directed to where they are so urgently needed - towards the
economic and social needs of the world's population.
The opening line of our Charter - the Charter of the United Nations does not talk about States or Governments; it talks about people.

The world

now has the best chance for peace, security and development since the founding
of the United Nations.

I hope, like the founders of the United Nations

themselves, that we can today renew the resolve enshrined in the Charter - the
resolve to combine our efforts to accomplish the aims of the Charter in the
interests of all the people we are privileged to represent.

That is our role,

and I wish the Council well in its work today.
Members of the Council, we have a great deal to do today.

In accordance

with custom I shall, with your agreement, make my national statement when all
other colleagues have spoken.
We shall now commence our debate, and I invite the Secretary-General to
address us.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL:

Mr, President, Excellencies:

it is a great

honour for me to welcome you to this historic meeting of the Security
Council.

The significance of this gathering exceeds its symbolic value.

is one of those occasions when symbol enhances substance,

It

Your presence here

is a striking demonstration of your reliance on the United Nations.

This

expression of support is profoundly gratifying to the Secretary-General whom
you have just elected.

S/PV.3046

BCT/ed

8

(The secretary-General)
This meeting could not have been more timely.

As the new era begins, it

calls for both ideas and action to place international life on stronger
foundations.

What shape the emerging order will take, ·what defences will be

built against anarchy and terrorism, and how entrenched inequities can be
removed will depend greatly on the wisdom, foresight and compassion· of the
world's leadership.

It is the leaders of nations, engaged in joint

deliberations, who can address not only the apparent problems but also the
frustrations and fears that underlie and intensify them.

As other swnmit

gatherings are held regularly, it would be in tune with this time of the
acceleration of history that the Security Council also meet at the summit
level periodically to take stock of the state of the world,

If this

suggestion of mine is well received, it would strengthen the tone of authority
that the United Nations needs at this critical stage,

It would also help to

assure that transfiguration of this house which the world hopes to be
completed before its fiftieth anniversary, in 1995.
There has hardly been a stage more critical in modern history.

The

revolution that is sweeping large parts of the world derives its momentum and
authenticity not from any outdated or recycled ideology but from the primal
need of peoples for freedom, for justice, for solidarity and for recognition
of their identities.

The contours of the global order to which it will lead

are not yet clearly perceivable.

But several lessons are already being driven

home:
Democratization at the national level dictates a corresponding
process at the global level.

At both levels, it aims at the rule of law.

For

national societies, democracy means strengthening the institutions of popular
participation and consent, political pluralism and the defence of human

BCT/ed

S/PV.3046
9

(The Secretary-General)
rights,· including those of minorities.

.For global society, it means the

cllemocratization of international relations and the participation of all States
i.n developing new norms of international life.

Small States can play large

cionstructive roles, and the record of the United Nations proves that political
,rill and imagination can make more fruitful contributions to peace than
military power or economic power.

Where such participation is not fully

forthcoming, it needs to be encouraged •. That, in turn, requires the
willingness to accommodate different viewpoints and a readiness to offer
ispecial assistance to the democratization process,
It would, of course, be naive to suppose that democratization alone,
whether at the national or at the planetary level, will solve all our
problems.

At both levels, democracy is a delicate plant that needs the

nourishing soil of peace, security and economic development.

New ways of

preventing internal disputes and inter-State confrontations- will therefore
need to be developed.
State sovereignty takes a new meaning in this context.

Added to its

dimension of right is the dimension of responsibility, both internal and
external.

Violation of State sovereignty is, and will remain, an offence

against the global order.

But its misuse also may undermine human rights and

jeopardize a peaceful global life.

Civil wars care no longer civil, and the

carnage they inflict will not let the world remain indifferent,

The narrow

nationalism that would oppose or disregard the norms of a stable international
order and the micro-nationalism that resists healthy economic or political
integration can disrupt a peaceful global existence.

Nations are too

BCT/ed

S/PV.3046
10

(The Secretary-General)
interdependent, national frontiers are too porous and transnational
realities - in the spheres of technology and investment, on the one.side, and
poverty and misery, on the other - too dangerous to permit egocentric
isolationism.

JP/edd

S/PV.3046
11

(The Secretary-General)
Collective security can be based only on collective confidence and
good faith - confidence in the principles by which it is governed and good
faith in the means by which it is sought to be ensured.

With all the

V/

convulsions in global society, only one power is left that can impose order on
i.ncipient chaos:

it is the power of principles transcending changing

perceptions of expediency.
(spoke in Fr@nch)
Now that the cold war has come to an end we must work to avoid the
C>utbreak or resurgence of new conflicts.

The explosion of nationalities,

which is pushing countries with many ethnic groups towards division, is a new
challenge to peace and security.

Could the United Nations discharge its

:responsibilities if, instead of being composed of 166 States, it had double
that number of Members?

Nationalist fever will increase ad infinitum the

:nwnber of communities claiming sovereignty, for there will always be
dissatisfied minorities within those minorities that achieve independence.
Peace, first threatened by ethnic conflicts and tribal wars, could then often
be troubled by border disputes.
The United Nations will have to adopt a new strategy to respond to the
irredentist claims of ethnic and cultural communities or their calls for
autonomy.

It will have to take into account the abundant supply of arms, the

aggravation of economic inequalities between various communities and the flow
of refugees.
We legitimately emphasize preventive diplomacy, which means identifying
potential zones of conflict; offering good offices while those conflicts are
still in the gestation stage and resolving crises before they degenerate into
armed confrontation.

That requires means for observation, a sophisticated

communications network and new financial resources.

It will also be necessary

JP/edd

S/PV.3046
12

(The Secretary-General)
to obtain the agreement of the State in crisis as well as that of communities
in revolt and to invent new federal formulas for the future.
The whole strategy will be pursued under the pressures of extreme
urgency, with combat and destruction and images of death, wounded people and
refugees clouding the political scene,

We have to some extent succeeded in

establishing the foundations of this new strategy,

We have succeeded in

maintaining a cease-fire or restoring peace in Africa, Central America, Asia
and Europe.

We have gone even further; we have even touched on the sphere of

the institutional management of national reconciliation,
Behind the clamour of conflict, the tumult of aspirations and
resentments, there is hope - the hope that the United Nations will act.

The

peoples expect Member States, and in particular those in a position to help,
to rise above their rivalries, to respond to the peoples' need for dignity,
equity and justice and to make the spirit of conciliation and dialogue
prevail, for without it there can be no peaceful settlement of disputes.

At

this very moment millions and millions of victims of war, tyranny, fanaticism
and economic injustice are anxiously following your deliberations, in the
expectation that a remedy will be found to their ills and their misery.

Their

hope will not be in vain if people of good will, courage, compassion and
vision take the initiative to resolve the problems that have broken so many
human lives.
You are those people of good will.

On behalf of the men and women who

work in this Organization, on behalf of the thousands of civil servants,
military people, observers and experts who make history in far-flung countries
and try to put an end to war and begin dialogue, I thank you for your presence

JP/edd

S/PV.30.6
13
(The Secretary-General)

he:r:e among us and for the hope that it awakens in those who pursue their daily
struggle for the triumph of peace and sovereign justice.
The PRESIDENT:

Thank you, Mr. Secretary-General.

I know the

Council looks forward to hearing you on many occasions in the years ahead.
Thank you very much for what you have had to say to us today.

I now invite the President of France to address the Council.
President MITTERRAND (interpretation from French):

First,

Mr, President, I should like to thank you for your initiative which has
brought us together here as members of the Security Council.
irnportant event, as the Secretary-General has just emphasized.

It is a very
I should like

tc> tell him how pleased we are to see him today heading our great
international society.

I wish him every success in his work, in which we

shall be unsparing in our support.
In addition to those words of encouragement, I should like to express our
gratitude to Mr. Perez de Cuellar, gratitude which has already been so well
expressed by you, Mr. President.
I myself had hoped for a meeting such as this 10 months ago, when we were

a.t the end of a war waged to deal with aggression and to restore law and
c,rder, under the aegis of the United Nations.

That was a new, but essential

s1tep, though the war of c.ourse inevitably brought suffering in its wake,
There have been many upheavals since then, with people thrown onto the
road, civil wars and the disruption of vast political entities of long
standing.
Where are we heading?
:Eind them.

We are looking for signposts, but we do not always

It is the role of the Security Council and the General Assembly to

J?Oint the way,

S/PV.3046
14-15

JP/edd

(Pre1ident Mitterrand)
Disorder and upredictability have become the rule.

It will be said that

perhaps there are too many things happening at the same time and that the only
constant today is change.

But are we now to mourn the old order and prefer,

with Goethe, the great German writer, injustice to disorder?

Surely not!

Liberty has grown in the world; we must continue to help it.
Are there any clear responses?

It is true that a time of crisis, such as

we are living through now, is also a time of choice.
war, exodus, the break-up of States and terrorism.
can prevent them.

That is my first assertiQn.

On the one hand there is
Are they unavoidable?

We

Preventing them is precisely

the primary task of the Security Council of the United Nations, in accordance
with the Charter.

EMS/5

S/PV .304,6
16

(Presigent Mitterrand)
A meeting like today's has been needed since March of last year.

Prime Minister Major was absolutely right:

the time was ripe for inviting us

here •. By no means does everything depend on us - but a great deal does.
Let me join my colleagues in tracing the route we should follow.

First

of all, a world in crisis requires instruments for comprehensive, universal
a.ction; secondly, we must guarantee collective security; and finally, we must
create new forms of solidarity.
Needless to say, my statement will not be exhaustive, for we have only a
limited amount of time to say what we want to say - and that may be a good
t:hing.

I shall merely put forward a few ideas, a few plans.

It is a fact that since 1945 all the world's major problems have required
a universal approach.
action:

We must now create the instruments for that universal

instruments on security, on how to expand the means available to the

Security Council for intervention.

Take, for example, resolution 687 (1991),

1~hich put an end to the Kuwait war,

Its strict implementation is necessary to

restore peace in the Middle East, but it is not enough.

The situation clearly

,calls for the creation of a zone free of weapons of mass destruction, which
means the participation of all the States of the region - and of other
regions.

It also calls for universal adherence to the Treaty on the

Non-Proliferation of Nuc~ear Weapons,
of ratifying that Treaty.

For its part, France is in the process

France will also become a' party to Additional

Protocol I of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin
'

America - the Treaty of Tlatelolco - whose twenty-fifth anniversary will be
marked in two weeks.

S/PV,3046
17

EMS/5

(President Mitterrand)
But the establishment of such a zone requires also the adoption of a
convention banning chemicai weapons.

That is possible, which is why I call

upon all States to come to Paris to sign such a convention before the end of
the year.
We should also try to monitor and limit arms transfers and, as so aptly
proposed by President Bush and President Yeltsin, to accelerate genuine
reductions in nuclear weapons.

We should establish a closer link between the

concepts of non-proliferation and disarmament, and so forth,
We are no longer engaged in a race towards over-armament; on the
contrary.

That is excellent news.

Everyone must now participate in nuclear disarmament, provided first and
foremost that all States in question are able to see that their security is
assured.

There should not be vast differences among the nuclear potentials of

various parties.
Economic interdependence is another axiom.

We have a great deal of

ground to cover in order to reap the practical benefits of such
interdependence,

We are now in a position to decrease military bu'dgets for

the benefit of development.

I would recall that many of us have called for

continued dialogue between the North and the South.
grow even wider.

We do not want the gap to

We must continue the work alread~ begun, for example, on the

question of debt by considering the position of intermediate~income countries
among the less wealthy.

I would mention the case of Venezuela and France:

without any great fanfare, we have been working since July to achieve an
agreement between a consumer and a producer of oil.
We must revise many of our methods, our concepts and our approaches,

EMS/5

S/PV.3046

18

(President Mitterrand)
I shall not dwell on the question of the environment.

Soon a conference

on the subject will be held in Rio de Janeiro, where we shall have to take a
broad view in order to save the planet while still enabling peoples to make
progress.

Peoples are often compelled to alter the natural balance, because

they lack the means to live in any other way.

~I Human rights have triumphed - and I hope it is no temporary triumph - in
the ideological struggle of the cold war.
I am not proposing a new system.

democracy begins in the schools,

I merely remind the Council that

We must consider and renew the role·of the

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), to
make it exemplary; we must consolidate it.

It is time for the States that

have left UNESCO to return and contribute to its great task,
Collective security will be jeopardized very quickly if we do not create
up-to-date conditions for it.

Past experience has shown that not~ing can be

done without the determination of States, particularly the major Powers, to
reject the law of the jungle and the principle that might is right,
determination is reflected in the Charter of the United Nations.

That

For a long

time, the Charter was hobbled, but today all its provisions are usable, and we
must implement them immediately.
I am certain that other colleagues will also be making proposals to

ensure the greater effectiveness of peace-keeping operations.

I state that

for its part France is ready to make available to the Secretary-General a
1,000-man contingent for peace-keeping operations, at any time, on 48-hours
notice,

That figure could be doubled within a week,

Such deployments would

involve activity by the Military Staff Committee, as provided for in the
Charter,

EMS/5

S/PV,3046

19~20

(President Mitterrand)
Secondly, it is indispensible that we develop preventive diplomacy.
Members of the Council should undertake systematically to provide the
Secretary-General with information on international security and to give him
the mandate to maintain regular contacts with his counterparts, the leaders of
regional organizations.

Chapter VIII of the Charter, on regional

arrangements, should no longer be disregarded,

We must be able to turn as

necessary to new bodies to meet specific needs.
On the relationship between disarmament and development, suggestions have
recently been made, for example by Germany,

Those are good suggestions, which

is why France recommends the establishment of regional funds for the
conversion of military research and develop~ent to civilian production, for
the benefit, to begin with,
of new States:
I

republics, with urgent needs,

which once formed part of the former·Soviet Union.

I am certain that other

countries too will be able to benefit, including States of the Middle East.
Similarly, on the model of Europe, why should we not establish in each
region appropriate arbitrating bodies?

The European Community already has

such a body.
Those are a few of the possible instruments.
We must, moreover, ensure that the United Nations has regular, increasing
financing.

To that end, arrears must be paid.

I am not making any specific

allusions, but I would remind the Council that this would make it possible to
demonstrate that a spirit of cooperation will be present in our work.

JB/6

S/PV.3046
21

(President Mitterrand)
My third and last point concerns the conditions for a new solidarity.
Security cannot be conceived solely in military terms.

Obviously, it has an

economic aspect which is in fact supreme over the other as time passes and so
long as economic insecurity does not generate new military conflicts.
Many proposals can be made.

North-South confrontation should not be

allowed to replace the East-West confrontation.
that.

I am sure all will agree to

Politics, like economics, disarmament, social development and the

environment, takes us back to the same law - that of solidarity.

For a long

time now the general term "developing countries" has not been in keeping with
reality.

'
Twenty years ago,
we could believe in general and uniform progress.

Today, there is in truth two basic categories of countries:

some have

succeeded in making progress, but many others - par.ticularly in Africa but
elsewhere as well, such as in the Indochinese peninsula - are bogged down in a
situation from which they cannot emerge without our assistance.
If there are many kinds of developing countries - to use the traditional
term that I am challenging - we need adapted forms of aid.

Those developing

countries which really are developing need private and public investment,
cheap credit, and growth in international trade.

Hence the importance of

international negotiations currently under way.
As for other countries which have not yet succeeded in bringing about
true development, let us not mince words:
world economy?

how can they be reinjected into the

We should really examine this, giving particular thought to

the necessary control of primary commodities.

Otherwise, intolerable

situations will arise and countries of goodwill, which work and require a
great deal of their citizens, often find themselves in terrible crises.

Their

S/PV.3046

JB/6

22

(~re§ident Mitterrand)
two-, three- or five.-year plans for recovery are demolished simply because in
a single week international speculation has come into play,
Those are a few of the issues I would like the Council to consider.

I

very much hope - and my country is re~uesting it - that there will be a world
swnmit on social development that·will enable us to rejuvenate our thinking on
development itself and t6 highlight the human dimension of things.
That is what I wished to say today.

We are experiencing in Europe - in

Western Europe particularly - an exceptional experiment:
which has known atrocious wars.

that of a community

These wars monopolized the entire history of

this century, piled destruction upon disaster, and long destroyed any chance
our continent had.

Well, we decided more than 40 years ago to settle our

differences by negotiation, to bring about the necessary reconciliations and
to learn to share our sovereignties and resources equally in the interests of
security and the common good.
I do not wish to set that up as an example.

Many others elsewhere have

much to teach us by way of example.

All are rich in tradition, culture and

contributions to world civilization.

I simply ask Your Excellencies to be

good enough, on behalf of the Security Council of the United Nations, to
exploit them.

The PRESIDENT:

I thank President Mitterrand for his remarks.

The

initiative for a meeting of this sort did originally spring from President
Mitterrand some months ago, and I am delighted to have been able to bring it
about today.
I now invite the Constitutional President of Ecuador to take the floor,

,JB/6

S/PV.3046
23

President BORJA (interpretation from Spanish):

In the maelstrom of

concerns afflicting the spirit of modern humanity in this last decade of the
twentieth century, four main issues are outstanding.
The first is violence in all its forms, nuances and manifestations:
violence from above and from below; institutionalized violence and the
violence of protest; political and economic violence; religious violence and
racial violence - in brief, all the various and devastating forms of violence
that beset the world.
Then, we have the age~old issue that political authority must be subject
to the law - in other words, the limitation of power, which is a problem of
conscience for any thinking person and which arouses profound ethical debate
concerning the relationship between society and the individual, the balance
between authority and freedom, the demarcation of authority, the juridical
security of those governed, and respect for human rights.
Another of our concerns is undoubtedly the protection of the environment
as an expression of solidarity with those who will follow us in this exciting
adventure of life on our planet and to whom we are morally obliged to bequeath
clean water, pure air, fertile land and green surroundings.

It is a

self-evident truth that no one can claim ownership of the freshness of the air
or the purity of water.
Finally, there is human development, which is much more than economic
development and the mere accumulation of material wealth, which goes beyond
material consumption and which embraces a broad range of tangible and
intangible possessions and values that together determine the quality of a
people's life.
These, while not the only ones, are clearly the concerns that most deeply
pervade the human spirit today.

For a long time following the Second World

S/PV.3046
24-25

JB/6

(President Borja)
War, when the concept of economic development was born, the inevitable
question. was:

h_ow much does a society progµ.ce?

The answer was always given

i.!LJ!~onometric terms of the gross .n.~t::Jonal prodµct,
and the- guestions are different.
What is their quality of .life?

Now things have changed

How are the inhabitants of a nation faring?
And the answers must be found in the way in

which the benefits of progress are distributed in a community and the

(

fundamental needs of the human being are met.

According to the criteria of

the United Nations Development Programme itself, this involves longevity,
education, personal security, political freedom, community participation and
respect for human rights.
As President Mitterrand just put it, this is the human dimension of
development.

In the past, the concern was quantitative in nature, always

involving national production indices measured by econometric formulas which
were often deceptive in countries of great contrasts.

Today, the concern is

qualitative and human development is understood to mean freedom, health,
security, well-being, culture, environment, satisfaction in one's work, the
good use of leisure time and a wide range of other values.

BHS/plj

. S/PV .3046
26

(President Borja)
Economic development does not necessarily and automatically presuppose
human development.

There are countries which, despite high levels of economic

growth, have unacceptable social problems.

Inversely, there are other

countries that have low per capita income and, none the less, have reached

I

considerable levels of human development.
The United Nations was established 47 years ago as an answer to the
deeply felt need for peace and security in the world following the untold
suffering caused by the last world war.

1

Its birth was inspired a~ that

historic time by the ideal so eloquently expressed in the preamble to its
Charter, which states:
"We the peoples of the United Nations, determined to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war, which twice in our lifetime has
brought untold sorrow to mankind ••• ".
We are far from having completely won the battle for peace.

There still

persist aggressive intentions, inferiority complexes that lead to violence,
and misanthropy in the minds of certain political leaders.

Racial and

religious fanaticism, senseless nationalism, and xenophobia also constitute
threats to the harmonious coexistence of peoples.
invaluable services to mankind.

The United Nations has lent

Just consider how different the world of

today is from the world of SO years ago.

We must remember the nature of

nazi-fascism and the horrors of war and what followed.

We had East-West

confrontation with its implacable struggle to divide the planet into zones of
influence, the madness of military expenditures, the SS-20s and the
Pershing-2s that were targeted at human civilization, with the peace of the
world subjected to the balance of terror.

We need to recall these irrational

and warlike elements in order better to admire and value the work done by the
United Nations during its first 50 years of existence.

BHS/plj

S/PV. 3046
27

(President Borja)
Let us begin by recalling .the importance for the destiny of mankind of
that one initiative taken on 26 June 1945 in San Francisco to establish a
world-wide community of States capable of resolving, on the basis of unity and
consens.us, problems that States could not have been able to resolve
individually and in isolation.
There is a clear parallel between the age-old process of forming human
communities and the process of forming societies of States.
the same motivating factors exist.

In both cases,

In the former case, man, an essentially

incomplete being, ill-equipped to meet the needs of his own existence, was
forced to join with others in order to survive; in the latter case, the State,
which with the passage of years has proved incapable of resolving alone the
problems of economic and social develppment, has also been compelled to
establish communities of States in order to join forces and attain common
goals.
Jean Jacques Rousseau, one of the cl.assic exponents of political thinking
and universal thought, in explaining the origins of human society, affirmed
that in a society its mernbers, "giving of themselves to all give themselves to
no one in particular and, since in any such partnership the partners enjoy
equal rights towards each other, one wins in that exchange the equivalent of
everything one loses, and greater strength to preserve what one has".
The same thing happens in the international sphere,

The liberty of

States, which is called sovereignty, is not undermined but rather is
strengthened by the establishment of international organizations.

The Italian

philosopher and jurist, Giorgio del Vecchio, in referring to this issue,
states:

BHS/plj

S/PV.3046
28
(President Borja)

11

0nly by obeying the law of our nature do we become truly free.

Thus,

the sovereignty of a State is truly affirmed as such only when the State
does not betray its own essence, in other words, its nature as a
I

participant in a possible and necessary community of States, in which it
has the power neither to disregard nor to deny its own nature,"
Following the implosion of 'the Marxist regimes, in other words, the
1:rumbling from within of the walls and scaffolding of their systems, the
bipolar distribution of global power and therefore East-West confrontation
have disappeared.

In this respect, I would say that I consider commendable

the announcement made a few hours ago by Presidents Bush and Yeltsin of their
readiness to eliminate nuclear missiles and reduce arsenals of other types of
strategic weapons.

This would be a major step on the road to disarmament.

I

say this as a leader who, deeply committed to the peaceful settlement of
international disputes, proposed, last September before the General Assembly
of the United Nations, the arbitration of Pope John Paul II to put an end to
an old territorial dispute between my country and Peru.

I am pleased in this

connection to inform the Security Council that, since that time, we have begun
an era of understanding and negotiation with the Government of Peru, inspired
by the aspirations of peace and cooperation of both peoples.

There can be no doubt whatsoever that a new stage has begun in the
history of mankind.

I believe that this meeting symbolizes that fact.

It is

the turning of a page of history.
The challenge today is international economic and social justice and
human development.

A primary responsibility of the United Nations is to

contribute to their attainment.

Its fundamental mission as we look to the

BHS/plj

S/PV,3046
29-30

(President Borja)
future should be the attainment of a new order which does justice to the poor
countries, which allows them to participate equitably in global income and
which distributes with justice the benefits of progress.

That is why Ecuador

enthusiastically supports the initiative to which President Mitterrand
referred just a few moments ago, of convening a summit meeting on social
development.

S/PV.3046
31

l!::F/8

(President Borja)
Ecuador therefore enthusiastically supports the initiative1 to which
~•resident Mitterrand referred just a few moments ago, of convening a summit on
~ocial development.

We must be clear about the idea that behind poverty there
I

l.urk serious threats to the peace because - as they had not in times gone by t:he peoples of today have passed value judgements on poverty.

People used to

view poverty as a household object and with the familiarity with which one
\riews a household object1 but they do not do so today.

The conviction that

poverty can be avoided leads to rebellion, and thus a dangerous and explosive
l?Olitical equation has now arisen:

poverty plus a value judgmement on it plus

irebellion equal the breaking of the peace.
The same thing is happening in the international sphere:

mankind has.

become aware of its own imbalances; ethical value judgements have been passed
c,n countries' situations, and this has added a new chapter to modern economic

1science1 on the study of - to paraphrase Adam Smith - the causes of the
J~overty of nations.
Human development is1 definitively, the most important issue of our day.
]~on-military risks to security have increased.

Today, in the marginal

,countries, there is more poverty1 ·more unemployment and more social
instability than there was 10 years ago.
The end of the cold 'war, as the Secretary-General said in his last
report, will make it possible for mankind to release very considerable
financial resources to social and to human development,

This is, in the view

of Ecuador, the most important, most crucial task of the United Nations during
the new, historic phase, which is beginning today.

S/PV.3046
32

EF/8

The PRESIDENT:

Mr. President, thank you very much.

It was good to

hear the environmental themes aired so thoroughly this morning, and many of
us, of course, look forward to taking up that debate at Rio later this year.
I now have pleasure in inviting His Majesty the King of Morocco to
address the Council.
King HASSAN II (interpretation from Arabic):

Praise to the Lord,

and prayer for the Prophet and his family.
The holding of a summit meeting of the countries members of the Security
Council, upon the invitation of His Excellency the Prime Minister of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Mr. Major, who is
President of the Security Council this month, is an excellent initiative and,
clearly, a commendable precedent in the history of the United Nations.
The high level of representation of the countries members of the Council
confers a special significance on this exceptional, historic event.

It

reflects not only the desire of the members of the Council to discharge their
responsibilities but als~ their commitment to international cooperation and
their support for the noble mission of the United Nations for greater
understanding in the interest of world peace, all of ,which is with a view to
avoiding a return to international confrontation and its sorry train of
harmful consequences for the world.

The peace between the wars lasted only a
I

short space of time, and hardly had one conflict been stanched when another
confrontation of even greater fury and violence was unleashed, giving mankind
no respite.
This summit meeting is being held in appropriate circumstances, as it is
taking place after the historic changes which have just occurred in the world
and have profoundly altered all the givens of international politics.

S/PV.3046
33

:EF/8

(King Hassan II)

These changes have brought about a situation for our planet which was
completely unforeseeable before the '80s.

That is why this swnmit meeting is

an invaluable occasion for us to exchange views on the events that we have
experienced and to reflect, together, on effecti~e ways to meet the challenges
now facing mankind as it enters the last decade before the twenty-first
century.
We cannot fail to take this opportunity to express our warmest·
congratulations to the Secretary-General of our Organization, His Excellency
Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, who, thanks to his intellectual powers and his
moral qualities, has very deservedly assumed this highly responsible post.
There can be no doubt that his election constitutes not only the consecration
crowning his success in the duties he performed in his own country, but also a
tribute to the region to·which he belongs and a just recognition of the
contribution of Arabs and Africans to the development of the United Nations
and to the accomplishment of its mission.
We would be failing in our duty if we were not also to pay a special
tribute to his predecessor, His Excellency Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar who,
through his tireless efforts, made an invaluable contribution to the
revitalization of the United Nations and its positive development during a
sensitive period in its history, so enabling it to tackle global problems and
alleviate tension, thus commanding respect from the world at large.
The fact that Morocco is part, at one and the same time, of Africa and of
the Arab and Islamic worlds gives it the duty, on this happy occasion, of
expressing its ideas and views while at the same time taking into account the
positions of the various parties which belong to these same regions.

We are

therefore honoured to be able to transmit to you the feelings, observations

S/PV,3046
34-35

EF/8

(King Hassan II)
and questions raised in our region by the initiative of the President of the
Council in convening this summit meeting.
As far as the United Nations is concerned, we commend the major role it
has played since the end of the Second World War in establishing a new era
based on the maintenance of peace and security and on the attainment of
progress for all the countries and peoples of the world.

Nevertheless, the

Security Council, which has functions in the field of the maintenance of
international peace and security, has not always been capable of carrying out
its mission under the Charter of the Organization, and in particular under
Chapter VI,

The Council has, for most of the time, been paralysed because of

the cold war, which was reflected in the Council by the exercise of the right
of veto by the great Powers of one o~ another bloc • . For the same reason, the
Security Council found itself incapable of finding satisfactory solutions to
regional conflicts, which had harmful consequences in the international arena,

:RM/9

S/PV.3046
36

(King Hassan II)
The desire to support the United Nations role requires, first and
foremost, action to maintain world peace and achieve the peaceful settlement
of disputes.

In other words, dialogue and mediation must be given_ pride of

place, and all of the mechanisms of the United Na,tions and the provisions of
the Charter must be employed; the Secretary-General must be given all the
means of preventive diplomacy to prevent the degeneration of disputes into
armed conflicts.
In addition, the provisions of the Charter concerning collective security
cannot become operational unless all .countries fully.respect international law
and unless the principle of equality among States is made a reality,
Since the end of the cold war, the United Nations responsibilities have
broadened and its role has been increased.
Given the new configuration of the world scene, the international
community is itself confronting new difficulties and new challenges at a time
when it aspires to peace.

This is why all countries are hopeful that the

Organization will be more effective at this crucial stage in the evolving
international situation.
In this connection the Kingdom of Morocco reaffirms the need to
strengthen the organs of the United Nations, to improve their functioning and
to review their mechanisms in order to increase their effectiveness and
credibility and adapt them to the new realities they face,
Morocco can therefore only support the often-expressed will to revitalize
the United Nations and reform its organs, and we hope that precise and
concrete proposals will be made in this respect as soon as possible.
The strengthening of the organs of the United Nations and of their role
in the maintenance of international peace and security requires that the

RM/9

S/PV.3046
37

(King Hassan II)
international community give serious consideration to disarmament questions,
In this respect, it is our view that the international instruments concluded
in recent years all provide glimmers of hope and encouraging prospects in this
area,
Nevertheless, the progress achieved by the United Nations in the nuclear
sphere should not prevent us from redoubling our efforts to ensure the success
of the Geneva negotiations on the prohibition of chemical weapons and their
destruction in order to rid ourselves of a devastating weapon that constitutes
a negation of civilization and noble human values.
We believe that disarmament will have no true significance unless it
engenders in the countries of the North the dynamics of cooperation with the
countries of the South to help the latter to free themselves from
underdevelopment.

Moreover, we believe in the need to establish a link

between peace and disarmament, and it is regrettable that the close
relationship that exists between peace and development is underestimated.
We must not forget that underdevelopment has been and remains the
greatest threat to world peace and security and that at the present time it
represents the greatest challenge the international community must meet.
We are a part of Africa, a continent that we cherish and respect.

We

suffer its problems and we share its aspirations, even though we may not
always have benefited from all of the understanding we had the right to expect
from the Organization of African Unity.

It is a continent whose situation is

worsening and where living conditions are deteriorating under the combined
effect of growing indebtedness, the decline in the prices of raw materials,
galloping population growth and the scarcity of foreign investment.

RM/9

S/PV,3046

38

{King Hassan II)
In addition, Africa is confronted with a worsening economic crisis
because of natural disasters, famine and the displacement of over 10 million
refugees to neighbouring countries.

This is a crisis that will imperil the

continent's future if the international community does not take urgent
measures to give effect to the commitments it has undertaken in this respect.'
It is impossible to envisage the establishment of a new world order when
the Arab world is living a tragedy that has lasted for nearly a half century.
That tragedy is the tragedy of the Palest~nian people, deprived of the
exercise of their rights, stripped of their territory and their homeland,
threatened in their identity and their history, whose children are dying
before the eyes of the entire world.
Although the international community has set out to find short-term or
longer-term solutions to some political problems, the persistence of this
problem for so long a time demonstrates the inability of the universal
conscience to resolve it and to put an end to its negative consequences.

Thus

the international community must redouble its efforts to find a definitive
solution to the problem of the Middle East in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council, which have, inter alia, emphasized the
withdrawal of Israel from the occupied Arab territories and the recognition of
the rights of Palestinians, including the right of refugees to return to their
homeland.
Morocco was among the first to encourage dialogue among the parties to
the conflict in the Middle East.

In so doing, we were acting consistently in

unhesitatingly supporting the peace initiative,

We thus hope that that

process will be completed and that the countries that have prepared the
meeting of the parties to the conflict will encourage dialogue leading to a
solution that will be just and acceptable to all.

S/PV.3046
39-40

RM/9

(King Hassan II)
In this framework, we should like to focus on the specific status of the
city of Al Quds Al Sharif and recall that in 1979 the Organization of the
Islamic Conference entrusted us with the chairmanship of the Al Quds
Committee.

Over these 12 years we have continuously sought to find an

equitable and just solution to the fate of the Holy City.
We understand that the Holy Places in that city are of paramount
importance to Muslims, Christians and Jews.

That is why the Arab and Islamic

side has shown openness in all the gatherings it has held, and in particular
at the Summit Conference held at Fez in 1982, displaying a spirit of
cooperation and taking the first steps towards .the other side.

However, and

to our profound regret, that openness and the initiatives taken with a view to
attaining peace have been met.with political immobility, with rigid positions,
the use of force and the fuelling of tensions.

BCT/ed

S/PV.3046
41

(I<;ing Hassan II)
Clear progress has been achieved in the international sphere in respect
of human rights.

Morocco takes this opportunity to express its pleasure at

this fact, because the concept of human rights, as we see it, is universal and
can in no way be departed from or called into gue,stion.
We believe that human rights mean respect for dignity and its corollary:,
the safeguarding of individual and collective rights.
that civilized communities are committed.

It is to this principle

It is a pleasure for us to say on

this occasion that the principles of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
reflect·the human concepts which we have upheld for 14 centuries and which
include political, economic and social rights.

The second Caliph of Islam,

Omar Ibn El-Khattab, proclaimed the principle of human rights in the following
words:

"How is it possible to subjugate man, when he is born free?".

Your initiative, Mr. President, gives the countries members of the
Security Council the opportunity, for the first time, to meet at the highest
level and enables them to have a thorough and interesting discussion of the
problems of o~r day.

The exchange of opinions and the discussion reflected in

the final presidential declaration which will be the culmination of our work
today will allow us to note the progress we have achieved and the breadth of
the tasks that await us if we are to meet the challenges with which we are
confronted.
While we cannot claim that our meeting will resolve the problems facing
the world, we can at least affirm that this meeting has the merit of enabling
us to consult together and to chart the course of that new world order to
which we aspire.

S/PV.3046

BCT/ed

42

The PRESIDENT:

Your Majesty, we thank you for that very

wide-ranging and comprehensive speech.
I now invite the President and Chairman of the Government of the Russian
Federation to address the Security Council,

fresident YELTSIN (interpretation from Russian): This summit
meeting of the Security Council, the first of its kind on the political
Olympus of the contemporary world, is a historic and unprecedented event.

The

end of the twentieth century is a time of great promise and new anxieties.
The age-old search for truth and the attempt to discern what the future has in
store for humanity seem to be getting a kind of second wind.

Perhaps for the

first time ever there is now a real chance to put an end to despotism and to
dismantle the totalitarian order, whatever shape it may take,

I trust that

after all the unthinkable tragedies and tremendous losses it pas suffered,
mankind will reject this legacy; it will not allow the twenty-first century to
bring new suffering and privation to our children and grandchildren.
The process of profound change is already under way in various spheres of
life, and above all in the economic sphere.

It is a problem that concerns not

just individual nations or States, but the whole of mankind.

After all, it is

an economy mutilated by ideological diktat and built in defiance of all common
sense that forms the principal material base of totalitarianism.

A profound

awareness of this causal relationship has led the Russian leadership to embark
upon a most .difficult course of economic reform.

We have taken that risk in a

country where an all-out war was waged against economic interests for many
decades.
I am grateful to the world community for its support of our efforts and
for understanding that the future not only of the people of Russia but of the

BCT/ed

S/PV,3046
43

(President Yeltsin)
entire planet largely depends on whether or not these reforms are successful.
I am also grateful to the people of Russia for their courage and
steadfastness.

They should take a great deal of credit for the fact that the

world community is moving ever farther away from the totalitarian past.
Democracy is one of the major achievements of human civilization.

All

times and all countries have known people who have risen up selflessly in its
defence.

The people of Russia defended democracy at the walls of our Moscow

White House.

Now we must accomplish the most difficult task - that is, the

creation of legal, political and socio-economic guarantees to make democratic
changes irreversible.
All of us our weighed down by a tremendous burden of mutual mistrust.

It

is no secret that a most profound abyss has separated the two States that
until recently were referred to as the super-Powers.
bridged.

This abyss must be

That is the wish of our nations and the commitment of the Presidents

of the United States of America and the Russian Federation.
The new political situation in the world makes it possible not only to
advance new, original ideas but also to make even the most ambitious of them
practicable.

Our proposals have been outlined in our messages to the

Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, and the
President of the United States, Mr. George Bush.

Russia believes that the

time has come to reduce considerably the presence of means of destruction on
our planet.

I am convinced that together we are capable of making the

principle of minimum defence sufficiency a fundamental law of the existence of
contemporary States.

Today there are real opportunities for implementing deep

cuts in strategic offensive arms and tactical nuclear weapons; resolutely

S/PV.3046

BCT/ed

44

(President Yeltsin)
moving towards significant limitations on nuclear testing and even towards its
complete cessation; making anti-ballistic-missile defences less complicated
and costly and eliminating anti-satellite systems; considerably reducing
conventional armaments and armed forces; ensuring practical implementation of
international agreements on the prohibition of chemical and bacteriological
weapons; and enhancing the reliability of barriers to the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction.
The problem of experts engaged in the development and production of such
weapons, including nuclear physicists, has lately become a top priority.

No

country has the right to use its talents for political gains, at the expense
I

of international security.

Russia is fully aware of its own responsibility

and is taking steps to make provision for the social security of such
experts.

~t the same time, we support the idea of establishing international

centres which could coordinate appropriate research and support the most
promising areas of work.
I think the time has come to consider creating a global defence system
for the world community.

It could be based on a reorientation of the United

States Strategic Defense Initiative, to make use of high technologies
developed in Russia's de1ence complex.
We are ready to par~icipate actively in building and putting in place a
pan-European collective security system - in particular during the Vienna
talks and the upcoming post-Helsinki-II talks on security and cooperation in
Europe.
Russia regards the United States and the West not as mere partners but
rather as allies.

This is a basic prerequisite for, I would say, a revolution

in peaceful cooperation between progressive nations.

We reject any

BCT/ed

S/PV.3046
45

(President Yeltsin)
subordination of foreign policy to pure ideology or ideological doctrines.
Our principles are clear and simple:

primacy of democracy, human rights and

freedoms, legal and moral standards.

I hope that this is something that our

partners in the Commonwealth of Independent States also hold dear.

We support

their early admission to the United Nations and believe that this will have a
beneficial impact on the evolution of the Commonwealth itself.

The

Commonwealth has been formed by the participating States on the basis of full
equality and of their own free will.
tens of millions of people.

It rests on natural human ties among

Russia is fully aware of its responsibility for

making the Commonwealth of Independent States an important factor of stability
in the world.

This applies above all to nuclear forces.

The participating

States of the Commonwealth share the view that nuclear weapons are an integral
part of the strategic forces of the Commonwealth under a single command and
unified control.
Today talks are under way about the future of the armed forces of the
former Union.

The main task is to carry out the transformation of them in a

civilized manner and on~ clearly defined legal basis.

S/PV.3046
46

JP/edd

C~regident Yeltsin)
Our top priority is to guarantee all human rights and freedoms in their
entirety, including political ~nd civil rights and decent socio-economic and
environmental living standards.
I believe that these questions are not an internal matter of States, but
rather their obligations under the United Nations Charter, international
covenants and conventions.
norm.

We want to see this approach become a universal

The Security Council is called upon to underscore the civilized world's

collective responsibility for the protection of human rights and freedoms.
In the near future Russia intends to adopt legislation that will reflect
the highest international standards in the field of the protection of human
freedom, honour and dignity.

This applies above all to ensuring personal

security, to the Criminal Code and the Corrective Labour Code, to protection
of Russian citizens abroad, to alternative military service and to other
issues.
We are prepared to accede to the international ,instruments on migration
and to join in the efforts of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees.

I believe that the experience of the world community in these areas

will be useful for Russia and other States of the Commonwealth.
A few days ago the 10 remaining political prisoners were pardoned by a
decree of the President of the Russian Federation.

There are no longer any

prisoners of conscience in free Russia •.
A special role in establishing a new international climate in the world
belongs to the United Nations.

This Organization has stood the test of time

and managed, even in the ice age of confrontation, to preserve the nascent
[

norms of civilized international cohabitation contained in its Charter.

S/PV.3046

JP/edd

47

(President Yeltsin)
We welcome the United Nations increased efforts to strengthen global and
regional stability and to build a new democratic world order based on the
equality of all States, big or small.
Russia is prepared to continue partnership betwe.en the 'permanent members
of the Security Council.

The current climate in the activities of this body

is conducive to cooperative and constructive work.
For us, the peace-making experience of the United Nations is particularly
valuable.
The new Russian diplomacy will contribute in every possible way to the
final settlement of conflicts in various regions of the world that have been
unblocked with the assistance of the United Nations.

We are ready to become

more fully engaged in these efforts.
We will make use of the effective role of the United Nations and the
Security Council and take part in the search for lasting solutions to the
Yugoslav and Afghan problems and for a normalization of the. situation in the
Near and Middle East, in Cambodia and in other regions.

I believe that we need a special rapid-response mechanism, as mentioned
by President Mitterrand of France, to ensure peace and stability.

Upon

decision of the Security Council it could be expeditiously activated in areas
of crisis.
We are prepared to play a practical role in United Nations peace-keeping
operations and contribute to their logistical support.
My country firmly supports steps to consolidate the rule of law
throughout the world.

It is necessary to enhance the prestige of the

International Court of Justice as an effective instrument for the peaceful
·1

settlement of international disputes.

S/PV.3046

J~eM

48

(President Yeltsin)
On the whole, I think it is high time we considered serious reform of the
I

United Nations.

The world has changed and certain areas of United Nations

activities have lost their relevance.

We should do away with those structures

which yield no practical benefits to Member States.

We are ready to present

our proposals for reform of the United Nations.
It is a historical irony that the Russian Federation, a State with
centuries-long experience in foreign policy and diplomacy, has only just
appeared on the political map of the world.

I am confident that the world

community will find in Russia, as an equal participant in international
relations and as a permanent member of the Security Council, a firm and
steadfast champion of freedom, democracy and humanism.
Last year's events have confirmed that the nations of ,the world have now
come of age and are capable of adopting responsible and meaningful decisions.
This was vividly demonstrated by the developments in the Gulf, when our
joint efforts resulted in the just punishment of the aggressor, and by the
defeat of the coup in Moscow last August.
Difficult work lies ahead for us all to consolidate the positive trends
in the evolution of today's world and to make them irreversible.

It is only

on this basis that we can ensure a decent and prosperous life for our nations
and every individual.

Russia is prepared to do all it can to achieve this

goal.
In conclusion, permit me to wish Mr. Boutros-Ghali every success in his
important post of Secretary-General of the United Nations.
The PRESIDENT:

Mr. President, thank you.

I know the Council would

wish me to welcome Russia as a permanent member of our Council.
welcome indeed.

You are very

JP/edd

S/PV.3046
49
(The President)

I now invite the President of the United States of America to take the
floor.
President BUSH:

Thank you, Mr. President, and thank you for your

key role in convening this first-ever summit of the United Nations Security
Council.
Mr. Secretary-Gen~ral, I offer congratulations to you as you take office
at this time of tremendous challenge and opportunity.
For the United States it is a high honour to participate and speak at
this history-making event.
We meet at a moment of new beginnings - for this institution and for
every Member nation.

For most of its history the United Nations was caught in

a cold-war crossfire.

I think back to my days here in the early 1970s as a

Permanent Representative and of the way polemics then displaced
peace-keeping.

Long before I came onto the scene, and long after I left, the

United Nations was all too often paralysed by cruel ideological divisions and
the struggle to contain Soviet expansion.

Today all that has changed.

The collapse of imperial communism and the end of the cold war breathe
new life into the United Nations.

It was just one year ago that the world saw

this new invigorated United Nations in action as the Council stood fast
against aggression, and stood for the sacred principles enshrined in the
United Nations Charter.
Now it is time to step forward again, to make the internal reforms,
accelerate the revitalization, accept the responsibilities necessary for a
vigorous and effective United Nations.
I want to assure the members of the Council and the Secretary-General
that the United Nations can count on our full support in this task.

S/PV.3046

JP/edd

50

(President Bush)
Today, for these brief remarks, I will not talk on the economic and
social agenda so eloquently addressed by President Borja, but, rather, I will
mention the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, regional conflicts,
destabilizing renegade regimes that are on the horizon, terrorism, and human
rights; they all require our immediate attention.
The world also challenges us to strengthen and sustain positive change.
We must advance the momentous movement towards democracy and freedom - I
believe our Secretary-General Boutros-Ghali called this 11 democratization" and expand the circle of nations committed to human rights and the rule of
law.

It is an exciting opportunity for our United Nations.

We must not allow

it to slip away.
Right now, across the globe,. the United Nations is working night and day
in the cause of peace.

Never before in its four decades have the United

Nations blue helmets and blue berets been so engaged in the noble work of
peace-keeping, even to the extent of building the foundation for free
elections.
And never before has the United Nations been so ready, and so compelled,
to step up to the task of peace-making - both to resolve hot wars and to
conduct that forward-looking mission known as preventive diplomacy.

In the

lives of millions of men and women around the world its import is simple:
can mean the difference between war and peace, healing and hatred.

it

Where

there is fear and despair, it can mean hope.
We look to the Secretary-General to present to this Council his
recommendations to ensure effective and efficient peace-keeping, peace-making
and preventive diplomacy.

We look forward to exploring these ideas together.

JP/edd

S/PV.3046
SO(a-z)

(President Bush)
We must be practi~al as well as principled as we seek to free people from
the spectre of conflict.
We recognize every nation's obligation to invest in peace.

As conflicts

are resolved and violence subsides, then the institutions of free societies
can take hold.

As they do, they become our strongest safeguards against

aggression and tyranny.

Democracy; human rights; the rule of law - these are

the building blocks of peace and freedom.

S/PV.3046
51

EMS/12

(President Bush)
We have witnessed change of enormous breadth and scope, all in but a few
short years.

A remarkable revolution has swept away the old regimes from

Managua to Moscow.

But everywhere, free Government and the institutions that

give it form will take time to flourish and mature.
Free elections give democracy a foothold, but true democracy means more
than simply the rule of the majority.
democratic principles.

It means an irrevocable commitment to

It means equal rights for minorities.

And above all

it means the sanctity of even a single individual against the unjust power of
the State.

The will of the majority must never degenerate into the whim of

the majority.

This fundamental principle transcends all borders.

Human dignity, the inalienable rights of man:
possessions of the State.

They are universal.

these are not the

In Asia, in Africa, in Europe,

in the Americas the United Nations must stand with those who seek greater
freedom and democracy.
American people,

That is my deep belief, and that is the belief of the

And it is the belief that breathes life into the great

principles of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
Our changed world is a more hopeful world indeed.

But it is not absent

those who would turn back the clock to the darker days of threats and
bullying.

Our world is still a dangerous world, rife with far too many

terrible weapons,
In my first address to the United Nations as President, I challenged the
Soviet Union to eliminate chemical weapons and called on every nation to join
us in that crusade.

His Majesty King Hassan II of Morocco made that point so

well right here today.

What greater cause for this great body than to make

certain the world has seen the last of these terrible weapons?

So let us vow

to make this year the year all nations at long last join to ban this scourge.

EMS/12

S/PV.3046

52
(President Bush}
There is much more to do regarding weapons of mass destruction,

Just

three days ago, in my State of the Union message, I announced the steps far-reaching unilateral steps - that we will take to reduce our nuclear
arsenal.

These steps affect each element in our strategic triad:

the land,

the sea and the air.
In addition to those unilateral steps we are prepared to move forward on
mutual arms reductions.

I noted the constructive comments of

President Yeltsin here today, and tomorrow in my meeting with him we will
continue the search for common ground on this vitally important issue.

He

responded with some very serious proposals just the other day.
We welcome - the world welcomes - statements by several of the new States
that won independence after the collapse of the USSR that they will abide by
the nuclear non-proliferation Treaty.

Yet realism requires us to remain

vigilant in this time of transition1

the danger of proliferation remains.

Let me single out the remarks earlier by the President of the French Republic,
President Mitterrand, on this subject:

a clarion call to do something about

it,
We must act together so that from this time forward people involved in
sophisticated weapons programmes will redirect their energies to peaceful
endeavours.

We will do more, in cooperation with our allies, to ensure that

dangerous materials and techology do not fall into the hands of terrorists or
others.

And we will continue to work with these new States to ensure a strong

commitment in word and deed to all global non-proliferation standards.
Today, the threat of global nuclear war is more distant than et any time
in the nuclear era.
that dread.

Drawing down the old cold-war arsenals will further ease

But the spectre of mass destruction remains all too real,

S/PV.3046

EMS/12

53

(President Bush>
especially as some nations continue to push to acquire weapons of mass
destruction and the means to deliver them.
Our triumph in the Gulf is testament to the United Nations mission:
security is a shared responsibility.

that

And today, this institution spearheads a

quarantine against the outlaw regime of Saddam Hussein.

It is the strong

belief of my country that we must keep sanctions in place and take the
following steps to preserve our common security:.
We must continue to focus on Iraq's capability to build or maintain
weapons of mass destruction.

And we must make clear to the world and, most

important, to the people of Iraq that no normalization is possible so long as
Saddam Hussein remains there, remains in power.
As on all the urgent issues I have mentioned today, progress comes from
acting in concert.

We must deal resolutely with these renegade regimes, if

necessary by sanctions or stronger measures, to compel them to observe
international standards of behaviour.
still face.

We will not be blind to the dangers we

Terrorists and their State sponsors must know there will be

serious consequences if they violate international law.
Two weeks ago, this Council in unity sent a very strong message to Libya,
and let me repeat today:

resolution 731 (1992), passed unanimously by this

body, the Security Council, calls on Libya to comply fully with the requests
of three States members of this Council.

I would just like to use this

meeting today to call on Libya to heed the call of the Security Council of the
United Nations.
Last year in the Gulf, in concert, we responded to an attack on the
sovereignty of one nation as an assault on the security of all.

So let us

EMS/12

S/PV.3046
54-55
(President Bush)

make it our mission to give this principle the greatest practical meaning in
the conduct of nations.
Today we stand at another crossroads.

For perhaps the first time since

that hopeful moment in San Francisco, we can look at ou~ Charter as a living,
breathing document.

Yes, after so many years it may still be in its infancy,

requiring the careful and vigilant nurturing of its parents, but I believe in

my heart that it is alive and well,

Our mission is to make_ it strong and

sturdy through increased dedication and cooperation, and I know that we are up
to the challenge.
The nations represented here - like the larger community of the United
Nations represented by so many Permanent Representatives in this Chamber
today - have it in their power to act for peace and freedom.

May God bless

the United Nations as it pursues its noble goal.
The PRESIDENT:

Mr. President, thank you for setting out so clearly

the opportunities and responsibilities that lie ahead for the United Nations.
I now invite the President of Venezuela to take the floor.
President PEREZ (interpretation from Spanish):

Ever since the San

Francisco Conference in 1945, Venezuela has underscored the principles that,
in its view, should guide the action of the United Nations.

Then as now, that

action is to organize the peace.
But to organize the peace, the United Nations was compelled, owing to the
circumstances of its foundation, to sacrifice sovereign equality in the
fulfilment of its mandate.

In San Francisco Venezuela expressed its hope that

the formula adopted on the powers of the Security Council and the General
Assembly
"might evolve in time towards modalities that are more democratic and
more representative of all peoples".

S/PV.3046
56

JB/13

(President Perez)
The end of the East-West conflict; the momentum of the process of
democratization throughout the world; interrelation and global economic
interdependence; the end of the decolonization process and, more recently
still, the resurgence of nationalities on the Euro-Asian continent all show us
that circumstances are so different today that it would be imprudent to
disregard the implications.
The right of veto has been an extraordinary power.

The circumstances on

which it was based have to a great extent been superseded by history.

It was

highly useful in ensuring the survival of the Organization, which, without
that power, might perhaps have met the same fate as the League of Nations.
Now that those risks are gone, the Organization must restore the basic
principle underlying its validity:
obligations.

that of equality of rights and

The Security Council reflects political realities as they

existed at the end of the Second World War, and not current realities.

The

General Assembly is repetitive in its resolutions and weak in providing
political guidance to humanity.

Its organs in the field of cultural, economic

and social cooperation must be reviewed, reinvigorated, streamlined and
effectively redesigned to contribute to North-South dialogue and the
development of the peoples of the third world.

The office of the

Secretary-General must be strengthened and provided with modern management.
I believe that another priority of the United Nations in maintaining
peace is the strengthening of regional organizations in an operational
relationship with the United Nations.
The role of the international Court in The Hague should be complemented
by the establishment of an international penal tribunal, as has so often been
requested.

The situations that have arisen in the Republic of Panama and now

JB/13

S/PV.3046
57

(President Perez)
in Libya, bearing serious risks for peace and the enforcement of international
law, alert us clearly to that need.
Regional conflicts, which could become the most serious and aggressive
threat to the peace, must be approached through a methodology that sets aside
the interests that predominated in the past and reflected the quest for
hegemony and zones of influence among the dominant Powers.
The permanent representatives to the United Nations of. the Rio Group, to
which Venezuela belongs, prepared a document for the consideration of the
General Assembly.
global life:

Its title is an accurate reflection of this change in

"From Confrontation to International Cooperation".

I wish to

stress the main lines of the Rio Group's declaration because they reflect the
thinking of all Latin America on the role which this Organization should play.
We can replace the nuclear threat with the challenge of disarmament.
This task is not the exclusive responsibility of those who confronted each
other during the cold war.

It is a collective responsibility.

It means

reconverting to peaceful uses the industrial-military apparatus and
controlling the flow of technology.

It means the development of guarantees

and controls by the international community.
We must adapt the traditional concept of national sovereignty,
incorporating into it the transnational responsibilities implicit in the
interdependence of all our nations and in supranationality, which has been
fully recognized through the democratization of global society.

We must

reshape the traditional concept of national sovereignty to the full range of
State duties and peoples' rights.

This is obvious when it comes to the issue

of the environment and, even more so in connection with natural resources,
which have been described as a collective heritage.

We must ~lso adapt and

S/PV.3046

JB/13

58

(President Perez)
reshape it to an essential body of human rights and States' commitments among
themselves and towards their peoples with the new concept of a democratic
legal philosophy.
The Rio summit on development and the environment can be an initial
staging ground for the democratization of international relations and the role
which relations between North and South must now play.

It must be followed by

a summit on social development, as proposed by President Mitterrand, if we
wish to be consistent with the goals that we have expressed.
May I recall that Venezuela was the country which proposed an
international convention on the question of the traffic in narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances.

Venezuela was also spokesman for efforts to focus

the international community's attention and action on the serious and
persistent absurdity of underdevelopment, which continues to distort the
fabric of North-South relations.

Venezuela has been and remains a staunch

promoter of relations among developing countries - South-South relations - in
the conviction that it is in the interest of all nations to put an end once
and for all to the inequality of conditions and opportunities on which
contemporary international society has been built.
The welcome reconciliation and cooperation between East and West must not
be at the expense of the necessary cooperation and agreement between North and
South.

These are no longer national problems.

If anything demonstrates that

fact, it is the constant tension that exists between models of global economic
organization and new regional structures.that are exclusive in nature and
threaten to create not only competitive but antagonistic blocs.

S/PV.3046
59-60

JB/13

(President Perez)
Here I wish to quote the reflections contained in the annual statement of
the Canadian Institute for International Peace and Security, which I believe
to be particularly timely and eloquent:
"Can anyone seriously envisage a 'new world order' composed of three
closed blocs formed by the wealthy sector of humanity wielding the
economic dagger, calmly advocating democracy, market economies and
disarmament to a majority that is ever more desperate, and all of this in
a world of overburdened natural systems, openly proclaimed divergent
values and massive migrations such as have never been seen before, as
well as technology and weapons of mass destruction proliferating
throughout the world?"
We must deal with all of these risks in a democratic and legal way, just as in
each of our national societies only the rule of law can safeguard
international coexistence through a legal system that ensures international
justice,

No longer can the United Nations live on the sidelines of history,

We have the good fortune to be able to strengthen ~nd guide it.

Undoubtedly,

this will require new instruments of action in accordance·with the new
priorities we set together,

And it is clear, perhaps for the first time, that

the United Nations is indispensable to us all,
that this will be easy.

We cannot and must not presume

But we can and must determine how it can be made part

of the solution of present-day challenges,

S/PV.3046
61

BHS/PLJ

(fresident Perez)
This means placing our trust in its leadership and in its set-up, as well
as in the decision-making machinery.

The guiding principles must be those

that inspired its establishment, now brought to complete fruition.
That is how I see the task of peace-building, peace-making and
peace-keeping.

The PRESIDENT: Thank you, Mr. President, and thank you also for
drawing some fresh subjects to the attention of the Council.
I now invite the Federal Chancellor of Austria to address the Council.

Mr, VRA,NITZKY (Austria):

Mr. President, your initiative to convene

this high-level meeting of the members of the Security Council is indeed
timely:

the end of the cold war has freed minds and resources which were for

so long bound by a wasteful and useless confrontation.

Dramatic changes have

occurred in a very short time; a ne.w quality in international relations is
making itself felt.

Austria, situated on the former iron curtain, can

certainly testify to that.
These changes also provide us with a new, maybe unique, opportunity to
face new challenges with a new perspective.

There is a new partnership in

global responsibility shared by all members of the Security Council.
Permanent and non-permanent members alike have worked together and have
enabled the Council to take a number of unanimous positions on some of the
most complex and critical issues.
In this Organization the powerful and the weak, the large and the small,
the wealthy and the struggling come together as equals to solve their
problems, to look for support, to look for justice.

It certainly is in our

interest to have the United Nations as effective as possible, as respected as
possible, as' influential as possible, so that it can really fulfil our common
goal, the maintenance of international peace and security.

This Organization,

BHS/PLJ

$/PV.3046
62

(Mr. Vranitzky. Austria)
its new Secretary-General and this, in many ways, new Security Council, must
be agents of peaceful and constructive change.
There are four major issues of great importance in this context:

the

strengthening of the United Nations in peace-making and peace-keeping; the
need for further progress in disarmament and arms control, including the
dismantling of weapons of mass destruction; the significance of human rights,
minority rights and democratic processes for development, prosperity and
peace; and the need for effective measures against poverty to create a
long-term basis for stability and security in international relations.
Peace-keeping activities are a very effective instrument of the United
Nations,

From its modest beginning, conceived with ingenuity and carried out

pragmatically, peace-keeping has grown in size and scope, has g1own into a
universally accepted and by now indispensable tool.
Much experience has been gained over the years.

I fully agree with the

former Secretary-General who, when accepting the 1988 Nobel Peace Prize for
the United Nations,peace-keeping forces, stated that the principles and
techniques involved in peace-keeping may also be applicable to conflict
resolution in general:

the principles of impartiality and objectivity, the

symbolic representation of international authority, the process of seeking
compliance through cooperation, the capacity for fact-finding, the monitoring
of the implementation of agreements, and the development of a capacity to
prevent conflicts.
Now the Security Council has begun to fulfil more effectively its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security.

Now

we also have the chance to give a new impetus to a stronger role of the United
Nations in these areas.

S/PV.3046
63

BHS/PLJ

(Mr. Vranitzky, Austria)
Some of the recent crises have made one fact very clear:
urgent need for an early rei!Ction to potential conflicts.

there is an

Preventive

diplomacy both by the Secretary-General and, where appropriate, by the
Security Council will have to be developed further.
An early deployment of peace-keeping personnel, possibly also at the
request of only one party to a conflict, may help to contain a dispute and
facilitate a process of negotiation and compromise before· the outbreak of
hostilities,

I strongly believe that the Security Council will have to

consider the possibility of this measure and other preventive measures.
Many of the questions currently on the agenda of this Council relate
directly to internal conflicts.

They are born of ethnic, nationalistic or

religious rivalries or are the result of long suppressed grievances.
Nevertheless, they all sooner or later affect regional or international peace
and security.
The tragic situation in Yugoslavia provides an instructive example.
Austria was among the first to call at an early stage for international

peace-making efforts in this conflict and for the deployment of United Nations
peace-keeping forces,

We welcome the fact that the United Nations role in

solving this crisis is now universally accepted.

However, some of the

bloodshed and destruction could have been avoided by a swifter response.
In other areas the United Nations has clearly shown that it is indeed
able to give an adequate response to new challenges by expanding the mandate
of peace-keeping to new responsibilities, such as the protection of human
rights or the supervision of free and fair elections.
It may also be useful to recall the Charter's ambitious goal of
multilateral peace enforcement and the creation of an effective system of
global collective security.

The authorization given by the Security Council

S/PV,3046
64-65

BHS/PLJ

(Mr. Vranitzky, Austria)
to a coalition of States to use all necessary means to implement the mandatory
resolutions of the Council was a significant step in this direction.
Another step would be to have.a fresh look at Article 43 of the Charter.
As one of the most important future tasks of the Security Council, I see
a more active involvement in the areas of arms control, non-proliferation and
disarmament.

In Article 26, the Charter has given us an excellent programme

for future action of the Council.
This is not only a political priority of the first order; it also
responds to the wishes of our peoples.

Given the tremendous challenges of

achieving sustainable development and international economic progress and
social justice, the need for reduction of military budgets becomes obvious.
Security can be achieved at a lower level, and the achievements in the
intermediate-range nuclear forces (INF), the strategic arms reduction talks
(START) and the conventional armed forces in Europe (CFE) negotiations clearly
show that this is possible,

The latest announcements by Presidents Bush and

Yeltsin of further cuts are very promising indeed and highly welcome.
New successes seem within reach also with regard to chemical weapons and
a broadened acceptance of non-proliferation.

The nuclear-weapon States in the

terms of the non-proliferation Treaty (NPT) are also the permanent members of
the Security Council.

They have a special responsibility to develop policies

that at least contain the promise of a nuclear-weapon-free world.
The global efforts and the negotiations in Europe will, in my view, have
to be complemented by regional and even subregional moves towards arms
reduction and disarmament in Africa, Asia, the Middle East and also South
America.

They also can profit from the so-called peace dividend.

A

reduction

of their military budgets can provide financial resources acguired for
economic and social development.

S/PV.3046
66

EF/15

(Mr, Vranitzky, Austria)
It is obvious that such efforts will be possible only in a climate· of
international trust and confidence.

Existing verification instruments will

have to be strengthened and expanded.

Technical expertise has been

accumulated in specialized agencies; now, it has to be put to good use.

One

such organization, without a doubt, is the International Atomic Energy Agency,
located in Vienna.

Given its experience and its capacity, I am convinced that

it should have a central role in the very special problem of the destruction
of nuclear weapons.
The protection of human rights and, in particular, of the rights of
ethnic minorities too, has had an important impact on the development of
peaceful relations between States.

There is a direct connection between

democratic processes within countries and the evolution of a political culture
which is conducive to the peaceful settlement of disputes.

From our own

history, we know that peace was most threatened when human rights were
abolished and minorities persecuted and when democratic processes gave way to
totalitarian practices.

Hwnan rights, minority rights and democracy are,

therefore, important cornerstones in our common endeavour.
The Secretary-General has identified these issues as priority areas for
the future work of the Organization.

I fully share and support this view.

Today, nobody should be allowed to use outdated interpretations of legal
documents as protective walls behind which human rights can be systematically
and massively violated with total impunity.
Democracy and hwnan rights are easily endangered in a state of poverty,
as has already been said this morning.

No system has ever been able to ensure

peace and security unless at the same time it provided social justice.

Our

search for peace cannot be separated from the need to improve economic and

S/PV.3046

EF/15

67

(Mr, Vranitzky, Austria)"
social conditions everywhere in the world.
necessary.

Adequate strategies are

They will have to be formulated quickly and implemented with speed

and efficiency.
As we move, through the actions of this Council, to strengthen an
international system based on international law and justice, increased support
will also be required for those institutions which care for and uphold the
effectiveness of international law.
International Court of Justice:

In particular, I am referring to the

its role must be expanded and strengthened in

accordance with the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
In conclusion, I should like to touch, briefly and in general terms, on
the future of this Council.

If our ideas are truly to bear fruit, we must act

on behalf of as well as in the interest of all States.

We must act in an

even-handed, impartial 1nanner, and we must also be perceived as doing so.

If

we truly want to turn over a new page in the book of this Organization today,
then we must also be aware that the realization of our hopes depends on the
trust of all the world's States and peoples in our impartiality and in our
goodwill.

This trust we must earn - over and over again,

Today is only a

beginning.
The PRESIDENT:

Mr. Federal Chancellor, thank you for your very

comprehensive remarks.
I now invite the Prime Minister of Belgium to take the floor.
Mr, MARTENS (Belgium) (interpretation from French):

The framework

of international relations has gone through profound changes during the past
few years.

The balance of power that emerged after the end of the Second

World War has now dramatically shifted.

As history is unfolding at such great

speed, it is undoubtedly appropriate to call for an exceptional meeting to

S/PV.3046

EF/15

68

(Mr, Martens, Belgium)
discuss some of the consequences of these changes for our Organization.

That

is why Belgium immediately welcomed your initiative, Mr. President, of
convening a meeting of the Security Council at the level of Heads of State or
Government.
The radical turn in the balance of international relations indeed
requires an updating of the role of the Security Council.

It also requires a

rethinking of the interplay between the various bodies of the United Nations.
In the course of this process, the Secretary-General will have to exercise
fully his right to take initiatives.

In our changing world, the

Secretary-General must invent new kinds of diplomacy; he must take new risks
and meet many kinds of challenges, such as terrorism, the recurrence of civil
wars and the emergence of international conflicts linked to the violation of
human rights.

His function will take on a more vital importance, and the

international community will have ever higher expectations of him.
When in 1978 Egypt took the "peace risk" and embarked on extremely
difficult negotiations, our new Secretary-General seized the opportunity to
show his courage and his talents as a diplomat.

Needless to say, Belgium is

extremely satisfied at seeing Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali occupying that seat
within the Council.
Your predecessor, Mr. Secretary-General, had the very difficult task of
carrying out his important responsibilities at a time which was extremely
important for the United Nations and for the world.

Mr. Perez de Cuellar

succeeded in becoming a true incarnation of the hopes of our Organization and
·. its Member States.
and his skill.

The success of his efforts bear witness to his tenacity

Recently, thanks to his diplomatic talent, we saw a solution

EF/15

S/PV.3046
69
(Mr, Martens, Belgium)

to the painful problem of the hostages in the Middle East.

We fervently hope

this process will be brought to fruition,
Among the most important tasks before us, I see three which may be
implemented through the means of action at our disposal:

cooperation and

coordination between the United Nations and international regional
organizations; extension of the powers of initiative and inquiry of the
Secretary-General and the Security Council; and the greatest possible
efficiency of the United Nations peace-keeping operations,

Furthermore, for

Belgium, it is essential that the Security Council and the Secretary-General
take full account of the importance of universal observance of human rights in
international peace-keeping and security issues; they should act accordingly,
with the full weight of their authority,
First of all, I should like to address the issue of international
regional organizations, which should be involved systematically in the
Security Council's actions.

Very recently, in its resolutions concerning the

Yugoslav crisis, the Security Council constantly referred to the intervention
of the European Community as well as to the efforts made within the Conference
on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) framework.

Belgium considers

this road to be very promising, inasmuch as regional structures genuinely
carry out their actions within the United Nations framework of values.
In this context, some aspects of the Treaty on Political Union, which the
12 States members of the European Community have just concluded in Maastricht,
should be highlighted.

The Treaty invites the Twelve to broaden their

cooperation to Security Council matters in order to defend their common
positions.

As far as Belgium is concerned, the framework of common foreign

policy and security policy should enable the Twelve to speak with a single

S/PV.3046

EF/15

70

(Mr. Martens. Belgium)
voice in due time.

A particularly positive example of this increasing

coordination of the Twelve is their common diplomatic initiative which led to
the adoption by the General Assembly of the idea of an arms transfer
register.

In the same spirit, the Twelve will shortly be considering what

action they can take to support the recent proposal of the German Government
aiming at preventing proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

RM/16

S/PV,3046
71

(Mr. Martens, Belgium)
The power of the Security Council and the Secretary-General to take
initiatives is a second means of action at our disposal.

That role would

become more efficient if we could facilitate a swift United Nations response
whenever conflicts or pre-conflict situations arise.
My country has been defending the principle of an extension of the
Secretary-General's preventive-diplomacy powers since 1983.

Belgium's

diplomatic efforts, which Germany, Spain, Italy, Japan and New Zealand have
joined, resulted in the adoption of a resolution at the forty-third session of
the General Assembly exclusively addressing the prevention of conflicts,
Belgium and the aforementioned States, together with Czechoslovakia, then went
on to examine the issue of fact-finding, which resulted in the adoption of a
resolution a few weeks ago during the forty-sixth session of the General
Assembly.
The central theme of both of those documents is the role of the
Secretary-General and the Security Council in the early stages of conflict
situations.

The Secretary-General should enjoy the full support of the

Security Council whenever he considers taking early initiatives to deal with
delicate situations.

If need be, the Security Council could enhance that

political support by requesting the Secretary-General to prepare a report on a
specific issue.

Moreover, he could be requested to contact the various

parties as soon as it became clear that the conflict might reach alarming
proportions.

Accordingly, the Secretary-General might be invited by the

Security Council to formulate concrete proposals aimed at preventing a
deterioration of the situation.
The third issue I should like to take up is that of peace-keeping
operations, which are one of the most efficient means of action available to

S/PV. 3046
72

RM/16

(Mr. Martens, Belgium)
the Security Council in coordination with the Secretary-General.

The

Secretariat should now reorganize and streamline their management and
administration, given the success of such operations and their increase in
number over the past few years, and given also the new scope of those
operations that will be initiated in the near future in our often very
delicate political environment.
We must first of all ensure the immediate availability of funds from the
moment the Security Council decides on the launching of a peace-keeping
operation.

In this regard Belgium proposes the creation of budgetary

reserves.

The size of those reserves would be agreed on annually according to

the operations planned.

The Council could allocate a portion of them to the

provisional financing of the preliminary stages of peace-keeping operations.
Within the framework of peace-keeping operations set up by the Security
Council, my country will give favourable consideration to the secondment of
troops and observers to the United Nations for possible deployment.

Through

specific training programmes, Belgium will ensure rapid deployment of Belgian
contingents in United Nations peace-keeping forces.
In addition to the procedures and means of action at the Organization's
disposal, the time has now come to place our actions once more in the
pecspective envisaged by the authors of the Charter, to which all peoples
aspire.

In this endeavour to allow the fundamental principles of the Charter

to prevail, it is essential that the Security Council and the
Secretary-General show courage and initiative.

The new solidarity has

permitted the collective defence of international law; it should now serve the
collective defence of human rights.
Last October in the General Assembly Belgium stated that:

RM/16

S/PV,3046
73

(Mr. Martens. Belgium)
"States are liable internationally for their national policies in the
field of human rights."

(A/46/PV.27. p. 49-50)

Every State here today will agree that the fate of civil populations that fall
victim to internal repressions fully justifies the compassion and concern of
the United Nations.

Indeed, all States Members of the Organization concur in

their determination to defend human rights.

They have committed themselves to

acting to that end, in keeping with the Charter of the United Nations.
My country believes that the raison d'etre of the principle of
non-interference is to allow States to foster in freedom the well-being of
their peoples.

However, no Government should use that principle as a legal

argument to condone abuses of human rights.

State rights are subservient to

human rights.
The Security Council and the Secretary-General should focus especial
attention on these matters.

The Commission on Human Rights already provides

mechanisms for denouncing serious violations of human rights.

In this

connection, Belgium would suggest that the Security Council deal with such
cases at an early stage and support any action taken elsewhere to put an end
to unacceptable situations that could pose a direct threat to international
peace and secur i.ty.
Recently, the United Nations has participated in the organization and
supervision of free elections.

Such assistance could also be provided in

situations where administrative structures have collapsed as a result of
natural disaster or conflict.

The United Nations might decide on procedures

to be implemented on short notice.

Member States could thus draw up lists of

national civil servants available for rapid deployment on certain missions.

RM/16

S/PV.3046
74-75

CMr. Martens, Belgium)
In addition to international peace and security, we should also make an
effort to pursue justice in other fields in order, in the words of the
preamble to the Charter, "to promote better standards of life in larger
freedom" for the largest possible number of people.
The Security Council and the Secretary-General are facing difficult tasks
in the field of international peace and security.

For the sake of efficiency,

a thorough symbiosis with other United Nations bodies is required, taking into
account their respective fields of competence.

In that respect, all other

objectives pursued by the United Nations continue to be of crucial importance,
in particular, the need to pursue, together, sustainable economic development
for all, fruitful dialogue between richest and poorest nations and the common
fight against such scourges as hunger, disease, illiteracy and pollution.
Belgium will continue to cooperate actively in the implementation of the
decisions of the Security Council and, as it has in the past, it will continue
to support the actions of the Secretary-General.
If the better-organized and more unified world I hav~ just outlined is to
live in peace, i't should also pay due regard to the problems of the
less-well-off and poor in a more effective .way.

Respec.t for the dignity and

worth of every human being is a universal aspiration, one we should uphold not
only in principle but one we should also try to translate into facts.

Peace

is a necessary step - but only a step - towards man's self-liberation, which
requires the joint efforts of all Member States and of the whole of the United
Nations.

BCT/ed

S/PV.3046
76

The PRESIDENT:

I thank the Prime Minister of Belgium for dealing so

well with the matters at the heart of our debate today.

I now invite the Prime Minister of Cape Verde to address the Security
Council.
Mr, VEIGA (Cape Verde) (spoke in Portuguese; English text furnished
by the delegation):

It gives me great pleasure, Sir, to see you presiding

over this'important meeting of the Security Council.

I congratulate

Your Excellency on this timely initiative of convening this high-level meeting
of the Security Council at this important time in the history of nations.
I take this opportunity to affirm publicly my Government's great
satisfaction at the election of Mr. Boutros-Ghali as the new
Secretary-General.

I pl~dge our full cooperation with him and wish him a

successful mand~te.
This meeti~g is convened at a time when profound changes are taking place
in the world.

In many parts of the planet one witnesses a redefinition of the

political structures and goals of nations.

At the same time, a strong

movement for democratization is gaining momentum and taking hold everywhere;
human rights concerns are gaining ever-increasing importance, while the
serious problems of the world environment are capturing our attention and the
need to address poverty and underdevelopment are becoming more acute and
pressing.
These are global symptoms of a world that is going through a process of
deep transformation, the end result of which we only hope will be a better,
safer, more just and prosperous world order.
The Charter of the United Nations conferred upon this Council the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, so as

S/PV.3046

BCT/ed

77

<Mr, Veiga, Cape Verde)
to ensure a stable world, free from the scourge of war.

This is a function

whose implementation is becoming ever more pressing in a world that has
accumulated massive amounts of highly destructive conventional armaments and
has not ceased building and perfecting nuclear arsenals.

This important

United Nations responsibility was not successfully carried out in the past, as
is well known to us all.
For decades the ideological confrontation of the cold war crept into the
deliberations of the Security Council and made it impossible for us "to unite
our strength to maintain international peace and security" - to use the words
in the preamble ·of the Charter.
We are glad to note that with the end of the cold war the Council has now
developed a new approach to its work, based on cooperation, especially between
its permanent members.

This cooperation has enabled the Council to assist,

through negotiations, in the settlement of age-old conflicts in many parts of
the world and to take swift and decisive action to reverse aggression and
restore the independence and sovereignty of Kuwait.
We believe that the Council has now embarked upon the right course of
action by effectively and efficiently shouldering its responsibility of
maintaining international peace and security.

As a result, the eyes of the

world have now turned to the United Nations as a source of international
peace, stability and justice, and nations seem to have a renewed interest and
faith in the Security Council as a peacemaker and as a guarantor of the
independence and territorial integrity of countries.
As a small, peace-loving country that under no circumstances condones the
threat or use of force to settle international conflicts, Cape Verde welcomes

BCT/ed

S/PV.3046
78

(Mr. Veiga, Cape Verde)
this new era of positive cooperation in the Council and strongly believes that
it should be further strengthened, in order to allow for full and regular
implementation of the Charter collective security system.

The United Nations,

through its Security Council, has to act - as envisaged by the Charter - as
the guardian of the security of nations, especially the small countries, and
as a catalyst for the promotion of the primacy of the rule of law in
I

international relations.

The actions and decisions of the Council in the last

two years have raised new hopes in this regard.
We strongly urge the Council to pursue this course and, certainly, as one
of its members we shall spare no effort to promote and strengthen its Charter
role of taking prompt and decisive action against aggression, of labouring to
bring existing conflicts to a peaceful end and of creating a more stable and
peaceful world environment.
It is therefore imperative that, now that the Council has gained new
impetus in carrying out its function and has gained the respect of the people
of the world, it should act in such a way as to strengthen its international
credibility and its moral authority, so that it will become an ever-present
instrument for maintaining world peace and promoting and strengthening
international security.
A strong Security Council is certainly one whose decisions are based upon
frank discussion by all its members and are a reflection of the views of all
of them.

In our view, the moral authority of the Council is bound to suffer

whenever a decision is taken without exhaustive efforts to achieve consensus.
We believe that when decisions of the Council command across-the-board support
from its members, the possibilities of their implementation are considerably
increased.

S/PV.3046

BCT/ed

79-80

(Mr. Veiga, Cape Verde)
The Council, in addressing aggression and illegal occupation, must be
even-handed.

Whenever a selective approach is taken in this respect, it

necessarily damages the Council's 9redibility and substantially weakens its
moral authority,

Equally damaging to the Council's credibility is what could

be perceived to be selective implementation of its resolutions.

In our view,

if the Council is to have, in the eyes of the peoples of the world, the
credibility such an important organ deserves, then it becomes highly advisable
that the Council secure the implementation of all its resolutions.
The Security Council's role in promoting a safer and more stable climate
needs to be strengthened.

One of the most important tasks facing the Council

in this regard is the implementation of the collective security system
envisaged in the Charter.

The new climate of cooperation between the members

of the Council seems to have contributed to creating the conditions that will
facilitate measures leading to the implementation of that system.
It is unfortunate that we live in a world where there is still aggression
by some States against others.

We believe that aggression should always be

swiftly and decisively reversed by the United Nations.

JP/edd

S/PV.3046
81

(Mr. Veiga, Cape Verde)
On the other hand, we believe that the role of the peace-keeping forces
should be strengthened.

Although peace-keeping activities were ingeniously

invented to fill, partially, the vacuum created since the early days of the
United Nations, by the inability of the latter to implement the collective
security system, we think that such activities have gained a life of their own
and have become an indispensable and important tool in the hands of the
Security Council in its conflict-management role.
United Nations peace-keeping operations have been deployed in various
parts of the world with proven success, and in many instances have contributed
to defuse tension and prevented the escalation of hostilities and in some
cases have even become an indispensable element of a negotiated solution.
We also believe that, without interfering with the sovereignty of
countries, the deployment of United Nations peace-keeping forces can play an
important and decisive role in helping bring about a speedy peaceful outcome
to national conflicts whenever no Government is really in charge and chaos
sets in.
National conflicts are sometimes as destructive as the fiercest
international conflicts.

The enormous loss of life and the human tragedy they

produce demand no less attention and appeal for no less speedy a response from
the international community.
Apart from the loss of human lives, every national conflict has an
international dimension, for it generates massive numbers of refugees, thus
creating enormous social pressure in neighbouring countries, threatening their
peace and stability.
We are glad to note the positive response of the Security Council in this
respect in recent cases, and we encourage the Council to pursue this course.

S/PV.3046
82

JP/edd

(Mr, Veiga, Cape Verde)
Because of its important role and its beneficial result in
conflict-management, we favour a review of the United Nations peace-keeping
activities with a view to consolidating their performance and increasing their
effectiveness.
The Secretary-General has an important Charter role to play in assisting
the Security Council in its peacemaking efforts, by bringing to its attention
any matter that may, in his judgement, threaten international peace and
security.

This eminently relevant political function of the Secretary-General

has not been implemented in the past as it should have been.
In the current international climate, characterized by a proliferation of
violent conflicts, we believe it to be of great importance that the
Secretary-General use, as often as required, this prerogative of his as an
inescapable functional duty that, when performed in a timely manner, might
prevent a potential dispute from developing into an open conflict.

We

encourage the Secretary-General to make effective use of preventive diplomacy,
Whatever the efforts of the Security Council in maintaining international
peace and security, and however commendable the cooperation between its
members might be, the Council measures, in and of themselves, will not suffice
to secure the permanent stability of nations, to quell regional rivalries once
and for all and to weed out violence.
The Council's role will be facilitated when, and only when, the root
causes of instability and conflicts are properly addressed.
Therefore, if we, Members of the United Nations, are to succeed in
creating a safer and more stable world, we should be prepared to couple the
efforts of the Security Council with those of the United Nations system and
the international community in general to help find an urgent and satisfactory

JP/edd

S/PV.3046
83-85

(Mr, Veiga, cape Verde>
answer to poverty, underdevelopment and social problems, all of them natural
ferments that brew frustration and violence and spawn constant instability in
world affairs.

In this respect, we firmly support the initiative to convene a

world summit on social development.
In many instances, the best, most efficient and longest-lasting security
measure to avoid conflict is to invest in the solution of social problems, the
eradication of poverty and underdevelopment and to promote a cult of respect
for, and strict observance of, the Charter principles - particularly, strict
observance of the principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes.
The PRESIDENT:

Thank you, Prime Minister, for your speech and your

very strong support for the United Nations role.
I propose that we now suspend our meeting until 3 p.m., when I shall
invite Premier Li Peng to address the Council.

S/PV.3046

EMS/29

86

The meeting was suspended at 1,2s p,m. and resumed at 3,10 p.m.

The PRESIDENT:

I now invite the Premier of the State Council of the

People's Republic of China to make a statement.
Mr, LI Peng (China) (interpretation from Chinese):

For the first

time in the 47-year history of the United Nations the Security Council is
meeting here today at the level of Heads of State or Government of its member
States.

I am very glad to have the opportunity to attend this meeting as the

representative of the People's Republic of China and, together with my
colleagues from other countries, to discuss major international issues
including in particular ways to give support to a greater role for the United
Nations in maintaining peace and promoting development in the world, as well
as to exchange views on other issues of common interest.
I wish to avail myself of this opportunity to thank the Right Honourable
John Major, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, for his initiative to hold
this meeting.
I should also like to express once again our warmest congratulations to
Mr, Boutros Boutros-Ghali on his assumption of the office of Secretary-General.
The present-day world is at a vital turning-point.

The old structure has

come to an end, while a new one has yet to take shape.

The world is moving in

the direction of multipolarization.

World peace, national stability and

economic development are aspirations shared by peoples everywhere.

The tense

face-off between the two major military blocs in Europe, which lasted for
nearly half a century, is no longer in place.

Some regional hot spots have

either been or are in the process of being removed.
situation has eased to some extent.

The international

EMS/29

S/PV.3046
87

(Mr, Li Peng, China)
However; factors threatening world peace and causing international
tensi9n have not been removed completely.

While some old contradictions and

confrontations have disappeared, new ones have cropped up; rendering our world
neither tranquil nor peaceful.
The Middle East question remains unresolved after the Gulf war, and the
peace talks between the Arab countries and Israel are likely to be a long and
difficult process.

In some European countries conflicts of varying intensity;

or even wars; have broken out as a result of ethnic strife.

No one can say

for sure that similar conflicts and wars will not take place in other parts of
Europe.
What deserves the close attention of the international community is the
fact that the developing countries, whose populations constitute the
overwhelming majority of the world total; are finding themselves in an
increasingly difficult position.

The gap between the North and the South

continues to widen, with the rich countries becoming richer and the poor
poorer.

That state of affairs, if allowed to continue, will eventually lead

to fresh disturbances or even new regional conflicts.

The stark reality shows

that the questions of peace and development, the two principal themes of the
present-day world, remain to be solved.
In contrast to a turbulent Europe, the Asia-Pacific region enjoys
relative stability.

The signing of the Paris Agreement has laid the

/'

foundation for a final settlement of the Cambodian conflict.

Following their

simultaneous admission to membership of the United Nations, the North and the
South of Korea have signed a protocol on mutual non-agression and a joint
declaration on the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
the peninsula is moving towards relaxation and stability.

The situation on

S/PV.3046
88-90

EMS/29

(Mr, Li Peng. China)
Quite a few countries in the Asia-Pacific region have enjoyed a rather
high economic growth rate thanks to political stability at home.

This region

has now become a dynamic and promising region in world economic development.
A stable and economically prosperous China not only is in the fundamental
interests of the Chinese people but also constitutes an important factor
making for peace and stability in the Asia-Pacific region and in the world as
a whole.

Over the past decade or more, China has firmly implemented the

policy of reform and opening to the outside world initiated by
Comrade Deng Xiaoping, which has brought enormous changes to the country.

Now

China enjoys political stability, social tranquility, ethnic harmony and
sustained economic growth.

With full confidence, the Chinese people are

advancing on the road of building socialism with Chinese characteristics.

As

a developing country with a huge population, China knows full well that its
modernization will take a considerably long period of time.

The attainment of

this goal requires two indispensable conditions, namely an environment of
prolonged peace and stability internationally and prolonged political
stability at home.

China pursues an independent foreign policy of peace.

It

always maintains that differences in social system, ideology, cultural
tradition and religious belief should not be an obstacle to establishing and
developing normal relations between States.

JB/30

S/PV.3046
91

(Mr. Li Peng. china)
China is ready to develop friendly relations with all countries on the
basis of the five principles of peaceful coexistence.
threat to any country or any region of the world.

It will never become a

China is of the view that

no country should seek hegemony or practice power politics.

This should be

made a principle to be observed universally in international relations.

does not seek a sphere of influence for itself.

China

It does not seek hegemony now

and will not seek hegemony in future when it grows stronger.

The past few years have seen a further strengthening and development of
friendly and good-neighbourly relations between China and the countries
surrounding it, as a result of the concerted efforts of China and those
countries.

This in our view not only serves the common interests of both

China and those countries but also contributes to the peace and development of
the region and the world as a whole.
In order to win a genuine peace in the world and create a favourable

environment for development for the people of all countries, the international
community is focusing more and more on the subject of what kind of new
international order should be established.

In our view, such basic principles

as the sovereign equality of Member States and non-interference in their

internal affairs, as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, should be
observed by all its Members without exception.

In ,compliance with the spirit

of the Charter and the established norms governing international relations,
and in the light of the changes in the international situation, the Chinese

Government wishes to share with the Governments of other countries some of its
basic views concerning the establishment of a new international order that
will be stable~ rational, just and conducive to world peace and development.
These basic views are:

S/PV.3046
92

JB/30

(Mr, Li Peng, China)
The new international order should be established on the basis of
the principles of mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity,
mutual non-aggression, non-interference in each other's internal affairs,
equality, mutual benefit and peaceful coexistence.

The core of these

principles is non-interference in each other's internal affairs.

The people

and Governments of the various countries are entitled to adopt the social
system and ideology of their own choice in the light of their national
conditions.
All countries, big or small, strong or weak, rich or poor, are
entitled to participate in world affairs as equal members of the international
community and to,make their own contributions to world peace and development,
The new international order should include a new economic order.

As

the ever-widening gap between North and South and the continued exacerbation
of the disparities between them have become a destabilizing factor in
international life, the establishment of a just and rational new international
economic order based on equality, mutual benefit and providing for appropriate
handling of the debt burden has become ever more ur.gent and crucial.
The human rights and fundamental freedoms of all mankind should be
universally respected.

Human rights cover many aspects.

They include not

only civil and political rights but also economic, social and cultural
rights.

As far as the large number of developing countries is concerned, the

rights to independence, subsistence and development are of paramount
importance.

In essence, the issue of h~an rights falls within the

sovereignty of each country.

A country's human rights situation should not be

judged in total disregard of its history and national conditions.

It is

neither appropriate nor workable to demand that all countries measure up to
the human rights criteria or models of one country or a small nwnber of

JB/30

S/PV,3046
93

(Mr. Li Peng, China)
countries.

China values human rights and stands ready to engage in discussion

and cooperation with other countries on an equal footing on the question of
human rights on the basis of mutual understanding, mutual respect and seeking
consensus, while reserving differences.

However, it is opposed to

interference in the internal affairs of other countries using the human rights
issue as an excuse.
Effective disarmament and arms control should be achieved in a fair,
reasonable, comprehensive and balanced manner.

Efforts should be stepped up

to attain the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear and
chemical weapons at an early date and to ban the development of space
weapons.

Countries in possession of the largest nuclear and conventional

arsenals should take the lead in discharging their special responsibilities
for disarmament.

All nuclear-weapon States should undertake not to be the

first to use nuclear weapons and not to use or threaten to use such weapons
against non-nuclear-weapon States or nuclear-free zones.

The nuclear weapons

of the disintegrated Soviet Union should be placed under effective control,
As the disarmament issue bears on the national security of all States, it
should be discussed and addressed with their participation.
The United Nations should uphold justice and play a more active role
in maintaining world peace and promoting development, as well as in helping to
establish a new international order.

As most States Members of the United

Nations belong to the developing world, it is only reasonable for people to
expect that the Organization will do more to defend the rights and interests
of the developing countries.
In recent years, the United Nations has played an important role in
maintaining world peace and security, accelerating the settlement of regional

S/PV.3046

JB/30

94

lMr. Li Peng. China)
conflicts and promoting the economic and social development of various
countries.

In so doing, the United Nations has enhanced its prestige and that

of its Security Council and increased peoples• confidence in the
Organization.

While affirming this, we must also be aware that the drastic

and profound changes in the international situation have led to the
re-emergence of numerous contradictions previously hidden from public view,
adding to instability in the pursuit of peace and development in the world,
It is in this sense that the responsibility of the United Nations and its
Security Council has become heavier and that the challenges facing them have
grown more formidable.
China is ready to cooperate with all the other members of the Security
Council, to discuss issues of common interest to the international community
and to exchange views with them as equals in the spirit of seeking common
ground while r,serving difference~, so as to expand areas of consensus.

China

sincerely hope~ that the United Natidns and its Security Council will play a
still more active and constructive role in international affairs.

We now have

a newly elected United Nations Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros-Ghali.

China

supports the work of the Secretary-General and wishes to pledge its full
cooperation.

We are confident that, in discharging his duties, the

Secretary-General will receive extensive support from the developing countries
and the international community at large.
It is our hope that this meeting will have a positive impact on the
maintenance of world peace and security and that it will play an important
role in helping to establish the new international order and to defend the
rights and interests of the developing countries, thus making a contribution
to the progress of humanity.

JB/30

S/PV.3046
95

The PRESIDENT:

I thank the Premier for his valuable contribution to

start our afternoon session.
I now invite the Prime Minister of India to take the floor.
Mr. RAO (India):

Mr. President, we appreciate the initiative you

have taken in convening this meeting.

Its deliberations can show us a

direction which is indeed important at this juncture.

It is good of you to

have helped us.make a beginning.
I also wish to pay a tribute to a personal friend and colleague of
distinction and eminence, whom the United Nations has rightly chosen as its
Secretary-General.
greetings.

To my brother Boutros Boutros-Ghali, our heartiest

May I also recall with gratitude and appreciation the services of

Mr. Perez de Cuellar, which have left so distinctive a mark on this
Organization.

S/PV.3046

BHS/edd

96

(Mr. Rao, India)
We miss today the presence of a distinguished member of this fraternity,
President Mugabe.

We grieve with him in his personal bereavement and convey

to him, through his delegation, our deepest condolences.

To the President of

Hungary, our good wishes for a speedy recovery from his indisposition.
We are living in a time of change, palpable change.

Until very recently,

the Security Council's effectiveness was inhibited by the cold war.

We have

since witnessed an upsurge of democratic sentiment all over the world.

We

have been touched by the desire in diverse countries that the values of
liberty, economic justice and the dignity of man should govern the conduct of
world affairs.

These are trends of which our discussions must take cognizance.

The United Nations and the Security Council played the role required of
them in recent months because the permanent members of the Council adopted a
harmonious, cohesive and firm stance in dealing with the threats to the
cherished values of man.
India's support to the United Nations has been complete and consistent.
It has had no fluctuations.

Today, we welcome this fresh effective role of

the Security Council and shall continue our support.

In visualizing its

future role, it is essential that we take note of the emerging forces, the
socio-political undercurrents, that result in unrest, instability and the
recurrence of violence across the globe.
Lasting peace and security necessarily require comparable levels of human
happiness across the globe.

It is impossible to think of a United Nations

functioning usefully or harmoniously while humankind continues to be riddled
with ever-increasing disparities and while the world's natural resources land, water and air - which are really humanity"s common heritage are getting
fast depleted by thoughtless acts of overexploitation and environmental

BHS/edd

S/l?V.3046
97

(Mr.

Rao, Indi13,)

degradation.

This is the single simple truth which this Organization has to

take note of.

All else falls in place, although the overall task remains

extremely complicated, even with the best will in the world.
The role of the United Nations must naturally rest on the Charter, which
incorporates the vital framework for action for maintenance of international
peace and security.

But the Charter is only as legitimate and secure as its

underpinning by the collective will of the international community.

At every

step, the interpretation of the Charter as well as the actions by the Security
Council must flow from that collective will and not from the views or
predilections of a few.

A general consensus must always prevail,

right and just must become transparent,

It is as simple as that.

What is
Members of

the Security Council, whether permanent or elected, should insist on this
consensus, scrupulously avoiding the temptation to dictate for quick results.
Besides, while prescribing norms and standards for national or international
conduct, the Security Council must scrupulously accept those norms for itself.
As the composition of the General Assembly has trebled since its
inception, the size of the Security Council cannot remain constant any
longer.

Wider representation in the Security Council is a must, if it is to

ensure its moral sanction and political effectiveness.
While implementing its resolutions in good faith, it is incumbent on the
Security Council to anticipate all the consequences of its decisions.

Some

consequences may be unintended, but they can affect those whom they are least
intended to affect.

For instance, economic sanctions against one country can

have a major impact on its trading partners.
impact can be catastrophic.

For developing countries, this

If the Security Council's actions are to continue

·'.,

S/PV.3046
98

BHS/edd

(Mr, Rao, India)
to command adherence and support, it must take speedy and parallel action to
address problems arising in a third country from the implementation of its

resolutions.

Besides, it must act decisively a~d in time to alleviate human

suffering in the country in question, once the primary purpose of imposing
economic sanctions has been fulfilled.
I have profound respect for those who are crusading for the protection
and preservation of human rights.

A country with a history of over 5,000

years, with a record of non-invasion and non-annexation of alien territories,
with the shining example of a powerful monarch like Asoka turning into an
apostle of non-violence, another powerful heir apparent becoming the one and
only Buddha, with a contemporary political system modelled on the best
traditions of human rights and liberties - such is my country.

Indian culture

and human rights in their loftiest form are almost synonymous.

However,

having stated this, we cannot countenance a situation where all human rights
are reserved only for the practitioners of terrorism, while Governments
dealing with this menace are arraigned day and night on grounds of violation
of human rights - real or imaginary, mostly the latter.
I am fully conscious of the obligations of the State in preserving human
rights, as contrasted with terrorist and secessionist elements killing
innocent citizens with impunity.

What should really be suggested at this

meeting is perhaps to delineate the parameters that harmonize the defence of
national integrity with respect for human rights.

In this view, India is ever

willing to discuss and contribute in the endeavour.
It is also important to note that the content and nature of human rights
are conditioned by the social, traditional and cultural forces that inform
different societies.

While the endeavour of the United Nations as being

BHS/edd

S/PV.3046
99
(Mr. Rao, India)

intimated in this meeting is gradually to move towards creating uniform
international norms for human rights, such norms should not be unilaterally
defined and set up as absolute preconditions for interaction between States
and societies in the political or economic spheres.

Our endeavour should be

to work towards a just and fair world economic order and to encourage
countries to move to~ards universal norms of human rights.
We fully share the concerns expressed by several leaders on the threat
posed to international peace and security by the proliferation of nuclear
weapons.

Another dimension of international security today is that of the

possible loss of control over nuclear arsenals.

What we are faced with is no

longer the possible acquisition of such weapons by a handful of threshold
States, but an uncontrolled spread of ready-made nuclear weapons across the
globe by a variety of means and methods.

The proliferation issue has thus

assumed a qualitatively and frighteningly new dimension.
While sharing these concerns, we wish to underline, however, that
measures of preventive or punitive action on a selective basis will not
achieve the results we are aiming at.

The sense of disquiet and urgency that

pervades the discussion of this issue is precisely because it has now become a
global problem and not of a few potential nuclear-weapon States.

In this

imponderable yet terrible scenario, technical fixes or regional arrangements
can no longer suffice.

The difficulties of monitoring and policing activities

in a large number of States, several of them not even accurately identified at
any given time, preclude effective results.

The Secretary-General cannot, I

submit, be expected to be inspecting basements and searching for bombs.
can hardly succeed, as anyone can see.

There must be some other way.

This

BHS/edd

S/PV.3046
100
(Mr,

What then is the answer to this difficult dilemma?

Rao. India)
In our view, the only

logical route available to us is to pursue a global approach, based on a new
international consensus on non-proliferation.

To be effective, this global

non-proliferation regime must be universal, comprehensive and
non-discriminatory and linked to the goal of complete nuclear disarmament.
At'the third special session of the United Nations devoted to
disarmament, held in 1988, the late Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi of India put
forward a specific Action Plan for Disarmament, which would eliminate all
weapons of mass destruction in stages, eventually leading to a
nuclear-weapon-free and non-violent world,

The plan contained all the key

elements of a new international consensus on nuclear non-proliferation.
First, it called for the conclusion of an international convention on the
prohibition of the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons.
advocated a comprehensive test-ban treaty,

Second, it

Third, threshold States would

undertake obligations not to cross the threshold, and this would be linked to
corresponding obligations by nuclear-weapon States to eliminate their nuclear
arsenals by the year 2010 at the latest.

S/PV.3046

EF/32

101

(Mr.

Rao, India)

At the time this action plan was put forward, some nuclear-weapon States
expressed difficulty in accepting these ideas in view of their adherence to
the so called doctrine df nuclear deterrence.

This doctrine was anchored in

the specific context of East-West confrontation and the cold war.
war is now over; the nuclear stand-off is a thing of the past.

The cold

The doctrine

of nuclear deterrence is no longer relevant.
We are now offered a historic opportunity to exercise statesmanship and
move, quickly, to eliminate nuclear weapons altogether from the face of the
Earth.

In particular, the ideas India put forward in its action plan - or any

alterations thereof - for example, a universal pledge to abjure the use of
nuclear weapons, to conclude a comprehensive test-ban treaty and to develop a
new, universal and non-discriminatory approach to non-proliferation, acquire
compelling relevance.

It is only within the framework of such a consensus,

and through no other means, that the Security Council can deal effectively
with the threats to peace emanating from the proliferation of nuclear weapons
in its current, global dimension.

If our meeting today can make a declaration

along these lines, we will have made a truly historic contribution to the
promotion of lasting peace and security.
In fact, I would venture to suggest that, going even beyond India's
action plan, the target date for a nuclear-weapon-free world should now be
advanced to the end of the present century.

It would be a hopeful note on

which to enter the twenty-first century.
Mr. President, the statement you will be reading out on behalf of the
members of the Council at the end o,f today's meeting has been the subject of
intensive, productive discussions.

We were happy to be part of the exercise

and to have made our contribution to it.

We consider it an important

S/PV.3046
102

EF/32

(Mr, Rao, India)
statement.

However, I find that the statement does not reflect one or two of

India's crucial concerns.
just now.

These I have mentioned clearly in my intervention

This, of course, does not detract from the significance of the

statement you are about to make or from India's ~ooperation.

Indeed, I trust

that today's meeting will spur our common efforts to cooperate to mutual
benefit and in the interest of all, in accordance with the provisions of the
Charter.
The PRESIDENT:

Mr. Prime Minister, thank you for that comprehensive

contribution.
I now invite the Prime Minister of Japan to address the Council,

Mr. MIYAZAWA (Japan):

The year 1992 marks a point of departure

towards a promising future for the United Nations.

It is thus most

appropriate that, for the first time in its history, the Security Council has
convened a meeting of Heads of State or Government at the beginning of the
year.

I should like to convey my sincere respect to Prime Minister John Major

for his excellent leadership in making this summit meeting a reality.
I should also like to extend a heartfelt welcome to
President Boris Yeltsin, who is here at the United Nations for the first time
as the leader of the Russian Federation.

The political and economic stability

of the Federation is of great importance to the peace and stability of the
entire world,

I am confident that Russia will successfully discharge its

awesome responsibilities, not only as a Member of the United Nations but also
as a permanent member of the Security Council.
I also extend my warmest congratulations to Secretary-General
Boutros-Ghali, who has assumed his new post amid growing expectations of the

EF/32

S/PV.3046
103

(Mr. Miyazawa. Japan)
role to be played by the United Nations.

I take this opportunity to express

the firm determination of my Government to support him in all his endeavours.
The cold war that divided East and West throughout the post-war period
has finally ended, and the configuration of the world is about to undergo
epochal change.

While the international situation in this post-cold-war era

is highly fluid, it also presents abundant opportunities to build a new and
peaceful world order.

The precise shape of this new world order is not yet

clear, but all countries must join together to construct a new peace order
appropriate to the new era, for the sake of the freedom and prosperity of
humankind and the future of our planet.
At this time of transition, the United Nations has begun to play, both in
theory1and in practice, a central role in efforts to achieve and maintain
world peace.

Expectations of the United Nations among the peoples of the

world have reached new heights; its role, and particularly that of the
Security Council, during the Gulf crisis, remains vivid in our memory.

United

Nations involvement has been central to the attainment of peace in Central
America, to the resolution of the conflict in Yugoslavia and to the final
phase of the Cambodian peace process.
United Nations peace-keeping operations have played a major role in
ensuring world peace and security over the more than 40 years since the
operation was first established.

Their importance continues to grow, as

reflected in the fact that five new peace-keeping operations were established
in the last year alone, and, in the Asia-Pacific region, the United Nations
Transitional Authority in Cambodia, soon to be established, will have a range
of activities unprecedented in United Nations history.

S/PV.3046
104-105

EF/32

(Mr, Miyazawa, Japan)
Clearly, more active cooperation by Members of the United Nations will be
needed in this area.

Keenly aware of this need, Japan is now striving to make

the necessary domestic arrangements to contribute personnel to peace-keeping
operations.

I shall do my utmost to have the relevant legislation approved by

the Japanese Diet during its current session, which commenced this month.
What are the issues confronting the United Nations today as it responds
to expectations for the role it is to play in the attainment and maintenance
of peace?

The major issues are, in my view:

first, how the United Nations

will adjust itself to the epochal changes; secondly, how it will improve its
effectiveness in peace-keeping and peace-making efforts; and, thirdly, how it
can secure a sound financial base that will enable it to carry out those
efforts.
First of all, I believe that, in securing a peaceful world order, the
ideals and purposes of the United Nations Charter, which represent fundamental
and universal values, will be of even greater relevance than ever before.

It

is incumbent on Member States to strive, constantly, to ensure that each of
these values is respected in practice.

At the same time, it is also necessary

for the United Nations to evolve while adapting to a changing world.

For

example, certain sections of the United Nations Charter are based on the
realities prevailing in 1945, when the United Nations was founded, which
predate even the cold war.
In addition, since the Security Council is at the centre of United
Nations efforts to maintain international peace and security, it is important
to consider thoroughly ways to adjust its functions, composition and other
aspects so as to make it more reflective of the realities of the new era.
This is a process in which Japan is prepared to take an active part.

RM/33

S/PV,3046
106

(Mr, Miyazawa,

Ja.pan)

Secondly, it is important to consider concrete measures to strengthen th e
functions of the United Nations so that it can work more effectively to secure
a peaceful world order.

The importance of peace-keeping activities does :not

need to be repeated here, but I should like to comment on the :need to
strengthen the functions of the United Nations in the area of conflict
prevention.

It is essential that the Secretary-General, who plays a

crucial

role in the United Nations mediation efforts and good offices, be given
sufficient information concerning tensions that could escalate into
international conflicts.

An important step in that direction was made last

December with the adoption by the General .Assembly of the Declaration on
Fact-Finding by the United Nations in the Field of the Maintenance of
\

International Peace and Security, which was proposed and sponsored by Japan
and other countries.

It would also be useful if countries with sophisticated

information-gathering capabilities would provide the Secretary-General with
relevant information, as appropriate.

I hope that this issue will receive due

consideration.
Thirdly, a sound financial base is essential to enhancing the
effectiveness of the United Nations and to ensuring that its various
activities are conducted smoothly.

As reported last autumn by the then

Secretary-General Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, the United Nations conti.nues to
be faced with critical financial difficulties,

At the end of 1991 a

total of

approximate'ly US$ 800 million in assessed contributions was still
outstanding.

If the United Nations is to play a central role in establishing

a new and peaceful world order, serious efforts by all Member States are
urgently required to resolve this issue.
immune to these difficulties.

Nor are peace-keeping operations

In particular, the availability of funds

S/PV .3046

RM/33

107

(Mr. Miyazawa. Japan)
necessary for the start-up phase of a peace-keeping operation is essential to
its smooth deployment.

It is also important that States concerned, including

those which would extend considerable financial support to the peace-keeping
operations, become involved in consultations on its establishment from the
earliest steps,
I should add that the International Court of Justie:e also plays an
important role in promoting the peaceful settlement of international
r,

conflicts.

At this time, when strengthening the rule of law in international

affairs should be an important element in the creation of a new and peaceful
world order, it ·is necessary to make better use of the Court and to enhance
its functions.
The threat of military force has long been considered the primary threat
to peace and security.

While this threat seems to have subsided considerably,

humankind's economic and technological achievements have, ironically, given
rise to a host of global environmental problems and other threats to human
survival of a non-military nature.

The United Nations will consider global

environmental problems at the Conference on Environment and Development to be
held in June,

I would hope that this is just a beginning and that the United

Nations will hereafter address these new threats with the determination and
effectiveness they demand.
The trend towards world peace that we are witnessing today will not
endure unless the dividends of peace are shared by all - but especially by the
peoples of the South who are beset with famine, poverty, disease and other
hardships.

The serious efforts of the United Nations in addressing the

North-South problem should contribute to world peace and stability.

It is

also necessary to extend appropriate assistance to the self-help efforts of

S/PV.3046

RM/33

108

Miyaza"'a. Japan)

(Mr.

developing countries.

Those .efforts, in turn, will foster respect for human

rights and the spread of democracy, values shared by peoples in a11 parts of
the world.
In securing peace the United Nations also has a tremendousl.y important
role to play in the field of arms control and disarmament.

Japan has been

actively contributing to· strengthening the role of the United Nations in that
field and has strongly supported the efforts of the countries concerned
towards disarmament, particularly nuclear disarmament, with a view to
attaining strategic stability at a lower level of armament.

I

wel.come the

disarmament proposals made very recently by President Bush and
President Yeltsin.

I sincerely hope that, through consultations between th&

United States and the Russian Federation, they will lead to concrete results•
The dramatic changes in the international milieu have once aga.:i.n
highlighted the importance of disarmament efforts, including those to prevent
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

I need not point out to

those assembled here today that, with the dissolution of the Soviet Union and
the birth of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), the question of how
to prevent the dissemination of those weapons, of their production facilities
and of related technologies is one of vital importance.

I commend the leaders

of the CIS for their determination to liberate their institutions from
military domination, and I hope that they will continue to work to prevent the
proliferation of nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction as we11 as
related technologies.
The proliferation and transfer of weapons is a matter of concern to every
member of the international community.

Spurred by the initiatives from Japan

and countries of the European Community, the General Assembly 1ast year

S/PV.3046
109-110

RM/33

(Mr, Miyazawa, Japan)
formally adopted a resolution to establish a United Nations Register on Arms
Transfers.

I call upon the members of the Security Council to work together

for the smooth implementation of this Register.

Steps to strengthen the

regime of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and to
conclude successfully negotiations on the convention on chemical weapons this
year are also of major importance.

The Security Council ought to be seized of

the developments made in these areas.
In the light of the circumstances I have just described, I should like to
propose the following measures to render the United Nations more suited to the
international situation of the twenty-first century.
First, looking ahead to 1995, when the United Nations will celebrate its
fiftieth anniversary, I should like to propose that discussions be held within
the Organization to ensure that it plays a central role in maintaining and
strengthening the peaceful world order.

These discussions should include a

consideration of the functions and organizational structure of the United
Nations.

BCT/ed

S/PV.3046
111

(Mr.

Miyazawa, Japan)

Secondly, in order to secure the smooth functioning of peace-keeping
operations, I would propose the creation, as necessary, of a consultative
mechanism on their establishment, particularly the establishment of
large-scale peace-keeping operations.

This mechanism would be in the form of

a consultative group of an appropriate size whose members would include
countries which are major contributors of funds, among other things, as well
as the countries concerned in the region.

I would also emphasize the

importance of securing sufficient funds for peace-keeping operations at their
initial stage, and invite Member States to make voluntary contributions to the
peace-keeping-operation Trust Fund in the United Nations.
Thirdly, I propose that concrete ways be sought to strengthen the role of
the United Nations in facing non-military threats to the future security and
prosperity of humankind, including those relating to the environment, refugees
and poverty.

I hope that the Secretary-General will bring these non-military

threats to the attention of the relevant United Nations organs.
Fourthly, in the area

of arms control and disarmament, I propose that

concrete measures be urgently considered for bolstering the efforts of the
United Nations and the countries concerned to strengthen the control of, and
to prevent the proliferation of, nuclear and other weapons of mass
destruction, in the wake of the dissolution of the Soviet Union, and to
restrain the international transfer of conventional weapons.
It is the responsibility of all the members of the international
community to work for the maintenance of world peace.

As we enter the

twenty-first century, the Security Council and, indeed, every country in the
world are required to face in earnest the problems which lie before us as we
shape a new and peaceful world order.

Having recently commenced its term as a

S/PV.3046

BCT/ed

112

(Mr. Miyazawa, Japan)
non-permanent member of the Security Council, Japan realizes that present
circumstances confer upon it particularly weighty responsibilities.

Japan

earnestly embraces these responsibilities without reservation and, as
envisaged in its Constitution, is determined to continue to extend maximum
support to the United Nations in the name of international cooperation.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the Prime Minister for stressing his

commitment to the work of the United Nations and setting out some proposals
for its future.
I now invite the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Personal Emissary of
the Prime Minister of Hungary to address the Council.

Mt, JESZENSZKY (Hungary):

At this meeting of historic significance,

I have the honour to deliver my statement also on behalf of the Prime Minister
of Hungary, who regrets that he is not able to be present amongst us.

I have

just spoken to him on the telephone.
The world order that appeared unshakeable for decades is now passing
through a period of stormy and radical change.

Following the end of the cold

war, the world is witnessing the growing advance of freedom, democracy and the
rule of law,

A striking. manifestation of this progress was the announcement

made this morning by President Yeltsin about the release of the very last
political prisoners in Russia.

However, this transformation is accompanied by

tremendous difficulties and tensions which are especially manifest in the
former Communist countries.

At the present juncture, all the democratic

Governments are being called upon to play an active role in shaping the course
of world history for the coming decades.

BCT/ed

S/PV.3046
113
(Mr, Jeszenszky, Hungary)

Mr. President, the Republic of Hungary welcomes and highly appreciates
your initiative of inviting the States members of the United Nations Security
Council. to meet in New York.

The very fact that the States represented in

this body are meeting at the highest level for the first time in the history
of the world Organization is a telling indication of the increased role and
importance of this forum, bearing as it does primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

My country, as well as the

region I come from, has always looked to this body with great expectations and
hopes.

We did so particularly in the dramatic days of 1956, when we believed

that the United Nations would be able to stop the Soviet tanks from
suppressing the democratic revolution and the freedom fight of the Hungarian
people and could prevent bloody reprisals.

Today, we are pleased that after

35 years the leaders in Moscow openly dissociate themselves from those past
Soviet actions.

For well-known reasons, however, no active assistance was

forthcoming at that time, but the moral and political support of the United
Nations still meant a lot to us.

The experience of that period should

encourage us to urge the United Nations, with its increased capacity for
action, not to leave peoples alone in their struggle for the realization of
their right to self-determination, and to do its utmost to ensure free and
democratic development and the exercise of human rights in each and every
country of the world.
The favourable changes of recent years have created proper conditions for
the United Nations to put into practice the principles and purposes enshrined
in its Charter as long ago as 1945.

The world Organization has now escaped

the paralysing effect of great-Power confrontation, and is now able to respond

S/PV.3046
114

BCT/ed

(Mr, Jeszenszky, Hungary)
more effectively to the challenges to peace and security.

It is our firm

belief that, along with its peace-keeping activities and by its involvement in
making and building peace, the United Nations is becoming an irreplaceable
factor of international relations.

We hold that the peace-keeping missions of

the United Nations should no longer be seen as some kind of an external force
designed merely to confine conflicts and to preserve status guos, but as
factors contributing creatively to removing hotbeds of crisis by upholding
democratic values and enforcing respect for human rights,

As a member of the

Security Council, Hungary wishes to take its share in ensuring that this new
philosophy of preventive diplomacy, peacemaking and peace-keeping is
translated into concrete and effective measures.
In this phase of profound transformations, a review of the activities and
the efficiency of the United Nations has become necessary.

What the world

needs ~s a renewed and reformed United Nations capable of meeting the
challenges of the present and the future.
It was exactly a year ago that, under the authority of the Security
Council, the multinational coalition of countries took action to liberate
Kuwait.

The operation against the Iraqi aggression was a landmark in the

history of the United Nations.

On the one hand, it provided evidence of the

capacity of the international community, through the Security Council, to
undertake peacemaking actions and to deal with local conflicts in the interest
of collective security, as set forth in the Charter.

On the other hand, it

highlighted another, exemplary Security Council action:

launching a

large-scale humanitarian operation to save the Kurds of Iraq.

We view those

steps taken by the Security Council as a manifestation of the peace-building
activity to safeguard human rights and the rights of minorities.

BCT/ed

S/PV.3046

115

(Mr. Jeszenszky, Hungary)
For the Republic of Hungary, respect for human rights and the rights of
national minorities is not merely a legal and humanitarian question:
also an integral part of international collective security.

it is

Therefore, it is

indispensable for the Security Council to take resolute action to defend and
protect these rights.

S/PV.3046

JP/ASW

116

(Mr. Jeszenszky, Hungary)
The presence, wherever needed, of United Nations personnel to guarantee
the enforcement of those rights should be seen as an integral part of United
Nations peace-building activities.
The decisions of the Security Council regarding the military arsenal of a
United Nations Member State having committed aggression are, in our judgement,
a precedent deserving unreserved support.

The limitation of the armaments and

the number of troops of an aggressor State or, for that matter, of an
aggressor army out of political control, as well as their disarmament under an
international verification system, should be a new, important dimension of the
activities of the Security Council.
Central and Eastern Europe is the scene of major, crucial changes.

The

peoples of that region, after long decades, are again free to decide their own
destiny.
At the same time, the communist-dictatorial system has bequeathed a grave
legacy.

This may be a source of tensions jeopardizing and weakening the hoped

for stability in the region.

The United Nations is faced with great tasks in

ensuring, with its authority and through avenues open to it under
international law, that the transition to democracy and a market economy in
the countries of that region follow a peaceful course and lead to stability.
One of the most urgent tasks stems from the situation emerging after the
disintegration of the former Soviet Union.

Following more than seven decades

of rule by a totalitarian regime, which took a toll of millions of human
lives, what emerges is an economy in ruins with ensuing grave social problems,
no clear-cut arrangements for the control of formidable nuclear weapons and
the eruption of violent ethnic discords.
wor.ld into a critical state,

This situation could plunge the

The successor States of the defunct empire are

JP/ASW

S/PV.3046
117
(Mr.

Jeszenszky, Hungary)

fully justified in their efforts to build the closest possible ties with the
world community.

This, in turn, can offer us reliable prospects for a

positive settlement of the many relevant security and arms-control questions,
as well as for the full observance of international standards in the fields of
human rights and minority rights.

Hungary is guided by these considerations

when it lends support to a strong involvement of the former Soviet republics
in the work of multilateral forums, primarily the United Nations and its
specialized agencies, and also the Conference on Security and Cooperation in
Europe process.
The processes of rearrangement taking place in our region have led not
only to potential crisis situations but also to an actual explosion in what
was Yugoslavia.

The senseless war raging in our vicinity has affected Hungary

most directly.

Continuous violations of our airspace and borders and the flow

of over 50,000 refugees to our country are indications of a critical situation
that poses a serious threat to international peace and security and carries
additional grave implications.
Public opinion in Hungary and the Government are deeply concerned at the
human misery and material devastation brought upon the peoples of that land,
including the continuous and systematic violations of the hwnan rights and
minority rights of hundreds of thousands of Hungarians who live in the
province of Vojvodina and the sufferings of those Hungarians who live along
the Croatian front lines.

The future of the Hungarians there, like that of

any other minorities inhabiting the southern Slav States., could be assured by,
among other things, the institution of territorial and cultural autonomies, as
proposed by Lord Carrington.

In our opinion, during the political

negotiations aimed at reaching a durable and satisfactory settlement of the

S/PV.3046

JP/ASW

118

(Mr. Jeszenszky, Hungary)
problems it is incumbent upon the Security Council to monitor carefully, in
close cooperation with the European Community, the developments in that land
and to deploy United Nations monitors or peace-keeping forces in all areas
where tensions or conflicts might arise.
In the present situation the United Nations has a major contribution to
make to the solution of the conflict between the southern Slav peoples.
Hungary pledges its full support for an early dispatch of United Nations
peace-keeping forces, in accordance with the plan formulated by the
Secretary-General.

We expect such action - together with the embargo on all

deliveries of weapons and military equipment, which must be strictly observed
by all Member States of the United Nations - to facilitate significantly the
reaching of a comprehensive political settlement there.

The admission of

former Yugoslav republics to membership in the United Nations would be a
further step along the way to peace and stability in the whole region.
The current involvement of the United Nations in the Yugoslav crisis can
in no way replace talks between the peoples and minorities concerned, nor
should it impede the conclusion of arrangements which would have to take into
account the legitimate interests of all the parties concerned,

We are of the

view that a peaceful future for the region can be ensured only by reaffirming
the inadmissibility of the forcible change of borders, recognizing the rights
of peoples to self-determination and enforcing human rights.

We consider that

the setting up of a control mechanism for the verification of the provisions
of the relevant agreements could be highly important elements of a
comprehensive settlement.
At this historic moment of unprecedented change we ought to consider
another no less important repercussion of these transformations.

The world

JP/ASW

S/PV.3046
119

has to face the challenge of dismantling enormous war machines and related
manpower.

Today we are witnesses of armies with unclear orientations or with

no political control.

Not only should war industries be converted to civilian

purposes, but a large number of scientists, experts and professional soldiers
also need to be retrained or reprogrammed.

The future of the newly

independent States in the Balkans and in the former Soviet Union hinges
largely on the success or failure of this huge endeavour of human conversion.
Parallel with this demolition and recycling process, there should be some
new creations as well.

In our view, under the changed international

circumstances, due consideration should be given to the idea of the United
Nations instituting a force readily and constantly available that could be
mobilized on very short notice, at any given time, and deployed without delay
in accordance with the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter
to any conflict-stricken region of the world.
Today's event, unique in the history of the United Nations, and made
possible by the fading away of the obsolete ideological confrontations of the
past, gives us an opportunity, and creates much better conditions, to take up
successfully the challenges of our era and to give the right answers to the
global problems of security, democracy, economic and social development and
ecology that we are faced with.

In this context, the idea of convening a

meaningful summit meeting on guestions of social development merits our close
attention.
Our gathering here also gives us an opportunity to reaffirm our
confidence in, and support for, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, .the new
Secretary-General of our Organizatlon, whose well-known commitment to peace
and international understanding is a guarantee that the effective role of the

S/PV,3046
120

JP/ASW

(Mr. Jeszenszky, Hungary)
United Nations in international relations will continue to grow in the years
to come.

The Government of the Republic of Hungary is ready to contribute

fully to the strengthenng of our world Organization and to the improvement of
its functioning in accordance with the exigencies of our times,

There can be

no doubt that the United Nations, born in 1945, will be a major factor in the
world of the twenty-first century.
The PRESIDENT:

Thank you, Mr. Minister, for your statement on your

own behalf and on behalf of Prime Minister Antall.
I have been asked by the Prime Minister of Hungary to convey his
apologies and most sincere greetings to all the Heads of State or Government
of the countries participating in this meeting of the Security Council, and I
do that most happily,
I now have pleasure in inviting the Minister of Foreign Affairs and
Personal Emissary of the President of Zimbabwe to take the floor.

S/PV.3046

EMS/36

121

Mr. SHAMQYARIBA (Zimbabwe):

May I say how very pleased I am to see

you, Prime Minister Major, presiding over our deliberations today.

I

congratulate you and I thank you for the very timely initiative you have taken
in convening this historic gathering.
I also take this opportunity to welcome our new Secretary-General,
Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, and to convey to him Zimbabwe's congratulations on
his election.

Those of us who come from Africa have known him as one of our

eminent intellectuals and as an unflinching defender of peace.

We are

appreciative of the enormous wealth of experience and skill he brings to the
helm of this world body.
We are greatly indebted also to his predecessor, Mr. Javier Perez
de Cuellar, a dignified arbiter who, during his terms of office, turned around
the fortunes of this Organization and tirelessly worked for peace, even to the
very last minute of his tour of duty.

We are grateful to him and we wish him

good health and many successes in his retirement.
As we meet today we are witnessing ominous developments that threaten to
suffocate the fragile positive trends we had begun to see recently.

Signs

abound that we have entered a world situation almost as unpredictable and
dangerous as that which prevailed in the cold-war era.

Conflicts and tensions

of a new nature are erupting in regions that had been spared instability in
the post-Second World War era.

We have heard many references to those

situations in the speeches made this morning and this afternoon in this
distinguished gathering.
The bold strides in disarmament that had been made by the United States
of America and the then Soviet Union had given us enormous comfort and hope
that we were at last safe from the threat of nuclear annihilation.

But

S/PV.3046

EMS/36

122

(Mr, Shamuyarira, Zimbabwe)
instead of entering a post-nuclear age we are now witnessin~ the possible
beginning of an age of dangerous and uncontrolled proliferation and civil
strife in several areas.

As was said by another spe~ker earlier, some of

those areas of civil strife spill over into regional and international threats
to peace and security.

To make matters worse, as business booms in the

international arms bazaar, the weak economies of the South remain in the grip
of deepening crisis, while growing poverty - a tragically potent source of
instability - is becoming a menace to recent gains in democracy~
The responsibility lies squarely with the United Nations and in
particular with this Council to rescue us from this unpredictable and
dangerous situation.

The Organization of African Unity looks to this body to

democratize the international system so that all nations big and small can
participate fully in peace-making and peace-keeping.

As the principles of the

United Nations Charter must govern the global order we wish to construct, and
since our efforts should result in a United Nations that is stronger and more
effective, Zimbabwe holds the vie~ that the process must begin with a
reexamination of the Charter itself in the context of the changing
international circumstances.
Organization of African Unity.

That is also the expressed view of the
A new world order cari best be constructed by

reexamining the Charter, rectifying the flaws and closing the gaps that have
been revealed by recent developments, and updating those of ~ts provisions
that have been rendered obsolete by the new international circumstances.
The fact that we have had to resort to improvisation in certain cases is
in itself clear evidence of the need to revise the Charter.

For instance, as

Mr. Perez de Cuellar's report of 1991 rightly observed, the costs and
capabilities demanded by modern warfare inevitably led to major modifications

EMS/36

S/PV.3046
123

(Mr, Shamqyarira, Zimbabwe)
in the application of Article 42, Chapter VII, with respect to carrying out
combined international enforcement action during the Gulf crisis.

Also, we

have developed and pursued peace-keeping and peace-making operations which are
not provided for anywhere in the Charter.

Yet these are among the most

effective and successful activities of the United Nations.

In the

presentations made this morning and this afternoon, much stress has been
placed on the importance of the peace-keeping role of the United Nations in
the world.

We strongly support that view.

Certainly, the Organization of

African Unity would like to see greater assistance from the United Nations in
areas of strife in Africa that need some international external intervention.
But, as I said, this was not specifically provided for in the Charter; we have
been operating under arrangements we made in the early 1960s as the problems
arose.
It is in this context that I wish to comment on some aspects of the
Charter and to share wit~ colleagues some preliminary suggestions regarding
how we can bring some missing pieces 'into the Charter, how we can reinforce
those of its provisions that have served us well in the past, how we can
revive some of its potentially valuable provisions that have been dormant, and
how we can update the provisions we feel have been rendered obsolete by the
changed international situation.
Obviously, I will not deal at length with these provisions; my task has
been made lighter by some of the references already made by earlier speakers
such as the President of Venezuela, the President of France and the Prime
Minister of Japan to the need to look again at the Charter.
In the emerging international situation we would like to see increasing
use of Article 41, Chapter VII, of the Charter, relating to effective

S/PV.3046
124-125

EMS/36

(Mr, Shamµyarira. Zimbabwe)
collective measures that can be taken, but not involving the use of armed
force.

That means more use of measures such as economic sanctions to ensure

compliance with Security Council resolutions.

But the problem with economic

sanctions is the adverse effect they may have on third countries, or what are
called victim States.

Although Article 50 was designed to give some

protection to such States, the experience of the Gulf war revealed that some
gaps need to be closed.

The application of sanctions against Iraq brought

hardship to many countries in the region and beyond.

The fact that

representations continue to come to the sanctions Committee from the most
affected States even today demonstrates the inadequacy of Article 50.

What is

required are clear criteria for determining who deserves assistance and
standing United Nations ~rrangements for the mobilization of the resources
needed to assist the affected States •.
We hope that when the Secretary-General presents his recommendations to
us before July, as we shall request him to do at today's meeting, he will have
had time to reflect on some of the issues that we are only mentioning now.

We

shall certainly cooperate in looking at those issues in much greater depth,
A related issue that may need to be looked at again is the effect
economic sanctions may have on innocent civilians living in a State whose
Government they cannot change.

Such people lack the political means to

reverse the very policies that give rise to the offence that is the object of
sanctions.

JB/37

S/PV.3046
126

(Mr. Shamuyarira, Zimbabwe)
In order to avoid the many misgivings expressed by some regarding the

prosecution of the Gulf War, future collective enforcement operations must be
fully accountable to the Security Council and should be truly representative.
This can be achieved by strengthening Article 46 of the Charter, which gives a

role to the Military Staff Committee.

However, if we are to give such an

important role to the Military Staff Committee, its membership cannot remain
limited to only a few.

Non-permanent members should also participate in all

the work of the Committe~.

This would ensure that collective enforcement

actions are not dominated by a single group of countries.
I

Collective enforcement arrangements of the United Nations should also
ensure uniformity.

In the event of aggression, combined international

enforcement action should be taken irrespective of who the aggressor is or who
the victim.

Zimbabwe believes that a collective security system liable to a

veto by one or a few States is not reliable.

It means that the Security

Council cannot take any action in a conflict in which one of the permanent
members has a direct interest.

Undoubtedly, this was one of the

considerations at San Francisco, but has that issue not now been overtaken by

events?

In this regard, consideration could be given to extending paragraph 3

of Article 27, which provides that in decisions relating to peaceful
settlements of disputes under Chapter VI, a party to a dispute shall abstain

from voting.

Our view is that this should also apply to Chapter VII, so that

those who wield the veto power may not block the imposition of sanctions or

any other collective enforcement action where they are party to a conflict.
A

very positive development in the emerging new world order is the

increasing reluctance we see on the part of the permanent members to use their

own veto.

They now prefer to reach decisions by consensus.

We welcome and

encourage this trend, and hold out the hope that the veto may eventually be

S/PV.3046
127

JB/37

(Mr, Shamuyarira, Zimbabwe)
abolished or will fall away because of disuse.

While in the aftermath of the

Second World War the victorious Powers had special privileges, now in the
post-cold war era we believe that we are all victors and that there should be
no losers.

Consequently, no one deserves any special privileges.

Zimbabwe and other non-aligned States have always subscribed to the
principle that general and complete disarmament.can only be achieved in the
multilateral forum of this body of the United Nations.

In the face of the

growing menace from the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, which
has been referred to, we hope that by addressing the issue of disarmament in
resolution 687 (1991) and in the draft declaration before us, the Security
Council has now come to recognize this principle as well.
We also believe that the Security Council should ensure that the
initiators of the Arms Transfer Register established by the General Assembly
only last month, and to which Zimbabwe lent its support, will follow through
on their assurances to us that, in time, it will develop into a comprehensive
and non-discriminatory register that also covers nuclear-weapon stockpiles,
domestic production and the transfer of dual-purpose items.
In tandem with the Arms Transfer Register, we believe that multilateral
disarmament could further be boosted by the use of the provisions of
Article 26 and of paragraph 1 of Article 47 of the Charter, which empower the
Security Council, with the assistance of the Military Staff Committee, to put
in place a system for the regulation of armaments.

These provisions, which

have been dormant since the founding of the Organization, would have rendered
unnecessary the ad hoe creation by resolution 687 (1991) of the Special
Commission currently dealing with the disarmament measures imposed on Iraq.
It is our view that an opportunity still exists to utilize them in

S/PV.3046
128

JB/37

(Mr. Sharnu,yArira, Zim~abwe)
implementing the disarmament measures for the wider Middle East region
provided for in resolution 687 (1991).
In addition to unil~teral reductions of nuclear arsenals, those who hold
nuclear weapons should demonstrate their commitment to making the post-cold
war world a safer place by subscribing to the conversion of the present
partial test-ban Treaty of 1962 into a comprehensive test-ban treaty.

Having

ourselves recently acceded to the non-proliferation Treaty - and we are happy
to note that some members at this table are in the process of acceding to that
Treaty - we hope that at the next review of the Treaty·our oft-voiced concerns
will be adequately addressed,

In particular, we hope that the International

Atomic Energy Agency's inspections of the nuclear facilities of recent
adherents to the non-proliferation Treaty will be thorough and detailed.
should avoid taking action when it is too late.

We

But the route we should take

in the area of disarmament is to demilitarize consistently both the domestic
and the international situations.

The manufacturers as well as the recipients

and users of dangerous weapons should be stopped from trading in death.

We

should demilitarize our societies in the new world order,
In Africa, many Governments are rightly linking disarmament to
development.

They visualize a situation where more funds will now be made

available for debt relief and various forms of aid.

The vast sums of money

being spent on armaments would go a long way towards ameliorating the plight
of millions of people in developing countries who are in dire need of
resources to raise their standards of living.

In the new climate resulting

from the ending of ideological confrontations, a reexamination of the
conclusions of the International Conference on the Relationship between

S/PV.3046

JB/37

129

(Mr. Shamu.yarira, Zimbabwe)
Disarmament and Development, held here in New York in 1987, might help us to
go forward.
A proposal to expand the membership of the Security Council and to ensure
equitable representation in this body has been before the General Assembly
since 1979, alongside the other items which I mentioned earlier, which have
also been before this body for some time.

The Council.cannot afford to shield

itself from change at a time when all the other major organs of the Un.ited
Nations are going through a process of reform and when new international
circumstances call for readjustments.

The increase in the total membership of

the United Nations alone is sufficient to warrant expansion of the membership
of the Council.

The Prime Minister of India gave us some figures to indicate

the rapid increase that has taken place in the membership of the United
Nations itself.
The Security Council takes decisions of major importance on behalf of the
entire membership of the United Nations.

Those decisions should be made

representative of the will of the general membership.

In 1945, the Council

represented 20 per cent of the United Nations membership; but now, with United
Nations membership having risen to 166, the Council represents less than
10 per cent.

Clearly, the Council has become less representative than it was

before, and the question of equitable geographical representation also has to
be addressed,

One region is clearly overrepresented on the Council, while

Africa and Latin America are not represented at all among the permament
members.
Zimbabwe believes that the decisions of an expanded and more
representative Council would carry more weight,

We support the proposal of

the Organization of African Unity that matters of restructuring the organs of

JB/37

S/PV.3046
130

'(Mr, Shamuyarira, Zimbabw~)
the United Nations should be discussed in the General Assembly so that members
there can express their views and contribute to the new world order which we
are discussing.
On the question of human rights, Zimbabwe is fully committed to the
promotion of the full enjoyment of all basi~ human rights by all citizens in
any State that is a Member of the United Nations.

Established principles

governing inter-State relations - such as that of non-interference in the
internal affairs of other States and infringing on the sovereignty of States will have to accommodate efforts by the United Nations and by regional
organizations to protect the basic human rights of individuals and social
groups that are threatened in particular States.
For example, when the United Nations condemned the doctrine of apartheid
in South Africa, it became a concern of the whole international community to
promote human rights there.

It could no longer be described or regarded as a

domestic issue in South Africa alone.

We are pleased that steps are now being

taken to dismantle the ugly edifice of apartheid in South Africa.

Massive and

deliberate violations of human rights or the existence of situations of
oppression and repression can no longer be tolerated anywhere in the world.

S/PV.3046

BHS/edd

131

(Mr. Shamuyarira, Zimbabwe)
In the era we are entering, the Council will be called upon to deal more
and more with conflicts and humanitarian situations of a domestic nature that
could pose threats to international peace and stability.

However, great care

has to be taken to see that these domestic conflicts are not used as a pretext
for the intervention of big Powers in the legitimate domestic affairs of small
States, or that human rights issues are not used for totally different
purposes of destabilizing other Governments.

There is, therefore, the need to

strike a delicate balance between the rights of States, as enshrined in the
Charter, and the rights of individuals, as enshrined in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights.
Zimbabwe supports very strongly both the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and the Charter on these issues.

Zimbabwe is a firm subscriber to the

principles in the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights.

However, we

cannot but express our apprehension about who will decide when to get the
Security Council involved in an internal matter and in what manner.

In other

words, who will judge when a threshold is passed that calls for international
action?

Who will decide what should be done, how it will be done and by

whom?

This clearly calls for a careful drawing up and drafting of general

principles and guidelines that would guide decisions on when a domestic
situation warrants international action, either by the Security Council or by
regional organizations.

This could be one of the tasks this Council could

entrust to the Secretary-General,
The welcome end of East-West confrontation should propel us to end the
North-South confrontation as well,

I am very glad that the President of

France dwelt at some length on this matter this morning.
belabour the point.

Hence I will not

The growing economic gap between the two sides will

BHS/edd

S/PV.3046
132

(Mr. Shamuyarira, Zimbabwe)
lead to catastrophe for us all.

We should provide a forum for analysing and

discussing these issues and finding viable solutions.

The environment

conference in Brazil next June will give participants an opportunity to
discuss the very pressing problem of increasing poverty in developing
countries and the alarming rate of degradation of the environment.

After the

debates, it will be up to the United Nations and its specialized agencies to
implement those recommendations on which action could be taken.

The

specialized agencies of the United Nations are doing most valuable work in
bringing expertise and skills to developing countries.

We look forward to the

convening of the projected World Summit on Social Development as another
important forum for exchanging views, experiences and knowledge.

The social

condition of millions of people in developing countries must be a source of
great concern to all leaders of Governments.

While the technology of

developed nations is enabling them to reach outer space, ours is not
sufficient to reach the village, especially in Africa.

A new world

order that

does not make a special effort to eliminate poverty and narrow the widening
disparities existing between industrialized and developing countries will not
be sustainable.
African States face a multitude of problems as they enter the new world
order.

They are taking painful steps of political, social and economic

adjustments of existing structures in order to be accommodated in the emerging
new order and also in order to improve the standard of living of their own
people generally on a more sustainable and permanent basis.

They will need

strong Governments to implement these reforms, and they will require financial
and material resources on an increasing scale.

Zimbabwe supports strongly the

proposal of the Secretary-General to mediate in the civil strife in Somalia in

S/PV.3046
133

BHS/edd

(Mr, Shamyyarira. Zimbabwe)
particular.

But we would urge him to take similar steps in five other African

countries facing similar strife.

Some of the problems of civil strife in

Africa could be contained with vigorous preventive diplomacy by the
Secretary-General as well as the Secretaries-General of the Organization of
African Unity and the Arab League.

We are pleased that the Secretary-General

is taking very vigorous steps in this direction early in his tenure of office.
We have also recently witnessed how ill-equipped the United Nations is to
deal with problems of drug-trafficking and international terrorism, which are
likely to become a major threat to international peace and security in the era
we are entering.

The President of the United States, in his intervention this

morning, made reference to some of these important problem areas.

We believe

this could very well be the time to revive the idea of an international
criminal code and to create an international criminal court.
In a document entitled "The Hague Declaration on the Rule of Law in
Inter-State Relations", the non-aligned States offered some useful ideas which
were well-received by the General Assembly at its forty-fourth session, when
it declared the 1990s a Decade of International Law.

We hope that the

Security Council will also consider taking decisions that will result in the
establishment of the primacy of law in the emerging world ord~r and, in
particular, consider proposals to strengthen the authority of the
International Court of Justice.

The Non-Aligned Movement has taken very

vigorous steps in the direction of strengthening international law in the
important meeting which was held in The Hague and which produced this very
important Declaration.

BHS/edd

S/PV.3046
134

CMr, Shamuyarira. Zimbabwe)
In the final analysis, I think we can all agree that peace and security
based on mutual interests and shared values is much more likely to be enduring
than that based on the threat of arms.

It is therefore imperative that we

take full advantage of the disappearance of cold-war rivalries and mutual
suspicions to create and promote this shared community of interests and
values.

Where disputes do arise, let us focus on the root causes rather than

on the symptoms.
resolve them.

It is much better to prevent conflicts an~ disputes than to

This calls for the primacy of preventive diplomacy we are

expecting from our Secretary-General.

This calls for an activist role on the

part of the Secretary-General in terms of Article 99 of the Charter, which
calls upon him to bring before the Security Council any matter which, in his
opinion, threatens international peace and security.
It goes without saying that in order to play the key role envisaged in
the Charter, both the Secretary-General and the United Nations require
adequate resources.

Is it not one of the great ironies of our time that, when

it comes to war-making, resources become available in abundance, but when it

comes to peace-making, resources become extremely scarce?

It will not be

possible for the United Nations to play a key role in the peace and security
of a new world order if it is not rescued from its continuing financial
crisis.

We trust that, as we are giving the new Secretary-General a strong

mandate and an elaborate programme over the next five years, he will be
provided with the means of executing that task.

BHS/edd

S/PV.3046
135
The PRESIDENT:

Thank you, Mr. Minister, for your contribution,

Perhaps I might ask you to take back to President Mugabe on behalf of the
Council our deepest sympathy at his recent bereavement.

Mrs. Mugabe was very

well known, I know, to many people present and she will be very greatly
missed.

I would be grateful if you would pass our very strong sense of loss

to President Mugabe when you return.
With the permission of the Council, I should now like to make a statement
in my capacity as representative of the United Kingdom.

S/PV.3046

EF/39

136

CThe President)
Today's meeting is, I think, a historic event,· the first time in its
history that the United Nations Security Council has met at the .level of Heads
of State or Government, an extraordinary event to match extraordinary times.
We meet here today partly to celebrate - to celebrate the appointment of a new
and distinguished Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali.
way, our new Secretary-General is a lucky man:

And in one

he is the first

Secretary-General in many years to inherit a United Nations that is confident
in its own ability to solve problems while still being conscious of the
magnitude of its task.

We celebrate too a new world Power:

the Russian

Federation, the Power which has now emerged from an aberration that lasted for
70 years.
I think we are here also for other reasons:

to gather strength from each

other for the tasks ahead; to revitalize our joint sense of purpose; to
reaffirm the intention of the United Nations to redouble its efforts in the
cause of peace - but not to forget, as we do so, that we need economic
development and prosperity in order to achieve lasting peace and stability.
A ·great deal has already been achieved.

Last year, the United Nations

authorized the international community's response to Iraq's invasion of
Kuwait.

Today, Baghdad is still defying international law and human rights.

Iraq must comply with all the relevant United Nations Security Council
resolutions.

Saddam Hussein's defiance hurts the Iraqi people, but sanctions

must remain fully in force until all the resolutions are implemented.
In the aftermath of Iraq's eviction from Kuwait, Saddam Hussein turned on
his own people.

Resolution 688 (1991) set up a humanitarian mission to help

the fleeing Kurds and Shi'ites.
responsibility.

Their plight still remains our

As time goes on, more of Saddam Hussein's wickedness is

S/PV.3046
137

EF/39

(The President)
revealed.

Even today he is stopping food, medicines a~d other vital supplies

going to the Kurds.

The Security Council cannot ignore that breach of

resolution 688 (1991).

We cannot lay down the shield we provided to protect

Iraq's vulnerable communities.

There will be other such crises.

everywhere expect the United Nations to react, to save lives.

People

This can be

done with full respect for Charter principles; but people increasingly agree
that humanitarian affairs are every man's affair.
In recent weeks, the Security Council has been involved in taking
decisions on Yugoslavia, Cambodia, El Salvador, Somalia and Western Sahara.
The Council recently adopted resolution 731 (1992), unanimously condemning
State terrorism, and Libya must respond positively to the demands that this
Council has made of it,

The world already has an effective instrument to

uphold collective security, but it is not yet a perfect instrument, and I hope
this meeting will set in hand work to strengthen the United Nations.
New ideas focus on new opportunities in preventive diplomacy, in

peace-making and in peace-keeping, but what do we mean by preventive
diplomacy?

I believe we mean action to avert - or at least to contain -

crises, and we must exploit the unrealized potential of the United Nations
Charter.
We need also to be more active in crisis prevention.

That is just as

important - if not more so - than perfecting our skills at crisis management,
The Secretary-General - our new Secretary-General - should take the initiative
boldly, the initiative to draw potential conflict to the attention of the
Security Council.

In the past, his predecessors have often been hobbled by

the political rivalry between Member States, often reflected most sharply in
the Council.

In future, the Council must be prepared to act before tension

EF/39

S/PV.3046
138

(The Pr«rnident>
becomes conflict.

The Secretary-General deserves an assurance of our good

faith in his good judgement.

This meeting can give him that assurance.

Peace-making and peace-keeping should run in parallel.
future, is not likely to decrease·.
Nations ability to respond.

Demand, in the

We should like to enhance the United

We recognize the load placed on the Organization

and the skills and experience of its staff, but we want the United Nations to
be able to carry out its mission even more effectively, and that is why we
propose that the Council should invite the Secretary-General to give his ideas
on how this might be done.

It will be an important report.

The report might

look at the United Nations role in identifying, and dealing with, the causes
of instability and potential crises, as well as the contribution to be made by
regional bodies in helping the work of the Council.
If we are to safeguard international peace and security, the States
Members of the United Nations - all of them without exception - must also be
active in arms control, and this means giving high priority to three central
objectives:
First, we must implement what has already been agreed, notably in the
START and Conventional Armed Forces in Europe Treaties.
Secondly, we must commit ourselves to working for further measures of
disarmament, both regional and global, with special attention in 1992 to the
chemical weapons convention,

I strongly endorse what was said earlier by a

number of speakers on this particular point.
Thirdly, we must make sure that each of us has in place arrangements
which prevent proliferation and discourage the accumulation of lethal
weaponry.

I can announce today that the United Kingdom Government is acting

to strengthen controls on the export of specific biological materials and

S/PV.3046
139

EF/39

(The President)
organisms which could be misused for weapons purposes.

We are also looking at

the ideas of others, including our German colleagues, which are intended to
limit further the scope for proliferation.
These are daunting challenges at a time when the map is being radically
reshaped, but we can draw on valuable new assets:

a new degree of cooperation

between the former enemies of East and West; a new readiness to help each
other, for example in the destruction of surplus nuclear weapons; a new
awareness, from the Iraq war, of the dangers of proliferation; and a new
willingness, shown in the adoption of the United Nations register of arms
transfers, to cooperate on a global basis here in the United Nations itself.
Between now and the Conference to renew the Non-Proliferation Treaty in
1995, we have a unique chance to consolidate the gains of the last few years
on a truly durable basis.
Britain believes that all States must respect human rights and
fundamental freedoms.

Good government is not a luxury, it is the bedrock on

which we build a stable and prosperous society, and that in turn is
essentially built on international peace and security.

Peace-keeping

operations tend now to include provision for hwnan rights verification and
free and fair elections as vital components of a peaceful settlement.

I am

sure that is right, and I hope that will continue to be the case.
In the first four decades of the United Nations, my own continent
experienced fewer dramatic changes than almost any other area of the world.
The cold war imposed upon Europe immobility of an unenviable sort - the uneasy
stand-off of two nuclear-armed, opposing camps.
different.

But this decade has been

This decade has seen headlong and profoundly hopeful change come

to Europe - a chain-reaction of revolutionary change.

That change is

EF/39

S/PV.3046
140

{The President)
personified, clearly and unmistakably, by the presence in this Council today

of two outstanding figures from the first generation of post-communist
leaders - President Yeltsin of Russia and Foreign Minister Jeszenszky of
Hungary.

We meet them here as friends and partners.

outlook and common objectives.

Today, we share a common

Other things are different:

no longer are the

leaders of East and West competing.

No longer does ideology drive us apart.

No longer do we threaten each other.

And not least among the benefits is the

prospect of making ever more productive use of the United Nations.
The 1990s will be a decade of transformation in Europe.

There are huge

tasks to be accomplished in the rebuilding of economies smothered by communism
for generations, and in rooting democracy firmly in the soil of open politics
and free markets.

There are risks too:

the communist empire has bequeathed a

host of potential problems between peoples and States.
already led to conflict.

Some of them have

The United Nations can play a key role in promoting

acceptance of the principles of the Charter and the peaceful settlement of
disputes.
Colleagues, we in Britain will work closely with the Secretary-General closely, to strengthen and enhance the United Nations capacity to respond to
crisis, and incipient crisis, wherever it threatens.

The challenge is a

formidable one, and it is one which only the United Nations, with the full
support of Member Governments, can meet.

Today I am happy to pledge to you

the full support of the British Government in that movement.

S/PV.3046

RM/40

141
(The President>

I now resume my functions as President of the Security Council.
I should like to turn to the presidential statement that is the outcome
of our negotiations and deliberations today.

It is my understanding that the

members of the Security Council are content for me to issue the declaration
which, in accordance with custom, I shall read in a moment as a presidential
statement on their behalf.

I am grateful

for that authority, and I should now

like to read out to the Council the statement that has been agreed.

It reads

as follows:
"The members of the Security Council have authorized me to make the
following statement on their behalf.
"The Security Council met at the Headquarters of the United Nations
in New York on 31 January 1992, for the first time at the level of Heads
of State and Government.

The members of the Council considered, within

the framework of their commitment to the United Nations Charter, 'The
responsibility of the Security Council in the maintenance of
international peace and security',
"The members of the Security Council consider that their meeting is
a timely recognition of the fact that there are new favourable

international circumstances under which the Security Coun6il has begun to
fulfil more effectively its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security,
"A time

of change

"This meeting takes place at a time of momentous change.

The ending

of the Cold War has raised hopes for a safer, more equitable and more
humane world.

Rapid progress has been made, in many regions of the

world, towards democracy and responsive forms of government, as well as

RM/40

S/PV.3046
142

(The President)

towards achieving the Purposes set out in the Charter.

The completion of

the dismantling of apartheid in South Africa would constitute a major
contribution to these Purposes and positive trends, including to the
encouragement of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.
"Last year, under the authority of the United Nations, the
international community succeeded in enabling Kuwait to regain its
sovereignty and territorial integrity, which it had lost as a result of
Iraqi aggression.

The resolutions adopted by the Security Council remain

essential to the restoration of peace and stability in the region and
must be fully implemented.

At the same time the members of the Council

are concerned by the humanitarian situation of the innocent civilian
population of Iraq.
"The members of the Council support the Middle East peace process,
facilitated by the Russian Federation and the United States, and hope
that it will be brought to a successful conclusion on the basis of
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
"They welcome the role the United Nations has been able to play
under the Charter in progress towards settling long-standing regional
disputes, and will work for further progress towards their resolution.
They applaud the valuable contribution being made by United Nations
peace-keeping forces now operating in Asia, Africa, Latin America and
Europe.
11

The members of the Council note that United Nations peace-keeping

tasks have increase~ and broadened considerably in recent years.
Election monitoring, human rights verification and the repatriation of
refugees have in the settlement of some regional conflicts, at the

S/PV.3046
143

RM/40

(The President)
request or with the agreement of the parties concerned, been integral
parts of the Security Council's effort to maintain international peace
and security.

They welcome these developments.

"The members of the Council also recognize that change, however
welcome, has brought new risks for stability and security.
most acute problems result from changes to State structures.

Some of the
The members

of the Council will encourage all efforts to help achieve peace,
stability and cooperation during these changes.
"The international community therefore faces new challenges in the
search for peace.

All Member States expect the United Nations to play a

central role at this crucial stage.

The members of the Council stress

the importance of strengthening and improving the United Nations to

increase its effectiveness.

They are determined to assume fully their

responsibilities within the United Nations OrganizatioJl in the framework
of the Charter.
"The absence of war and military conflicts amongst States does not
in itself ensure international peace and security.

The non-military

sources of instability in the economic, social, humanitarian and
ecological fields have become threats to peace and security.

The United

Nations membership as a whole, working through the appropriate bodies,
needs to give the highest priority to the solution of these matters.

"Commitment to collective security
"The members of the Council pledge their commitment to international
law and to the United Nations Charter.

All disputes between States

should be peacefully resolved in accordance with the provisions of the
Charter.

S/PV.3046

RM/40

144

<:rbe f.£esident)
"The members of the Council reaffirm their commitment to the
collective security system of the Charter to deal with threats to peace
and to reverse acts of aggression.
"The members of the Council express their deep concern over acts of
international terrorism and'emphasize the need for the international
community to deal effectively with all such acts.

"Peacemaking and peace-keeping
"To strengthen the effectiveness of these commitments, and in order
that the Security Council should have the means to discharge its primary
responsibility under the Charter for the maintenance of international
peace and security, the members of the Council have decided on the
following approach •
.. They invite the Secretary-General to prepare, for circulation to
the Members of the United Nations by 1 July 1992, his analysis and
recommendations on ways of strengthening and making more efficient within
the framework and provisions of the Charter the capacity of the United
Nations for preventive diplomacy, for peacemaking and for peace-keeping.
"The Secretary-General's analysis and recommendations could cover
the role of the United Nations in identifying potential crises and areas
of instability as well as the contribution to be made by regional
organizations in accordance with Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter in helping the work of the Council.

They could also cover the

need for adequate resources, both material and financial.

The

Secretary-General might draw on lessons learned in recent United Nations
peace-keeping missions to recommend ways of making more effective

S/PV.3046

RM/40

145

(The President)
Secretariat planni~g and operations.

He could also consider how greater

use might be made of his good offices, and of his other functions under
the United Nations Charter,
"Disarmament, arms control and weapons of mass destruction
"The members of the Council, while fully conscious of the
responsibilities of other organs of the United Nations in the fields of
disarmament, arms control and non-proliferation, reaffirm the crucial
contribution which progress in these areas can make to the maintenance of
international peace and security.

They express their commitment to take

concrete steps to enhance the effectiveness of the United Nations in
these areas.
"The members of the Council underline the need for all Member States
to fulfil their obligations in relation to arms control and disarmament;
to prevent the proliferation in all its aspects of all weapons of mass
destruction; to avoid excessive and destabilizing accumulations and
transfers of arms; and to resolve peacefully in accordance with the
Charter any problems concerning these matters threatening or disrupting
the maintenance of regional and global stability,

They emphasize the

importance of the early ratification and implementation'by the States
concerned of all international and regional arms control arrangements,
especially the START and CFE Treaties,
"The proliferation of all weapons of mass destruction constitutes a
threat to international peace and security.

The members of the Council

commit themselves to working to prevent the spread of technology related
to the research for or production of such weapons and to take appropriate
action to that end.

S/PV.3046

RM/40

145 (a-z)

<the Pres,iden,t)
"On nuclear proliferation., they note the importance of the decision
of many countries to adhere to the Non-Proliferation Treaty and emphasize
the integral role in the implementation of that Treaty of fully effective
IAEA safeguards, as well as the importance of effective export controls.
The members of the Council will take appropriate measures in the case of
any violations notified to them by the IAEA.
"On chemical weapons, they support the efforts of the Geneva
Conference with a view to reaching agreement on the conclusion, by the
end of 1992, of a universal convention, including a verification regime,
to prohibit chemical weapons.

S/PV.3046

BC?/ed

146

(The President)
"On conventional armaments, they note the General Assembly's vote in
favour of a United Nations register of arms transfers as a first step,
and in this connection recognize the importance of all States providing
all the information called for in the General Assembly's resolution,

* * *
"In conclusion, the members of the Security Council affirm their
determination to build on the initiative of their meeting in order to
secure positive advances in promoting international peace and security.
They agree that the United Nations Secretary-General has a crucial role
to play.

The members of the Council express their deep appreciation to

the outgoing Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Javier Perez
de Cuellar, for his outstanding contribution to the work of the United
Nations, culminating in the signature of the El Salvador peace
agreement.

They welcome the new Secretary-General, His Excellency

Dr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, and note with satisfaction his intention to
strengthen and improve the functioning of the United Nations.

They

pledge their full support to him, and undertake to work closely with him
and his staff in fulfilment of their shared objectives, including a more
efficient and effective United Nations system.
"The members of the Council agree that the world now has the best
chance of achieving international peace and security since the foundation
of the United Nations.

They undertake to work in close cooperation with

other United Nations Member States in their own efforts to achieve this,
as well as to address urgently all the other problems, in particular

BCT/ed

S/PV.3046

147

(The President>
those of economic and s.ocial development, requiring the collective
response of the international community.

They recognize that peace and

prosperity are indivisible and that lasting peace and stability require
effective international cooperation for the eradication of poverty and
the promotion of a better lite for all in larger freedom. 0
That concludes the statement we have agreed.

I would inform the Council

that the statement will be published as Security Council document S/23500.
The Security Council has thus completed its business for this meeting,
and I therefore declare it adjourned.
The meeting rose at 5.10 p,m.
