S/2005/758

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
6 December 2005
Original: English

Letter dated 30 November 2005 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to inform the members of the Security Council that the
authorities of the Central African Republic have advised my Representative that
they would like the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in the Central
African Republic (BONUCA) to continue to assist them in their efforts towards
building lasting peace, following the restoration of constitutional order in their
country.
President François Bozizé has stressed the need for greater involvement on the
part of the international community in view of the major post-election challenges
facing the Central African Republic, while acknowledging that the primary
responsibility for improving the population’s living conditions rests with his
Government. It should be noted that President Bozizé recently suspended three
Government Ministers suspected of corrupt practices, after a census was conducted
to determine the number of civil servants and State officials in active service.
Considering that the prospects for lasting stability in the Central African
Republic are more encouraging than ever, I recommend that the mandate of
BONUCA be extended from 1 January to 31 December 2006. For the first time since
the establishment of BONUCA, conditions conducive to peacebuilding are in place.
The renewal of the mandate of BONUCA would enable it to help the Central
African Republic in its efforts to build on the success of its recent elections. Support
from BONUCA, particularly in the areas of strengthening political dialogue and
promoting the rule of law, will help to create a climate conducive to reconstruction
and development. It will also be essential for the pursuit of the reforms that the
Government intends to undertake.
The upsurge in cross-border banditry and the proliferation of weapons in the
subregion have increased insecurity in the Central African Republic and are
hindering its economic recovery. The Central African authorities, in concertation
with the neighbouring countries, have requested BONUCA and my Representative
to serve as facilitators in their search for a common solution to these threats,
considering that no significant progress can be achieved in the political, social and
economic areas unless security is restored.
BONUCA carries out these new subregional responsibilities in addition to the
activities it has been undertaking to assess the impact of developments in
neighbouring countries on the Central African Republic, and vice versa (see
S/PRST/2004/39). BONUCA will continue to work closely with subregional
05-62954 (E) 061205

*0562954*

S/2005/758

partners, including the Central African Economic and Monetary Community, the
Economic Community of Central African States and the CEMAC Multinational
Force.
In view of these additional responsibilities and the encouraging developments
occurred recently, I intend to raise the rank of my Representative in the Central
African Republic to that of Special Representative, at the Assistant SecretaryGeneral level, to enable him to continue to provide United Nations support to the
efforts of the Central African Republic and the neighbouring countries towards
building lasting stability.
I should be grateful if you would bring this letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

2
