V.

well as on the modalities for obtaining financia! resources,
as described in the annex to the report of the SecretaryGeneral of I October 1981, 76 to do so as soon as possible;
4. A/so requests ali Member States that have not yet
provided their comments to the Secretary-General on the
expert feasibility study and working plan for the establishment of an intemational financia! corporation to finance
non-commercial measures to combat desertification, contained in chapter V ofthe annex to bis report, 76 also to do
so as soon as possible, particularly with respect to:
(a) The establishment of the corporation;
(b) Their interest in participating fmancially therein;
5. Further requests the Secretary-General, in cooperation with the Executive Director of the United
Nations Environment Programme, to report to the General Assembly at its fortieth session on the implementation
of the present resolution.

Action to Combat Desertification and to report on this
matter to the General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session;
5. Expresses its gratitude to the Govemments, agencies
of the United Nations system, intergovemmental organizations and other organizations that have contributed to
the implementation in the Sudano-Sahelian region of the
Plan of Action to Combat Desertification;
6. Urges ali Govemments to respond favourably to
requests for assistance from the Govemments of the
Sudano-Sahelian region in combating desertification;
7. Requests the Goveming Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme to continue to report
annually to the General Assembly, through the Economic
and Social Council, on the implementation in the SudanoSahelian region ofthe Plan of Action to Combat Desertification.
102nd plenary meeting
19 December 1983

102nd plenary meeting
19 December 1983

38/165.
38/164. Implementation in the Sudano-Sahelian
region of the Plan of Action to Combat
Desertification
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 36/ l 90 of 17 December 1981
and 37/216 of 20 December 1982,
Noting part seven, section B, paragraph 5, of decision
11/7 of 24 May 1983 of the Goveming Council of the
United Nations Environment Programme 77 on the implementation ofthe Plan of Action to Combat Desertification
in the Sudano-Sahelian region, 74
Noting a/so Economic and Social Council resolution
1983/68 of 29 July 1983 on the climatic situation and
drought in Africa,
Having considered the report of the Goveming Council
of the United Nations Environment Programme 78 on the
implementation in the Sudano-Sahelian region of the Plan
of Action to Combat Desertification,
1. Takes note of the report of the Goveming Council
of the United Nations Environment Programme;
2. Expresses its satisfaction with the progress made by
the United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office, on behalf of
the United Nations Environment Programme, under a
joint venture between the United Nations Environment
Programme and the United Nations Development Programme, to assist the Govemments of the region in implementing the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification;
3. Requests the Goveming Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme and the Goveming
Council of the United Nations Development Programme
to continue to provide adequate support for the United
Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office in order to enable it to
respond more adequately to the pressing needs of the
countries of the Sudano-Sahelian region;
4. Invites the Goveming Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme to examine, at its
twelfth session, the possibility of including Ghana and
Togo in the list of countries which receive assistance
through the United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office in
implementing in the Sudano-Sahelian region the Plan of
76 A/36/ 141.
77 Ojficial Records ofthe General Assemhlv. T/11rti'-<'1ghth Sesswn. Supp/e-

ment No. 25 (A/38/25), annex.

78 A/38/304, annex.

•

•

19 O/licia/ Records of the General Assemhly. Thirtv--<'Íl?hth Ses.,ion. Supph•-

ment No. 25 (A/38/25).

133

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

International co-operation in the field of the
environment

The General Assembly.
Having considered the report of the Goveming Council
of the United Nations Environment Programme on the
work of its eleventh session, 79
Taking note of Economic and Social Council decision
1983/168 of 25 J uly 1983 on intemational co-operation
on the environment,
Noting a/so the report of the Executive Director of the
United Nations Environment Programme on intemational
conventions and protocols in the field of the environment, 80 together with the sixth supplement to the register
of such conventions and protocols, 81
Bearing in mind the involvement of ali countries in the
protection of the environment with a view to enhancing
the quality of life for future generations,
A ware that the continuing increase in the production,
stockpiling and risk of use of weapons of mass destruction
and the development of new types of weapons not only
pose a major threat to the environment and even to life on
Earth, but also compete for limited resources that could be
better used for constructive purposes, including development,
Reaffirming the need to strengthen intemational cooperation in the field of the environment, particularly in
order to <leal with the most serious environmental
problems of the developing countries in line with the
lntemational Development Strategy for the Third United
Nations Development Decade, 82
Bearing in mind the interrelationships between people,
resources, environment and development and convinced
of the importance of assessing those interrelationships as
they relate to intemational co-operation for development,
Recalling the catalytic mandate and role of the United
Nations Environment Programme with regard to intemational co-operation in the field of the environment, especially with regard to integrating environmental considerations into the development process,
1. Takes note of the report of the Goveming Council
of the United Nations Environment Programme on the
80 A/381305, annex l.
81 / bid.. annex II.
82 Resolution 35156. annex, paras. 156-158.
