Resolutions adopted on reports of the Third Committee
right of self-determination", and shall stipulate that all
States, including those having responsibility for the
administration of Non-Self-Governing Territories,
should promote the realization of that right, in conformity with the Purposes and Principles of the United
Nations, and that States having responsibility for the
administration of Non-S~lf-Governing Territories
should promote the realization of that right in relation
to the peoples of such Territories;
2. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
prepare recommendations concerning international respect for the self-determination of peoples and to submit these recommendations to the General Assembly
at its seventh session.
375thJlenary meeting,
February 1952.

546 (VI). Inclusion in the draft International
Covenants on Human Rights of provisions
regarding reservations

The General Assembly,
Considering that it is desirable that the two International Covenants on Human Rights should include
P;~v.isions relating: to the admissibility or non-admiss1b1hty of reservations and to the effect to be attributed
to them, in particular with regard to the validity of the
Covenants between the reserving State and other States
ratifying the Covenant,
Considering that the General Assembly in its resolution 598 (VI) of 12 January 1952 has recommended
that organs of the United Nations, specialized agencies
and States should, in the course of preparing multilateral conventions, consider the insertion therein of
P;~v_isions relatin~ to the admissibility or non-admiss1b1hty of reservat1011s and to the effect to be attributed
to them,
Decides to recommend to the Economic and Social
Council that it should instruct the Commission on Human Rights to prepare, for inclusion in the two draft
International Co~enants on Human Rights, one or
n:io_r~ clauses relatt;1g to the admissibility or non-admiss1b1hty of reservat10ns and to the effect to be attributed
to them.
375thJlenary meeting,
February 1952.
547 (VI). Measures for the implementation of
the International Covenants on Human Rights
-procedural resolution

The General Assembly
Decides to request the Economic and Social Council
to forward the following documents on measures for
the implementation of the International Covenants on
Human Rights: A/C.3/L.191/Rev.3 ( Syria), A/C.3/
L.193 (Israel), A/C.3/L.195 and A/C.3/L.195/Rev.2
(Guatemala, Haiti and Uruguay), A/C.3/L.196 and
A/C.~/L.196/Rev.2 (Guatemala and Uruguay), A/C.
3/L.;98/Rev.2 ~(Leb~nc~n) and document A/C.3/L.191/
~ev.-, to. the Co!11m1ss10n on Human Rights as additional basic workmg papers on the subjects with which
they deal, for its consideration in connexion with the
drafting of provisions on implementation in the Covenants on Human Rights. The said Commission should

37

also take into consideration the discussion of the General Assembly concerning these documents and submit
its recommendations to the General Assembly at its
seventh session.
375th plenary meeting,
5 February 1952.

548 (VI). Adoption in Spanish of the term
"derechos humanos" instead of the term
"derechos del hombre"

Whereas in the Spanish text of the United Nations
Charter, Articles 1, 13, 55, 62, 68 and 76 refer to
"derechos humanos" and not to "derechos de! liombre",
Whereas the content and purpose of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and of the draft Covenant have a wide significance which is not covered in
Spanish by the term "derechos del hombrc",
Taking into account the fact that, in the general discussion on this matter in the Third Committee during
the sixth session of the General Assembly, prominent
representatives of Spanish-American countries expressed their preference for the term employed in the
Charter,
The General Assembly
Decides that, in future, in all United Nations
working documents and publications in Spanish, and
in the Universal Declaration and draft Covenant, the
words "derechos humanos" shall be used instead of
the words "derechos del hombre", used at. present.
375th!lenary meeting,
February 1952.
549 (VI). Special session of the Economic and
Social Council to precede the eighth session
of the Commission on Human Rights

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the resolutions 10 adopted at its present session which relate to the draft International Cove~ants on Human Rights and measures of implementation,
1. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
instruct the Commission on Human Rights to give priority to the question of the right of peoples to selfdetermination which the Commission was forced to
defer at its seventh session 11 owing to lack of time;
2. Requests the Council, in accordance with its rules
of procedure, to hold a special session, to precede the
eighth_ ses~ion of the Commission on Human Rights,
at which 1t shall take the necessary action to enable
the Commission to complete the work entrusted to it
in connexion with the said draft International Covenants on Human Rights and measures of implementation before the end of the Council's fourteenth session,
so that the Council may submit the drafts to the General Assembly at its seventh regular session together
with its recommendations.
375th plenary meeting,
5 February 1952.
10
See resolutions 543 (VI), 544 (VI) 545 (VI) 546 (VI)
547 (VI) and 548 (VI).
'
'
'
11
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council
Thirteenth Session, Supplement No. 10, Chapter V.
•. '
