UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL

CQUNCIL
RECORDS

THIRTY-FOURTH

YEAR

212ot”

MEETING:

NEW

5 MARCH

1979

&;j’<’
.]_;i.. .;

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

...........................
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2120)
Tribute to the memory of Mr. Jamil M. Baroody, Ambassador of Saudi Arabia.
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . , . . , . . .
Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 28 February 1979 from the Permanent Representative of Equatorial Guinea to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/13121) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1
1
1

1

S/PV.2120

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly Supplements of the OflcialRecorcis of the Security Council The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2120th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 5 March 1979, at 3.30 p.m.
President:

Mr. Leslie 0. HARRIMAN

(Nigeria).

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 28 February 1979 from the Permanent
--~
Representative of Eauatorial Guinea to tbe United
Nhons addressed to the President of ‘the Sea&~ Coundl (s/13121)

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia, France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Zambia.

5. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2119th meeting, I invite the representatives of
Angola, Benin, Botswana, Cuba, Ethiopia and Ghana to
take the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

Provisional agenda (WAgendaI2120)

At the invitation of the President, Mr. de Figueiredo
(Angola). Mr. Houngavou (Benin), Mr. Modisi (Botswana),
Mr. Roa KoUn (Cuba), Mr. Seific (Ethiopia), and Mr. SeQi
(Ghana) took the places reseryd for them at the side of the
Council chamber,

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. Question concerniqg the situation in Southern Rhodesia:.
Letter dated 28 February 1979 from the Permanent Representative of Equatorial Guinea to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/13121)
The meeting was called to order at 4.55 p.m

6. The PRESIDENT: I wish to inform members of the
Council that I have received letters from the representatives
of Sri Lanka and Yugoslavia in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the question on the
agenda. In accordance with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion, without the right
to vote, in conformity with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

Tribute to tbe memory of Mr. Jamil M. Baroody,
Ambassador of Saudi Arabia
1. The PRESIDENT:
I wish at the very outset of this
meeting on behalf of the members of the Se&&y Council to
pay a tribute to the memory of His Excellency Mr. Jamil M.
Baroody, Deputy Permanent Representative of Saudi
Arabia to the United Nations.

At the invitation of thePresident, Mr. &mando(SriLunka)
and Mr. Komatina (Yugoslavia) took the places reservedfor
them at the side of the Council chamber.
7. Mr. HULINSKQ
(Czechoslovakia) (interpretation
from Russ&n): Mr. President, before turning to the substance of the item under discussion I should like to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of March, a month in the
course of which the Council will have to consider quite a
number of important matters affecting your continent in
particular. I should like to take this opportunity wholeheartedly to thank your predecessor in the post of President,
the representative of Kuwait Mr. Bishara, who with skill
and energy unstintingly devoted himself each day to the
task of guidiig the proceedings of the Council in February.

2. Ambassador Baroody represented Saudi Arabia at the
United Nations from 1947. His political experience and his
historical knowledge of the united Naiions were tmparalleled. We recall that Ambassador Baroody was a wise
and enthusiastic guardian of the ideals and objectives of the
United Nations and that he participated in the work of the
Security Council on many occasions over the years.
3. I should like to ask the Permanent Mission of Saudi
Arabia to eonvey to the Government and people of Saudi
Arabia the sadnesswe feel at this time. I wish also to extend
sincere condolences to the family of Ambassador Baroody.

8. The. decision of the Group of African States at the
United Nations to call for an urgent meeting of the Council
to consider the question of the situation in Southern Rhodesia was a timely initiative. As a result of the illegal manceuvres of the racist r&ime directed against the African
majority in Zimbabwe and also as a result of their repeated
acts of aggression against neighbouring independent African States, there persists in this part of Africa a tense
situation that is fraught with danger to peace and security.
Understanding, as they do, that as a result of the irresistible

4. Hi passing leaves a gap which will be felt sorely by all
of us in our work at the United Nations.
On the .proposal of the PrestWnt, the members of the
GnmciI observed a minute of sflence.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted
1

upsurge of the liberation struggle waged by the people of
Zimbabwe under the leadership of the Patriotic Front the’
total collapse of the illegal regime is inevitable, the racists
around Smith will shrink from no crimes or provocations in
order to prevent the people of Zimbabwe from obtaining
true independence and freedom. It was precisely for that
reason that they arranged the so-called internal settlement,
which began a year ago with the shameful deal in Salisbury
between Smith and the three African leaders who sold out
and which is to be consummated next April by the farce of
the illegal so-called elections. This so-called internal settlement is-designed to hoodwink the people of Zimbabwe. It is
an attempt to impose on that people a neo-colonialist
regime and, while promising to establish a majoritygovemment, actually to preserve the reakity of power in the hands
of the white exploiters.

the people of Zimbabwe a n&-colonialist solution. The
Czechoslovak delegation whole-heartedly supports the
decisions that were taken on this question at the special
meeting of the Coordinating
Bureau of Non-Aligned
Countries which was held at ministerial level at Maputo
during January and February last.
14. The Czechoslovak delegation believes that at this stage the Security Council should once again condemn the manceuvres of the illegal r&ime-among
other things, the
farce of the so-called elections planned for next Aprilwhich attempt to preserve and perpetuate the domination
of the white minority and to hinder the attainment by the
people of Zimbabwe of genuine independence. The Council
must declare these elections and their results illegal and call
upon all States to refrain from recognizing any organs that
may come to be established on the basis of theseelections
We should also condemn with the utmost vigour the
repeated acts of barbarous aggression committed by the
Rhodesian racist army against neighbouring sovereign African States. At the same time, the Council must support the
just demands for the further expansion and strengthening of
,
binding sanctions against the racist regime.

9. In its resolution 423 (1978), the Security Council condemned “all attempts and manceuvres by the illegal regime
in Southern Rhodesia aimed at the retention of power by a
racist minority and at preventing the achievement of independence by Zimbabwe*‘. At the same time, the Council
declared illegal and unacceptable any internal settlement
concluded under the auspices of the illegal regime and called
upon all States not to accord any recognition to such a
/
settlement. -~

15. Mr. RICHARD (United Kingdom): Mr.. President, I
should like to start by congratulating you on your assuming
your office. You have, if I may say so, drawn what promises
to be a particularly busy and perhaps difficult month, and
we wish you well in your task, calling as it does for considerable diplomatic expertise, objectivity and patience, qualities
for which you are renowned.

10. However, as the facts show, not all Member Statesare
ready to comply with this unambiguous resolution. One
instance in evidence of this is the campaign that has been
mounted in Western countries for a repeal of the binding
sanctions decreed by the Council against the illegal regime
as well as consideration by the United States Congress of
the question of sending a group next April to observe the
illegal, one-sided elections in Rhodesia.

16. I should also like to take this opportunity of congratulating Mr. Bishara of Kuwait for the way he led the Council
during February when we were faced with some most
important issues. He handled the functions of the presidency with dignity and great skill.
.

11. As is pointed out in the statement of the Group of
African States at the United Nations of 14 February last:

17. It has been a sad week-end for the United Nations,
which has lost in Ambassador Baroody its longest-serving
and perhaps its best known delegate. I should like to extend
to his wife and his family and to the Saudi delegation our
sincerest commiserations. Mr. Baroody will never be forgotten here, and the Organization can ill afford, to lose his
dedicated devotion to its cause, his unique and independent
approach to world problems, his trenchant wit and what I
could call his spirit of iconoclasm. The United Nations will
..
not be the same without him.

“To send observers to such an election is in fact to give
encouragement to the manceuvres of the Smith regime
calculated to defeat a genuine settlement of the conflict in
Zimbabwe. Such a move can only comfort Mr. Smith
and his collaborators and provide them with a false sense
of hope if only they can continue with their oppressive
war for some time more. It would, as a consequence,
only lead to the escalation of the conflict and prolongation of the suffering and bloodshed of Zimbabweans.‘*
/S/13084, annex, para. 44

18. I now turn to the subject of our debate today. I would
wish first to place on record our whole-hearted condemnation of the recent attacks by the illegal r&ime on the territory of neighbouring States. The attacks were’illegal and
indefensible and we deplore the terrible loss .of life and
destruction. By spreading the destruction in this way-and
we note with extreme concern that the attacks have for the
first time been extended to include targets in Angola-the
Rhodesian regime risks widening the conflict into a regional
war. Indeed, both sides have been guilty of sharpening the
conflict in recent months. It has been marked by some
brutal acts inside Rhodesia, including the shooting down of
Rhodesian civiliin aircraft with tragic loss qf innocent lives.
As so often in such situations, the worst and most tragic
consequences of conflict fall upon the civilian :/Population,
both African and European.
‘_I .:
19. In the British Government’s view, the best prospect of
ending the conflict and of achieving a return to legality and

12. These and other similar actions are clearly designed to
help to legalize the Rhodesian 1regime in one form or
another, while at the same time they represent an attempt to
undermine the national liberation struggle of the people of
Zimbabwe. Also, this collusion promotes the continuation
of the aggressive acts of the racists against independent
African States, the latest examples of which have been the
massive attacks by Rhodesian 1troops against Zambia,
Mozambique and Angola resulting in the killing of
hundreds of refugees from Southern Rhodesia and inhabitants of those countries.
I
13. The Czechoslovak Socialiit~Republic supports a reso
lution of the Rhodesian problem that would ensure the
earliest possible transfer of power to genuine representatives of the African majority in Zimbabwe, namely, the
national liberation movement headed by the Patriotic
Front, and categorically opposes all attempts to impose on
2

there and the increasing extension of the conflict to the
territories of other Member States in the area. It also
remains convinced of the urgent need to encourage all the
parties to achieve, through negotiation, a settlement which
will at last bring an end to violence and secure a peaceful
transition in Rhodesia to internationally recognixed majority’ rule. We shall examine any draft resolution which is
submitted to the Council in the light of the considerations
which I have set out.

a peaceful settlement in Rhodesia lies in an attempt to find a
wider agreement involving both sides in the conflict and
incorporating
such essential features of the AngloAmerican proposals as a cease-fire and a neutral administration for the conduct of free and fair elections under
United Nations supervision. Such elections, held under
impartial control, should determine the wishes of the people
of Rhodesia as a whole and be conducted in a manner which
would command the acceptance of the international community. We believe that any resolution adopted by the
Security Council should call on all concerned to make
renewed efforts to achieve a settlement on those lines.

23. Mr. KHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretationfiom Russian): Mr. President, permit me fnst of all to congratulate you on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for March and to
wish you every success in your conduct of the Council’s
proceedings. In the present very weighty and complex stage
of the development of the international situation, the Soviet
Union has developed and is developing friendly relations
with your country and we are sure that your rich experience
in the United Nations, particularly in regard to the national
liberation struggle and the struggle against apartheid will
promote the achievement of positive results on matters
which the Security Council will be called upon to examine
this month.

20. The British Government, with the Government of the
United States, remains fully committed to continuing
efforts to bring about a peaceful transition to independence
and majority rule through elections supervised by the
United Nations. That commitment was reconfirmed at a
meeting between my Secretary of State for Foreign and
Commonwealth
Affairs, Mr. Owen, and the United
States Secretary of State, Mr. Vance, at the beginning of
last month. Also since the Council last discussed the issue,
Mr. Cledwyn Hughes, as special representative of the United Kingdom Prime Minister, visited southern Africa to
consult the leaders of the front-line States, Nigeria, South
Africa and the Patriotic Front and Mr. Smith and the other
three internal African leaders at Salisbury. The sad conclusion of Mr. Hughes’ inquiries was that the parties were so
far apart that there was no existing prospect of convening a
successful meeting of all parties to consider a negotiated
settlement, but that the Anglo-American proposals, though
neither immutable nor intended to exclude other possibilities, remained available as the best basis we could currently
see for an eventual settlement.

24. I should like to take this opportunity to express my
gratitude to your predecessor as President, Ambassador
Bishara of Kuwait, for his tireless and skilful conduct of the
work of the Council in exceptionally difficult circumstances
which required the full use of his unequalled diplomatic
talents.
25. I wish to say a few words also about the sudden
passing of Mr. Baroody. That sudden death took, from
among the ranks of United Nations diplomats an experienced diplomat who knew many statesmen and who was
sincerely striving to promote by his contribution the consolidation of peace.-<)ne could agree or fail to agree with the
various proposals or statements made by Mr. Baroody but
one could not deny him his great human qualities. He
sincerely wanted peace throughout the world.

21. We believe that the elections which the Salisbury
mgime proposes to hold in April are not likely to bring
about a successful result. As my Prime Minister has stated
publicly, he does not see how it is possible to talk about
holding “‘free and unfettered elections** in the kind of situation we are facing and that it is indeed diRicult to seehow, in
these circumstances, elections not held under international
supervision and following a cease-fire could gain intemational recognition. But I must add a clear note of warning to
those speakers who have called on Governments to prevent
their nationals from going to Rhodesia to observe these
elections; We could not accept language attempting to circumscribe the functioning of our parliamentary democracy
or Parliament’s right to exercise its judgement on the
acceptability of any settlement to the people of Rhodesia as
a whole in accordance with the fifth principle endorsed by
successiveBritish Governments. Nor could we accept wording which sought to fetter the British Parliament as to how it
might decide to inform itself on the situation. It has been
made clear that the British Government does not intend to
be offici&ly involved as a Government or to send observers
to monitor the elections. We shall however not be able to
accept .any resolution which circumscribes the rights of
individual United Kingdom citizens whatever their status,
whether ,that of Members of Parliament, representatives of
the media, or other. Nor shall we be able to accept any
resolution that in any way circumscribes the-rights
of the
--- .-_.__
British Parliament, which, as hai been l+atedly stressedm
the Council, has a specitic responsibility in relation to
Rhodesia.

26. The Soviet delegation has studied attentively the statements of representatives of African States and the representative of the Patriotic Front of Zimbabwe, which were made
at the last meeting of the Council. We entirely share the
profound concern and indignation of African countries at
the abrupt escalation of aggressive actions on the part of the
racist r&imes of Southern Rhodesia and South Africa
against neighbouring independent African countries. Over
the last two weeks alone, Zambia, Angola and Mozambique have been the victims of repeated barbarous bombing
by the racist mgimes. As a result of those bombings,
hundreds of completely innocent people-children,
women, and old people-died or were wounded, refugee
camps were destroyed and schools and other purely civilian
targets were destroyed. The racist aggressorswent so far asto
threaten to escalate the bombing of the territory of neighbouring African States to the level of large-scale warfare. At
the same time, the racist r&ime of Smith has been stepping
up its repressive policy within the country. His punitive
organs without trial and without investigation have been
dealing summarily and brutally with all those suspected of
opposition to the racist r&ime. They have been burning
villages, destroymg crops and pursuing a policy of open
genocide against the black population of Zimbabwe. In
these circumstances of intensification of the armed struggle

22. In short, my Government remains deeply concerned
about the situation in Rhodesia, the rising level of confhct
3

being waged against the Smith regime by the warriors of the
Patriotic Front, the Southern Rhodesian racists want to
break the militant spirit of those fighting for national libcration and force the African countries to give up their fraternal support for the liberation struggle of the Zimbabwe
patriots.

renounce the measures they are preparing with the aim of
legal&g the so-called internal elections being planned by
the racist r&ime, since that can only lead to a further
exacerbation of the conflict in Southern Rhodesia and an
increase in the threat to international peace and security in
that area.

27. . The Security Council cannot remain indifferent to the
situation which threatens peace and security in southern
Africa and elsewhere. The Council must most vigorously
condemn the aggressive actions of the racist rCgimes of
Salisbury and Pretoria against neighbouring African States
as a flagrant violation of international law and a serious
threat to international peace and security.

32. The question arises: Can it really be true that those
countries which intend to send stilled
observers to the
elections to be held by the Smith clique do not understand
that those elections constitute only a new and ill-disguised
farce? Obviously the point is that those elections are just one
more link in the chain of measures aimed at solving the
problem of Southern Rhodesia in a neocolonialist fashion.
Not so long ago, in the United States the doors were thrown
wide open in hospitality to the head of the Southern Rhode&an racists; steps were taken leading to the repeal of
economic sanctions and now the ground is being prepared
for the total recognition of the illegal r&iine.

28. At the same time the Soviet delegation believes that
the criminal attacks by the Southern Rhodesian racist
r@ime on African States should be viewed within the
broader context of the efforts being made to preserve the
colonial order .in that country and to continue the plundering and exploitation of the indigenous population of
southern Africa. For those purposes the racists and their
protectors in the West have had recourse to the most varied
manceuvres. They have hired local collaborators and made
attempts to split the ranks of the Patriotic Front, they are
banking on getting round economic and other sanctions
that have been imposed by the United Nations with regard
to Southern Rhodesia and, finally, they are continuing their
policy of implementing a so-called internal settlement,
which means the preservation in that country of a racist
order under a newolonialist label.

33. A similar role in this matter is also being played by the
United Kingdom, the administering Power in Rhodesia.
The so-called rebel Smith could long have been dealt with.
The United Kingdom could long ago by itself have transferred power to the indigenous majority of the population
of that country, and now could do so with the support of the
United States. But what is happening7 The answer is that
there are profound economic and strategic interests of the
United Kingdom and the United States at work in southern
Africa.
34. In the statement made on 14 February last by the
Group of African States at the United Nations, the following is rightly pointed out:

29. In its resolution 423 (1978), the Security Council condemned all attempts at keeping the racist minority in power
in Southern Rhodesia and declared illegal and unacceptable
any internal settlement concluded under the auspices of the
illegal r6gime. The Council called upon all States not to
recognize such a settlement.

“Such a move can only comfort Mr. Smith and his
collaborators and provide them with a false sense of
hope if only they can continue with their oppressive war
for some time more. It would, as a consequence, only
lead to the escalation of the conflict and prolongation of
the suffering and bloodshed of Zimbabweans. It would
also be in flagrant violation of the Security Council
decision.” [S/13084, annex, para 4.j
e

30. We have seen that the racist Smith r&ime, aware of
the support of extremely influential circles in the West, is
’ continuing the policy of preserving and strengthening the
rule of the minority in Zimbabwe. An important role in
those plans is assigned to the so-called elections in Zimbabwe scheduled for April. It is clear that those. elections
will constitute one more police operation undertaken by the
racist authorities, accompanied by terrorism against the
local population. There can be no question of any transfer
of power to the majority so long as that possibility is
excluded even by the so-called constitution which was
recently approved by the white population of the country.

35. The Soviet delegation believes that the Security Council should most energetically demand that the Western Powers should refrain from sending observers to Southern
Rhodesia-even though we have just been told here that
‘:’
their Governments are unable to do that.
36. For our part; we should like once again to confirm our
position of principle: A swift and just solution of the problem of Southern Rhodesia can be obtained only through
clear compliance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council, by means of strict,
complete and unswerving application of sanctions against
the Smith r&me and its supporter, South Africa, and by
the transfer of power to the genuine patriots in Zimbabwe,
represented by the united PatrioticPront. Only such measures will be in keeping with the interests of the people of
Zimbabwe, its will and its aspirations. The members of the
Patriotic Front should not allow any attempts to split that
Front’to succeed. The strength and the victory ofthe.Front
lie in its unity.
.-

31. However, as we know, the United States and the
United Kingdom are considering with the utmost seriousness the question of rccognizing the results of those elections and using that pretext to refuse to observe the
sanctions established by the Security Council against Southem Rhodesia. The proposed sending of a group of American congressmen and members of the British Parliament for
what they call “objective observation” of the “elections” is
an open act of defiance and a challenge to the patriotic
forces of Zimbabwe and the African countries, which have
condemned all attempts at a one-sided solution to the
Rhodesian problem undertaken by the Smith r&ime and
have rejected the planned elections as illegal and invalid. In
their statements in the Council, the representatives of the
African countries have called upon the Western countries to

Pursuant to its position of principle of supbort for the
struggle of peoples for their freedom and the elimination of
, *

37.

4

44. The present situation in Southern Rhodesia emphasixes the urgent need to find a political settlement which can
be internationally recognized and bring peace to a free and
independent Zimbabwe. There is no reason to believe that
the elections scheduled for 20 April will reverse the tide of
mounting war inside and outside Southern Rhodesia. On
the contrary, we fear that they will provoke further violence.

the colonial racist regimes, the Soviet Union intends to
continue most actively to promote the successof the great
liberation movement of the peoples of southern Africa. As
was pointed out the other day in his statement to the
electors of Moscow by the Chairman of the Presidium of the
Supreme Soviet of the USSR, Leonid Brezhnev,
“there is no area in world politics where our Party and
the Soviet State would not support the cause of justice,
progress and peace’*.

45. The Norwegian Government can in no way associate
itself with a purported electoral process, or the results
thereof, in a sitace on the basis of a constitution which
allows the white minority that constitutes less than Sper
cent of the population to retain the controlling political
power. Under these circumstances, the sending of observers
can in no way legitimize the results of those elections. The
international community must regard the upcoming internal elections in Southern Rhodesia, and the results thereof,
as null and .void.

On the basis of this position the Soviet Union addresses
itself to the struggle for the liberation from the yoke of racist
oppression of the peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia and
against the system of aparrheid in South Africa.
38. The Soviet Union intends firmly and unswervingly to
follow that course in the future, especially here in the
Y Security Council. We are ready to support any draft resolution of the African countries which would help to accelerate
the liberation of the people of Zimbabwe from the colonial
and racist yoke, and make it possible to establish the power
of the indigenous population of that country. A good basis
for a Council resolution on the item under discussion could
be the final communique of the meeting of the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of non-aligned countries recently held at
Maputo [see S/13185].

46. In the view of the Norwegian Government, the AngloAmerican proposals contain f&&mental
principles wl&h,
if implemented, would allow for free and fair elections.
Those principles must be an integral part of any political
settlement in Zimbabwe.
47. Regrettably, time is now rapidly running out, because
of the intransigence of Mr. Smith and his colleagues in their
pursuit of an internal settlement. In the Security Council,
however, we must still press for a peaceful solution and take
all necessary measures towards that end. The Norwegian
Government urges all parties concerned to resume efforts to
bring about a free and independent Zimbabwe on the basis
of genuine majority rule.

39. Mr. ALGARD (Norway): Mr. President, I should like
to express my sincere congratulations to you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this month.
I am convinced that you will discharge your duties in the
same efficient and elegant manner as did your predecessor,
Ambassador Bishara. The latter’s description of the presidency as crippling and restrictive, generating both loneliness and frustration, is an awesome characterixation which,
I am sure, will not deter a person of your own experience. I
have to confess, however, that it does give me some pause
for thought as regards next month.
/
40. I should also like to associate myself with the words of
condolence expressed here on the occasion of the death of
our friend and colleague, Ambassador Baroody. The
Organization will not be the same without him.

48. Until an internationally acceptable political settlement has been found, the international community must
sc~pulously maintain its sanctions against Southern
Rhodesia. The utmost care should be taken not to accord
any legality to a @ime in Southern Rhodesia established in
contravention of the principle of genuine majority rule
based on free and fair elections.
._
49. Mr. LEPRETIE (France) (interpreettionj?om French):
Mr. President, first of all I should like to say how pleased I
am to see you-once again presiding over the~Security Council. We shall need all your talent and deep knowledge and
experience in order to deal with the work which is before us
this month.

41. The war inside and outside Southern Rhodesia is
being stepped up. The policies of the illegal regime of Ian
Smith have brought about this tragic situation which has
been further exacerbated during the last twelve months. The
Norwegian Government strongly condemns the recent
armed attacks against Angola, Mozambique and Zambia
by Rhodesian forces.

50. I should also like to express to the representative of
Kuwait our thanks and our congratulations for the excellent manner in which he conducted the business of the
Council last month. His patience and tact during the last
few weeks have been a most valuable example to us all.

42. The Norwegian Government deplores the great losses
of innocent lives as a result of the increased military activities of the Smith regime across the borders of Southern
Rhodesia and the intensification of the civil war inside the
Territory. . .

51. The.French delegation would like to associate itself
with the tribute which you offered, Mr. President, to the
memory of Ambassador Baroody, who died yesterday after
having occupied such an important place in the United
Nations for more than 30 years. With his original turn of
mind and often non-conformist albeit conciliatory views,
Ambassador Baroody was sincerely devoted to the cause of
peace. I should like to express our deep deep sympathy to
the delegation of Saudi Arabia and the family of Mr.
Baroody.

43. The latest attacks on independent States in southern
Africa clearly demonstrate how those States are in the
forefront of the struggle for freedom and independence in
southern Africa. In this connexion, the Norwegian Govemment wish&to stress the responsibility of the international
community to provide effective economic and humanitarian assistance to the victims of those attacks.

52. It is almost a year ago to the day that the Security
Council met to consider a complaint of Zambia, a victim of
5

raids carried out by the forces of Southern Rhodesia. Ian
Smith sought in that way to show that he was determined,
despite and against everyone, to implement the so-called
internal solution which had given rise to the so-called agreement of 3 March 1978. The international community and
the members of the Council in particular at that time
warned the rebel leader of the dangers of that policy. For his
part, the representative of France stated here on 17 March
1978:
- ~. ~_~- .“The illegal regime at Salisbury must understand the
universal condemnation that such operations call down
upon it. It must realize that the restoration of peace in
Rhodesia cannot come about through hostile incursions
into neighbouring countries nor through a refusal to face
up to reality, but only through an understanding reached
in negotiations with all the Rhodesian parties.” 12070th
meeting, para. 18.1
53. Far from producing even the beginning of a solution
to the thorny problem which divides that country, the agreement of 3 March 1978 merely added to the difliculty, even
when in Malta and at Dar es Salaam solutions appeared to
be emerging.
54. On several occasions thereafter Ian Smith sent his
forces sometimes into Zambia, and sometimes into Mozambique and sometimes into Botswana in the hope of overcoming the resistance of the Patriotic Front.
55. Today, refusing to draw the obvious conclusions from
events and taking no account of the warnings and advice
offered to him from all sides, the rebel leader obstinately
continues to seek to impose his plan. With the forthcoming
elections which he has scheduled for 20 April he is, on the
contrary, increasing the number of his forays in neighbouring territories and for the first time has launched a raid as far
as Angola. On that occasion, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of my country issued a communiquC, on 1 March,
the terms of which I should like to recall:
“France condemns the raid carried out on 26 February by the Rhodesian air force over the territory of
Angola. Such actions, which are clearly contrary to the
rules which should regulate relations between States, can
only aggravate tension in southern Africa and jeopardize
efforts to reach a peaceful settlement of the various
problems present in the region.”
56. How can Ian Smith not realize that the repetition and
extension of these actions, with all the attendant suffering
and destruction, is above all a proof of his powerlessness?
57. According to Ian Smith, on 20 April the democratic
rule of “one man, one vote” will for the first time be applied
in Southern Rhodesia. Unfortunately, this manceuvre ‘is
taking place in the most questionable circumstances.
58. Fit and foremost, this electoral consultation is being
organized by a government set up pursuant to an agreement
judged to be inadequate by the United Kingdom itself, the
only legal administering Power recognized by the intemational community. Secondly, this parody of electoral consultation will be taking place in an atmosphere of insecurity
that has given -rise to a strengthening of the police and
military apparatus in a way incompatible with the free
expression of the will of the people.

59. For these reasons, we cannot support the intention of.
those who wish to observe this operation, thus conferring
on it an endorsement of which Ian Smith would not fail to
take advantage. France understands in any case that no
government is ready to encourage them.
60. In 1977 the United States and the United Kingdom
drew up proposals /S/12393] which, in my country’s view,
offered a useful basis for settlement. As was recognized last
Friday by the representative of Zambia f2119th meetingI,
they contain provisions the application of which would
make it possible for Zimbabwe to accede to genuine independence. France again expresses the hope that all the
parties involved in the conflict will agree to take into
account the essential elements of those proposals in order to’
put an end to the dispute which divides them and thus
promote the establishment of an era of peace in the region.
61. Mr. LA1 Ya-Li (China) (interpretation from Chinese):
Mr.President, first of all, allow me to extend to you my
sincere congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of March. I
should also like to take this opportunity to express my
sincere congratulations to Ambassador Bishara of Kuwait
on his successfulfulfilment of the duties of the presidency of
the Council for February.
62. On the other hand, I wish to express our deep condolences at the untimely death of Mr. Baroody, Deputy
Permanent Representative of Saudi Arabia to the United
Nations. We would ask the delegation of Saudi Arabia to
convey to Mr. Baroody’s family our deep sympathy.
63. The Chinese delegation has listened carefully to the
statements made by the representatives of the African
States. I now wish to state the views of the Chinese
delegation.
64. First, over a recent period the Smith racist r@ime in
Rhodesia has repeatedly and flagrantly dispatched planes
and troops in rabid armed attacks on and invasions of
Mozambique, Zambia and Botswana. From late November
to early December 1978, the Smith reactionary authorities
carried out numerous air raids on areas in the Gaza, Tete
and Sofala provinces of Mozambique and ruthlessly massacred innocent local inhabitants and Zimbabwe refugees.
On 20 December their planes intruded into Zambia and
carried out barbarous bombing and strafing, which resulted
in casualties among the peaceful inhabitants and Zimbabwe
refugees. During the same period, they also made repeated
incursions into Botswana, causing loss of life and property
among the people there. A few days ago, bombers of the
Smith racist r&ime flagrantly ovefflew the neighbouring
African States to penetrate deep into the Luso area of
Angola, where they carried out indiscriminate bombing and
strafing, inflicting loss of life and property among the innocent inhabitants of Angola and Zimbabwe refugees. The
Chinese Government and people express deep indignation
at, and strongly condemn, these new and sanguinary crimes
committed by the Smith racist r6gime against the people of
Zimbabwe, Mozambique, Zambia, Botswana and Angola
and all the peoples of Africa.
65. Secondly, the latest series of despicable acts of the
Smith racist regime in Rhodesia is obviously intended to
dampen the flame of the armed struggle of the Zimbabwe
people and to compel those African States to giveup their

I_

,

.,.‘.

Nigeria but also of its able Permanent Representative to the
cause of freedom and justice in Africa and the world at
large. It is therefore with full pride and confidence that we
extend to you our firmest co-operation in the diflicult tasks
ahead. >

position of supporting the Zimbabwe people’s struggle for
independence. At present, under the leadership of the Patriotic Front of Zimbabwe, and with the direct support of the
African States and of the front-line countries in particular,
the struggle of the Zimbabwe people is making steady
progress. Under the heavy blows of the armed struggle of
the Zimbabwe people, the Smith reactionary authorities are
beset with di!Iiculties at home and abroad and are finding
the going tougher and tougher. In order to save itself from
imminent doom, the Smith racist regime is increasingly
resorting to counter-revolutionary dual tactics with the aid
and abetment of imperialism and the South African racist
regime. While intensifying the suppression of the Zimbabwe people and armed aggression against the front-line
States, it is staging the political fraud of the so-called internal settlement in an attempt to exclude the Patriotic Front
of Zimbabwe, to preserve the interests of the minority white
ruling class and to perpetuate its reactionary rule over the
Zimbabwe people. This scheme is doomed to failure
because it has been strongly condemned and opposed all
along by the Zimbabwe people, the African States and al1
the countries and peoples that uphold justice in the world.
At its thirty-third session, the General Assembly adopted a
resolution by which it condemned and rejected the so-called
internal settlement of the question of Rhodesia and declared
it null and void [resolution 33/38,4]. In such circumstances,
the sending of observers by any country to the sham elections scheduled for next April and stage-managed by the
Rhodesian racist regime would be in total violation of that
resolution and therefore impermissible.

69. I take this opportunity also to thank once again our
outgoing President, Ambassador Bishara, who conducted
the Council’s deliberations in the month of February with
exemplary capability and devotion. His efforts in the cause
of peace have brought distinction not only to him but to the
Government and people ofKuwait.
70. I should also like to take a few moments to express on
behalf of my Government and the members of my Mission,
and on my own behalf, our deepest grief and sorrow at the
passing away of Ambassador Jamil Baroody. One cannot
do justice to him by describing in mere words his stature,
position and contribution to this world body, he wasveritably an institution, the dean amongst all United Nations
diplomats. His demise has diminished us all and his absence
will leave a void that, for many of us, can never be filled. I
extend our deepest condolences to his family.
71. Bangladesh whole-heartedly endorses the initiative of
the African Group in convening this urgent series of meetings of the Council. There is no doubt that events in Southem Rhodesia are rapidly converging into a critical and
bloody flash-point. Chaos in Rhodesia affects all of southem Africa, with dire consequences for peace and security in
the region as a whole and ultimately the world beyond.

66. Thirdly, while the racists are putting up a last-ditch
struggle, one super-Power not of the region is looking for
opportunities to meddle in the liberation struggle in southern Africa with a view to profiting from it. However, the
people of Zimbabwe and other African countries have long
been tested on the battlefield and are unshakeable in their
determination to overthrow racist rule and to win and
safeguard national independence. Neither the racists’ lastditch struggle nor the super-Power’s evil doings will be able
to block the advance of the people of Zimbabwe and all the
people of southern Africa.
67. The Chinese Government and people firmly support
the Zimbabwe people in their just struggle for national
independence and firmly support the front-line countries of
Africa in their just struggle to fight back against the armed
provocations and aggression on the part of the Smith reactionary authorities. We are convinced that under the leadership of the Zimbabwe Patriotic Front, the Zimbabwe
people will further strengthen their unity, persist in the
struggle, guard against and do away with the Super-Power’s
meddling and all other outside interference and win complete victory in the struggle for national liberation with the
support of the front-line and other African countries and all
the countries and people that uphold justice.

72. The immediate impetus for Council concern is the
successivepremeditated and provocative acts of aggression
that were launched by the racist white minority regime, well
inside the territories of Zambia, Mozambique and Angola,
from 17 February to 1 March. These predatory attacks
caused widespread havoc and the death of innocent refugees and civilians in their hundreds. They cannot but challenge the moral consciousness of all mankind-even more
because of the dubious motives that have accompanied
them. For, apart from its punitive intent and desire for
indiscriminate retribution, the racist regime seeksobviously
to divert the attention of its sympathizers from the desperate situation and struggle within Rhodesia and to embroil
them in a larger regional conflagration, thereby prolonging
its own illegal existence. The long-range strike on distant
Angola is proof positive of this intent. The Government and
people of Bangladesh unequivocally condemn these harsh
and illegal manceuvres and extend their heartfelt sympathies
and support to the fraternal people of Zambia, Mozambique and Angola. We extend our fullest commendation
also for their exemplary restraint in the face of continuous
provocations. We believe that all moral and material assistance should be rendered to these States, which bear the
heaviest burden of supporting the liberation struggle.

68. Mr. ‘RAISER (Bangladesh): Please accept our warmest congratulations, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency for ‘this month. Bangladesh considers it fortunate that
you are at the helm of our affairs at this juncture when the
Council is debating the critical situation in southern Africa.
We are confident that your skill and experience in these
matters, so ably demonstrated by you in your capacity as
Chairman of the Special Committee against Apurtheici will
ensure the satisfactory conclusion of our efforts. Bangladesh is fully cognizant of the commitment not only of

73. These pre-emptive strikes, however, are symptomatic
of a much larger malaise that is deeply rooted in the RhodeSian situation and of much more important concern to the
international community in its so far fruitless search for
solutions. This is characterized, on the one hand, by the
determination of the racist minority to maintain in perpetuity white supremacy and effective control of power,
directly or indirectly, by whatever ruse, subterfuge, circumvention or deceit possible and, on the other, by its evident
failure to contain or dampen the war of liberation aimed
7

ever, to condemn thii spurious settlement for what it was:
an undisguised attempt to legalize and indeed legitirnize the
white-minority hold over Zimbabwe by dividing the African majority and perpetuating white domination.

precisely at dismantling this colonial szuzusquo and ushering in genuine independence and majority rule in Rhodesia.
The crux of the problem revolves around the fact that up till
now racism and politics in Rhodesia, so far as the whites are
concerned, have been inseparable if not synonymous. The
real danger lies in the fact of increasing recognition by the
resisting black majority that it is military action that constitutes the true reflection of power. Without cognizance of
these facts and urgent and constructive efforts to remedy
this situation, the conclusion is obvious: Rhodesia is headed
irrevocably for a climactic blood-bath.

78. The show of tolerance that the r&me sought to
propagate was patently suspect. The legacy of decades of
racial discrimination and exploitation, despite recent antidiscrimmation laws, remains verymuch on the surface in
the form of vast disparities in education, salaries and job
opportunities, and built-in safeguards to protect the privileged status quo of the whites.’ Past speakers from Africa
have revealed the extent of the repression and brutality that
continues to be perpetrated on the people of Zimbabwe.
While much is made in the Western press of attacks an
white farmers, little is highlighted of the heavy price paid by
the African majority for the disintegration of authority in
the country. Harassment, intimidation and subjugation
continue unabated. There is hardcore evidence of torture,
the incarceration of thousands of African patriots in gaols
and concentration camps euphemistically called protected
villages and of the eviction, transfer and resettlement of
Africans, not to mention the indiscriminate murder of men,
women and children. In its desperation, the entrenched and
isolated r6gime has sought to bolster its belaboured armed
forces by raising the upper limit of the drafting age of whites
to 59 years, by recruiting mercenaries and encouraging a
massive influx of foreign immigrants, black or white. African partners of the racist minority have in turn sought to
protect themselves and to increase their individual power
through the recruitment of private armies, which are
nothing more than armed bandits. Rhodesia has thus been
turned into an armed bastion, and the common man is left
to the mercy and the depredations of a wide variety of forces
the identity of many of which are unknown.

74. The past history of Southern Rhodesia needs no elaboration. More than 13 years have elapsed since Ian Smith
tore up the Bhodesian Constitution, betrayed his oath to
the British Queen and unilaterally declared independence.
The international community’s reaction to this usurpation
of power and events thereafter is also well documented.
Some 23 Council resolutions stand as milestones of the
community’s concern as well as, unfortunately, its ineffectiveness. The racist r&ime was pronounced illegal, The
Council affixed primary responsibility on the United Kingdom, as the admiitering
Power, to put an end to the
critical situation. It was solemnly reafEumed that the people
of Zimbabwe were the only true repository of sovereignty in
Southern Rhodesia. Progressive and comprehensive eco
nomic sanctions were imposed. The deteriorating situation
was adjudged a danger to peace and security, particularly
with the increasing acts of aggression launched by the white
racist minority regime on neighbouring African States.
75. Simultaneously, a sustained effort waspursued through
a wide variety of proposals to seek a constitutional settlement and return to legitimacy on the fundamental premise
that there would be no independence before African majority rule. These proposals underscored the basic objectives of
the international community: the surrender of power by the
illegal r6gime and the return to legality; an orderly and
peaceful transition to independence; free and impartial elections on the basis of universal adult franchise; an independence constitution providing for a democratically elected
Government, the abolution of discrimination, the protection of individual human rights and the independence of the
judiciary.
76. The past 13 years have witnessed the systematic negation of all these proposals from the initial TigerandFearIess
talks through the hopeful Anglo-American initiative and
the series of negotiations at Geneva, Malta, Dar es Salaam
and elsewhere. They have also seen the whittling down and
circumvention of the fundamental objectives that could
form the only viable basis for multiracial constitutional
settlement. This failure belongs solely to the illegal white
minority r&me, which, in the words of their racist leader
Ian Smith, has yet to come to grips with “this thing called
majority rule”.

79. Meanwhile the course of events was also to be shaped
by the launching six years ago and the intensification of the
liberation struggle of the people of Zimbabwe under the
leadership of the Patriotic Front. This resort to arms in
defence of their inalienable rights was undertaken only as a
result of the frustration of all efforts exerted in search of a
peaceful transition to majority rule. As ‘has been aptly
pointed out by the representative of Ethiopia 12119th meeting/, as early as September 1977, in response to the Angle
American proposals, the Patriotic Front made it clear that
the problem in Zimbabwe was not the election of a black
Prime Minister but rather the dismantling of the colonial
edilice and the attainment of genuine independence through
the democratization not only of the voting process but of
the very way of life in Rhodesia-in short, the destruction-of
racist Rhodesia and the emergence of sovereign Zimbabwe.
The immense courage,.fortitude and sacrifice of the Zimbabwean patriots were to compel the illegal r6gime radically
to modify its recalcitrant stand and to make seemingly
tangible concessions.

77. Faced with mounting international pressure, internal
dissension and a burgeoning liberation struggle, daily
encroaching upon its authority, the Smith r6gime turned to
subterfuge to win the support of its sympathizcrs. It tempered its determined resistance to any tangible change by
so-called moderation and concessions to certain African
factions quick to seize upon the advantage of an immediate
sharing of power. The result was the internal settlement of
3 March -1978 and the establishment of a biracial. transitional government. The international community was,how-

80. It is in this vital perspective that the Council must now
turn to the latest manifestation of the minority r&imi’s
attempt at duplicity: the extension and perpetuation of the
spurious internal settlement through the announcement of
elections scheduled for next month. There can be no doubt
concerning the real motives underlying this calculated initiative, for what indeed are the contents of the new constitutional arrangements? They give to the white minority
disproportionate representation and control of all levers of
power. The four per cent of Rhodesia’s population-which is
8

white will have 28 seats in Parliament-more
than a quarter
of the total of 100 seats. The Constitution gives the Chief
Justice and his successorscontrol over the appointment of
all judges. So much, then, for the independence of the
judiciary. Similar arrangements cover the police, the civil
service and the armed forces, in which incumbent white
officers and top civil servants would control the appointment of their successors.

tion of the illegal Smith r&ime, the return to legality, the
dispersal of racist security forces in consonance with an
orderly and peaaful transition to independence, and the
halting of all acts of aggression against neighbouring States. ,
We believe that the Council should once again urge renewed
efforts at diplomacy in the overriding interests not only of
preserving human lives but of securing a lasting and just
settlement for the people of Zimbabwe.

8 1. The Constitution provides for a national government
for five years, including all parties, in which the whites ma
not inconceivably be the largest bloc. One might well as%
what happened to the provision of the original 3 March
settlement, which carefully stipulated that whites in Parliament would not be allowed to join any minority black party
to form a coalition and frustrate the majority. So much,
then, for the much touted National Unity Coalition Government. Meanwhile with the whites still unsatisfied by these
gains, provisions have been made to divide Rhodesia into
eight provinces for the remaining 72 black seats, a formula
that is designed to assist the minority tribal groups manipulated by the white @ime who could under the provision
secure 15 of the 72 seats available.

85. Bangladesh believes that, pending these arrangements,
the further extension and tightening of sanctions would be
consistent with exerting extra pressure on the illegal regime
to expedite the process of transition. We fully support the
African call for the reactivation and strengthening of the
Security Council Committee established in pursuance of
resolution 253 (1968).
86. In the final analysis, Bangladesh, along with nonaligned nations in general and free Africa in particular, is
fully committed to strengthening the solidarity with and
support for the struggle of the Patriotic Front, the sole
legitimate representative of the people of Zimbabwe. We
too are convinced, along with them, that final victory is
inevitable.

82. These arrangements have also blithely ignored the
actual ground situation. The Patriotic Front has been
excluded, despite its control of large areas of the countryside and command of the sympathy and support of the
people of Rhodesia. They have papered over the existing
tension and friction, which is reported to have reached
murderous levels, in the biracial transitional Government.
The question arises as to how these parties which detest, fear
and hate each other can govern in a coalition in which there
is no strong executive. Even the proposed name of the
country-Zimbabwe-Rhodesia-reveals
the incongruity of
the proposed settlement, for it underscores the hangover
and the nostalgia for white privilege.

87. Mr. MILLS (Jamaica): Mr. President, the delegation
of Jamaica extends to you its congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month
of March and considers it particularly significant that you
should be occupying this important position at a time
when the Council will be dealing with major international
issues, including critical matters concerning the situation in
southern Africa. We are fully aware of your personal dedication to the liberation of the people of southern Africa and
of your country’s great contribution in thii matter. We are
confident that you will place your characteristic energy and
interest at the disposal of the Council during your period of
office.

83. The conclusions are obvious. The scheduled elections
are nothing more nor less than a fraudulent sham. The
international community cannot in any way lend credence
to this massive hoax, whose sole aim is the perpetuation of
white domination and privilege under the guise of a return
to majority rule. Bangladesh joins its voice in the appeal to
all countries not to give recognition in any manner whatsoever to these illegal manceuvres, including the sending of
missions, however objective or dispassionate, to observe the
planned elections, since we believe that that could serve only
to lend legitimacy to the process and its results.

88. My delegation would like to express ona more its
deep appreciation to Mr. Bishara for the great efforts that
he made on behalf of the Council during the month of
February, when he was faced with issues of unusual
complexity.
89. Mr. President, the delegation of Jamaica wishes to
associate itself with the tribute which you paid to the
memory of Ambassador Baroody. We have also heard with
great sadness the news of the death of Ambassador
Baroody. His death robs the United Nations of a great and
dedicated friend and supporter. His frequent and earnest
participation in the work of the Security Council gave hi
virtually the position of a permanent member without the
right to vote. We have greatly missed his presence in the
Council chamber in the past few weeks. He was a man for
whom my delegation had the very deepest respect, and we
extend to his family, to his delegation and to his country our
deepest sympathy.

84. Bangladesh has consistently reafIiied that there can
be no acceptable solution in Zimbabwe until African majority rule is established with the participation of all parties
,concemed, and in particular the Patriotic Front, on the
basis of one man, one vote. We believe that a just and
permanent solution of the problem of Zimbabwe must be
consistent with the total transfer of power from the minority
to the people of Zimbabwe in recognition of their inalienable national right to self-determination, freedom and
genuine independence. Bangladesh has noted and welcomed theinitiatives taken by the United Kingdom and the
United States over the past two years for the convening of a
conference of all interested parties on the arrangements
necessary for the transition to majority rule. We believe that
.these proposals could have constituted a basic framework
for further negotiations leading to genuine independena,
inasmuch as they would have ensured the speedy termina-

90. Over the past few weeks, while the attention of the
Council has been focused on issues in South-East Asia, we
have none the less been aware of developments in the
question of Southern Rhodesia. We believe that it is fitting
and timely for the Council to examine those developments
in the light of its continuing responsibilities and its commitment to br&ine to an end the orevailing illegal situation
and to promoting~self4eterniination
and genuine majority
rule in Zimbabwe.
9

_
\

91. The Council is still faced with the continued defiance
of the rebel Smith regime. Over the past month, the illegal
regime has carried out air attacks on villages and refugee
camps in Zambia, Mozambique and Angola, causing indiscriminate loss of life and hardship and suffering among
civilians. Such deplorable acts of aggression have been
executed sporadically over a long period of time. But it
appears now that as the illegal regime becomes more and
more desperate it is increasing its programme of violence
and terror against the people of Zimbabwe and the frontline African States. The Council must unreservedly condemn these brutal acts of aggression.

arrangement that would prevent the accession of Zimbabwe
to independence and genuine majority rule. No action
should be taken by any State that might suggest that the
so-called elections and their results have any legitimacy or
validity. In this regard my delegation has noted with great
concern press reports indicating that the Governments of
the United States and the United Kingdom may be sending
observer missions to cover these elections. We consider that
such a step would be unwise, undesirable and unnecessary.
In our view, the question of whether or not the elections are
fair and democratic has already been determined by the
provisions of the internal settlement. By its resolution 423
(1978), the Security Council declared illegal and unacceptable any settlement under the auspices of the Smith r@ime. It
follows therefore that, as the over-all settlement is illegal
and unacceptable, any elections pursuant to its implementation must ipso facto be illegal and unacceptable. There can
be no doubt about this, and no more proof is required.

92. The Council should also, in the view of my delegation,
take note of the fact that these acts of aggression are extending over a wider field, menacing States far from the borders
of Rhodesia. The recent attack on Angola is an ominous
development which has grave implications for the security
of African States in central and southern Africa. That act of
aggression reveals the close co-ordination in military
strategy between the regimes of Salisbury and Pretoria
which are making common cause in their war against the
forces of African liberation. South Africa is, of course, the
major factor in this alliance. Without its military and economic support, the Smith regime would collapse in no time.
Jamaica has always held the view that effective action
against South Africa is vital if the policy of sanctions against
the illegal Salisbury regime is to succeed. As it is, South
Africa has enabled the Smith regime to defy the United
Nations, to survive the application of sanctions, to oppress
the people of Zimbabwe and to launch aggression against
independent African States with the use of sophisticated
modem weapons. Since we have no reason to expect that
the Pretoria regime will mend its ways, there should be no
hesitation in moving towards the imposition of comprehensive sanctions against South Africa.

95. We fear that the dispatch of observer missions might
be or might appear to be the beginning of a process of
legitimizing the Smith settlement of 3 March, leading to
disruption in the unity of international action against the
illegal rebel regime. This would represent a great setback to
our efforts towards genuine majority rule in Zimbabwe and
would lead to further problems for all concerned.
96. Jamaica is fully committed to the achievement of
genuine majority rule in a free and independent Zimbabwe.
Circumstances &d the drift of events have led to a situation
where the fulfilment of these objectives now depends on the
armed struggle of the people of Zimbabwe under the leadership of the Patriotic Front. Over the years, efforts at a
negotiated settlement have failed as a result of the intransigence of the illegal Smith regime and its refusal-to concede
political rights to the black majority. The Anglo-American
proposal for a settlement at an all-party conference appears
now to have suffered the same fate, as a result of this
intransigent attitude, Smith is determined to go ahead with
his own plan, which is bound to fail and can only delay the
eventual doom of his regime. The liberation forces, sup
ported by the front-line African States, will continue to
move from strength to strength, and there can be no doubt
that their just cause will triumph at the end .of the day,

93. In the meantime, the existing sanctions against Southem Rhodesia should be tightened and scrupulously observed. It is the duty of Governments to monitor the activities
of exporters of arms, oil companies and other commercial
interests to ensure adherence to the sanctions policy. The
surest way to bring this about is through the complete
closing off of contact with the rebel colony. All airline
connexions should be terminated, overseas information
offices operated by the illegal Government should be closed
down and facilities for emigration and for recruitment of
mercenaries to the colony should be denied.

97. I should now like to introduce a draft resolution on
behalf of Bangladesh, Bolivia, Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait,
Nigeria and Zambia. The draft concerns itself in its preambular paragraphs with the indiscriminate military operations undertaken by the illegal Smith regime involving
aggression against neighbouring States and with the continued executions of persons sentenced under the repressive
laws of that regime, whose existence and actions constitute a
threat to international peace and security.

94. In addition, it is necessary for all Governments to be
vigilant in the face of the propaganda campaign mounted in
certain countries and designed to give respectability to the
Smith regime and to undermine the unity of international
action against it. Since the promulgation of the so-called
internal settlement last March, Smith has mounted a strong
campaign to win support from certain countries-but to no
avail. The Smith settlement has been exposed as a fraud and
another trick to safeguard minority power and privilege in
Zimbabwe. It was firmly rejected as unacceptable and illegal by the Security Council and by the international community as a whole. Now that the rebel regime is in the
process of preparing to hold “‘elections” under its internal
settlement, it is right that the Council should reatlirm its
position of principle by rejecting those fraudulent elections
scheduled for 20 April and declaring the results thereof null
and void. The Smith r&me should be given the clear
message by the Council that the international community
will not compromise its basic principles and will oppose any

98. The right of the people of Southern Rhodesia (Ziibabwe) to self-determination and independence, in accordance with the resolutions of the General Assembly, is
re-emphasixed, as is the legitimacy of their struggle to secure
that right. The draft resolution records the grave concern of
the sponsors at the proposal by some countries to send
missions to Rhodesia to observe the illegal elections which
the Smith regime will be holding next April. and re&
the provisions of Security Council resolution 423 (1978)
which explicitly declares the internal settlementillegal and
unacceptable.
10

99. In the onerative uaraarauhs the Council strongly condemns the recent armid i&&ions of the People’s I&public
of Angola, the People’s Republic of Mozambique and the
Republic of Zambia and commends those States and the
other front-line States for their support of the struggle of the
people of Zimbabwe. It condemns the attempts of the Smith
r&ime to perpetuate racist minority rule, in particular by
way of its fraudulent so-called elections, which are declared
null and void. The sponsors call upon all States to refrain
from sending observers to the illegal elections. Finally, the
Council calls for the framing of measures for the strengthening and widening of sanctions against Southern Rhodesia.
100. The sponsors of the draft resolution stand ready to
pursue discussions on it with other members.
101. Mr. BISHARA (Kuwait): Mr. President, it gives me
great pleasure to congratulate you on the assumption of
your duties as President of the Security Council for this
month. This is the second time you have presided over our
deliberations. Your diplomatic skill and wide experience
augur well for the successful conclusion of our deliberations
during a month which is overcrowded with an agenda of
serious questions.
102. I should like also to thank members of the Council
who have expressed kind sentiments to me for the efforts
made during my presidency in February.
103. By the death of Ambassador Baroody, yesterday, the
United Nations waslost a representative whose devotion to
the Organization was unmatchable. The United Nations
was his lifeline and breath. He wasa universalist, an intemationalist. He placed the United Nations above regional and
national interests and he displayed his dedication to the
principles of the Charter with an indescribable zeal. His
wealth of knowledge benefited everyone, but he carried it
with unusual humility. His legacy to the United Nations is
too profound to be affected by the passage of time. Therefore he will remain everlastingly in the annals of the Organization. He was a United Nations legend and will be so even
in his physical absence. In brief, the UnitedNations without
him will be a different Organization. I convey my profound
condolences and sympathy first to the family of nations
which he unswervingly served for so many years and next to
his bereaved family and to the Government and delegation
of Saudi Arabia.
,‘.

104. Mv delegation stmuorted the reauest of the African
Group fbr the revival -and reactivation of the Security
Council Committee established in pursuance of resolution
253 (1968) in order to implement the various resolutions
of the General Assembly regarding the strengthening and
widening of the scope of sanctions against the Rhodesian
racist regime.
105. My delegation would also like to join previous speakers in condemning the upcoming Rhodesian elections, the
outcome of the Salisbury agreement, which were unanimously denounced by members of the Council.

107. Thd’illegai Smithr&$ne still practises racial discrimination and denies basic human and political rights to the
majority of the people of Zimbabwe. His illegal r&me is
now wreaking havoc with the concept of majority rule. Of
what value are elections if their real aim is to guarantee the
supremacy of the white settlers by perpetuating their control over the army, the police force and the administration
in general7 An election held without the participation of the
Patriotic Front is like “Hamlet” without the Prince of
Denmark.
108. It is one thing for Mr. Smith to hold bogus elections
and another for countries to send observer missions to
Rhodesia. My delegation strongly objects to any attempt to
endow the projected elections with any aura of sanctity by
sending official observer missions to give their blessing to a
process which is intended merely to provide an excuse for
lifting the economic sanctions imposed by the Council.
109. Ian Smith is not only waging a campaign of terror
against the indigenous population ,of Zimbabwe but is also
escalating his armed invasions of the territories of neighbouring African countries which have sheltered the refugees
who fled his reign of terror. The illegal regime must realize
that its modem and sophisticated weapons cannot break
the will of the valiant Governments of Zambia, Botswana,
Angola and Mozambique which have a moral obligation
and an international responsibility to help their less fortunate brethren in Southern Rhodesia.
110. The noose around the neck of Ian Smith and the
racist regime in South Africa is becoming increasingly tight.
All oil shipments from overseas have been stopped. Had it
not been for the connivance of the multinational corporations, the embargo would have become so complete that the
racist and apartheid regimes would have been compelled to
come to their senses.
111. My Government believes that the sanctions imposed
by the Security Council must be made more comprehensive
and must be fully implemented by all Member States ifthe
sanctions instrument is to remain effective. Instead of relaxing the sanctions imposed on Southern Rhodesia we must
carry out against the Smith regime all measures provided
for in Article 41 of the Charter, including the complete
disruption of road, sea, air, postal, telegraphic, radio and
other means of communication with Southern Rhodesia.
112. The present meeting of the Security Council is a
timely one because it comes in the wake of the escalating
armed invasions by Ian Smith of the territories of neighbouring African States and on the eve of the projected
bogus elections. Hence, the Council is bound to adopt a
decision condemning the unprovoked acts of aggression by
the Smith r&me against the territories of the front-line
African States. The Council must reafIii
the inalienable
right of the people of Zimbabwe to freedom and independence. It must reaffirm its rejection of the Salisbury agree.ment and all ancillary measures flowing from it such as the
elections scheduled for 20 April the outcome of which must
be declared null and void, as those elections are distorting the will of the people of Zimbabwe and welding the fetters
imposed upon them.

106. The Smith regime has been desperately trying to give
itself a semblance of legality. Mr. Smith came to the United
States in an attempt to win friends and influence people.
The deceptive mask, however, failed to deceive world public
opinion and camouflage the nature of the illegal r6gime.

113. We must realize that much more is involved than an
illegal racist r&ime. The Smith declaration of independence
was rightly described as an advance by the forces of racialism, fascism and, indeed, colonialism in southern Africa.
11.

The elimination of colonialism and racial domination in
southern Africa is justified by all the basic principles of
mankind. Every principle of national and individual freedom, every principle of human equality, of justice and of
humanity makes it imperative that the rule of the minorities
should be ended. For they are judge, jury, prosecuting
attorney and lawmaker in their own dispute. It is high time
for ,the Security Council to remind them that under the
Charter there exists such a thing as the rule of law. That is
why my delegation, together with other non-aligned countries, sponsored the draft resolution which was just so ably
introduced by Ambassador Mills of Jamaica.

119. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Ghana. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
120. Mr. SEKYI (Ghana): Mr. President, I would first of
all convey my gratitude to you and, through you, to the
other members of the Council for the opportunity to participate in the present debate. I have the greatest pleasure also
in adding the congratulations of the Ghana delegation to
those deservedly conveyed to you on your assumption of
office this month as President of the Council. Like those
who have spoken before me, so eloquently, I consider it
remarkably fortunate that we should be considering this
crisis in liberation under the presidency of Nigeria, a cotmtry whose dedication to the cause of liberation is unquestioned and whose influence in that crusade is widely
recognized. We are no lesshappy that Nigeria is represented
by you, Mr. President, a diplomat of recognized skill and
experience, with a well-established record of dedicated and
effective personal involvement in the tight against racism in
southern Africa, particularly as Chairman of the Special
Committee against Apartheid We wish you all success,
successno less than that of your predecessor of Kuwaitand may we say that we confidently expect it-as you steer
the Council’s work throughout this month.

114. Mr. YOUNG (United States of America): It is with
great sorrow that we learn today of the death of Ambassador Baroody of Saudi Arabia. His passing deprives the
United Nations of one of its most original and extraordinary personalities. Ambassador Baroody has been ass*
ciated with the United Nations since its inception at San
Francisco more than 33 years ago. He was deeply committed throughout his life to the well-being and vitality of the
Organization and to the cause of international peace. He
was not only a diplomat, he was an orator, a storyteller, an
historian and a raconteur. None of us can ever forget how
his wit and pungent comment carried us through innumerable diflicult moments and provided fresh insight on a
number of thorny international issues. Our profound condolences go to his widow and to his family.

121. The racist aggression now under consideration by the
Council is, as is well known, by no means the first of its
kind. The illegal racist minority regime of Ian Smith has
long been notorious for the persistence and barbarity of its
incursions into Mozambique, Zambia and Botswana. Following a precedent set by its mentor, the Vorster r&me, it
has now added Angola to the sphere of its marauding
activity-and this, again, merits the most unequivocal and
forthright condemnation by the Council. But is mere condemnation enough? How much more are the Smith regime
and its external abettors to be allowed to get away with in
threatening and disrupting peace and stability in everwidening areas of southern Africa? For how much longer
should they be allowed to drop napalm on refugees and
civilians whenever they lose a battle with freedom fighters?

115. Let me welcome you, Mr. President, to the presidency of the Council and say that my nation looks forward
to your leadership and guidance as we approach the dillicult issuesthat will confront us during the month of March.
I would also say again that we certainly appreciated the
patience and perseverance of your predecessor, the representative of Kuwait, and we hope that we can continue the
work of the previous month, building upon his leadership,
as we move forward with many of the unresolved questions
that continue to occupy the Council.
116. My delegation will want to speak further at a later
point on the issues involved in the Council’s discussion of
Rhodesia. Despite recent events, it remains my Govemment’s hope that early progress can be made towards selfdetermination for the people of Rhodesia. I assure the
Council that my Government, working jointly with that of
the United Kingdom, will continue to spare no effort
towards this end.

122. As the delegation of Ghana has frequently pointed
out, it has been a long time since a fairly wide range of
mandatory sanctions were first imposed by the Council
against the illegal racist regime, and these included oil sanctions. Long ago the world was entitled to expect that the
r&me’s economic nerves would have grown too feeble and
that its military machine would have grown too rusty to
mount any attacks against the internal population and
external neighbours of Rhodesia. But its armoured cars still
roll and its warplanes still fly, laden with weapons of aggression such as no decent country should use and driven by
contraband fuel which, originating from Member States
which ought to have known better, still reach the racists
through the sole channel of South Africa. In thii regard we
warmly congratulate the present Government of Iran in
putting a stop to the practices of its predecessor.

117. Today, however, I want to address myself in particular to the recent escalation of violence exemplified by the
destructive attacks on Angola, Mozambique and Zambia
carried out during past weeks by aircraft of the Salisbury
regime. Those attacks can only render more difficult a
peaceful settlement in Rhodesia, and they have cost many
human lives. It has been reported that at least some of the
targets were camps containing refugees, including women
and children, who became innocent victims of this violence.
We deplore all attacks on non-combatants, and we deplore
these attacks against neighbouring States. Such attacks
complicate our chances for rational transition to majority
rule in Rhodesia and make more difficult efforts throughout southern Africa to promote peaceful change.

123. I have spoken on the assumption that it is merely
South African fuel which was used in the recent atrocities
against Angola and Zambia. But if, as the, evidence
suggests-and we have heard the representative of Angola
on this-South
African armaments were employed, if
South Africa’s bombers took off with incendiary weapons
from United Nations territory under its illegal military occupation, then the matter is infinitely more serious and the evil

118. My Government believes that the Council should
forthwith condemn, on behalf of the world community, this
calculated and deliberate escalation of violence in southern
Africa.
12

much more widespread; and it all goes to reinforce a truth
which should already be self-evident: it is time-high
time-for the members of the Council to consider the extension of oil and other sanctions to South ‘Africa, not the
lifting of any sanctions against Rhodesia, and certainly not
the lifting of sanctions by any unilateral action in breach of
Charter obligations. This is the time to close the loopholes
in the ring of sanctions, not widen them in order that Ian
Smith with Vorster and others may be better able to oppress
the nationals of Zimbabwe and bomb its neighbours.

the point at issue, have never consented, on any account, to
relax their clutch on those ‘particular levers. When his talks
with the British Prime Minister, on HMS Tiger, broke down
in 1966, Mr. Smith said:

124. The Securitv Council itself does not intend. as far as
we know, to reverse any of its decisions imposing sanctions
against the Ian Smith r&ime. But, in our view, there are in
the present situation at least two things which call for urgent
action by the Council. As the first step towards a more
effective application of sanctions such as might curtail the
capacity of Ian Smith to make .a nuisance of himself in his
neighbourhood, why not resuscitate the Committee on
Sanctions,’ which ever since 1977 has very strangely been
allowed, it seems, to fall into disuse. Secondly, and still
more urgent, measures should be taken, in our view, against
the danger of unilateral action to lift sanctions against Ian
Smith.

Sir Harold himself, reporting later to Parliament at Westminster, said:

‘The proposals also envisaged by Mr. Wilson under
the heading of a return to legality are repugnant to the
Rhodesian Government, involving as they do, first that
the armed forces and the police will be invested in the
Governor.”

“I told him (Mr. Smith] that a fair and convincing test
of acceptability would be quite impossible in circumstances where an illegal regime was possessed of emergency powers and executive control including broadcasting and television.‘*
And again, Sir Harold said:
“Their refusal to accept the settlement as a whole
stems from their insistence on their refusal to return to
legality unless they themselves can remain in power while
the agreed constitutional settlement is being tested by
Rhodesian opinion.”
Sir Harold added significantly at the time: “The implications of this are obvious and no one in this House would be
ready to accept these implications*‘. Again later, in reply to
a question by Mr. Edward Heath, then leader of Her
Majesty’s Opposition, Sir Harold said:

125. There is little need to belabour the truism that any
such action would constitute a flagrant and appalling
breach of Charter obligations. And if any such action were
to be taken by any of the permanent members, the guardians, after all, of international peace and security, would
that not then be the very height of irresponsibility7 The
damage to their own reputation in the eyes of all Africans
and at the bar of world opinion could well be left to them to
assessfor themselves, for it is they, after all, who would
sense the inevitable consequences.

“In the first place, in my view and that of my House
friends, it is impossible to say that we could operate a free
test which is required by the frfh principle-on which
my predecessor insisted and on which he was so
determined-against the background of an illegal constitution, armed, as the leader of the Opposition himself has
said-and I quoted this to Mr. Smith-with all the powers of a police State.”

126. But what of the United Nations itself7 What would
be left of its effectiveness if the Security Council, the one
organ which can make binding decisions, could be disregarded as lightly as the General Assembly, alas, so often is?
If one Member,State can lightly throw off today the obligation to respect mandatory sanctions against Rhodesia, why
should not another as carelessly throw off tomorrow the
obligation to respect the mandatory arms embargo against
South Africa? Seen in this light,the precedent which now
threatens to be set appears dangerous indeed and pregnant
with incalculable mischief for the future. And all for what
purpose? Merely to hold up, by what seems to be a last
desperate effort, the crumbling edifice of racist rule in
Rhodesia. For, we must confess, the sequence of events
strongly suggests to us that such, no less, is the objective.

128. So the talks broke down over the question of the
levers of power, of who was to control the police and armed
forces during the test of the constitution’s acceptability to
the people of Rhodesia as a whole-the fifth principle-and
in the context of that breakdown, Sir Harold made his first
approach to the Security Council for mandatory sanctions.
The Council duly applied them-selectively at first, then
less so. But whether selective or not, they have been rendered ineffective by persistent breaches and gaping loopholes. So both negotiation and sanctions having failed to
prise the levers of power out of Smith’s clutches, the people
of Zimbabwe eventually resorted to the third method of
solving the basic problem, that of armed struggle. That
struggle has been unduly prolonged because sanctions have
been breached. Now it is succeeding and it is being proposed
that sanctions should be lifted.

127. In the final analysis the problem is, and has always
been, how to force the levers of power+ontrol
of the
armed forces and police-out of Ian Smith’s hands. Those
levers should of course not have got there in the first place.
But, if I may mention it, Ghana’s own efforts in the Council
to prevent their getting into the hands of a racist minority
r&ime were frustrated in 1963 by the sole veto of the
administering Power. Anyhow, the levers got into those
hands-the wrong hands-and the problem ever since the
unilateral declaration of independence has been how to get
them out again. Mr. Smith and his friends, displaying at all
times, one must say, a remarkably clear understanding of

129. Theologians have often told us that the Devil exults
in the contemplation of human sins, from which he draws
much inspiration and comfort. And one can readily imagine
that, like him, Ian Smith draws nothing but hope and
courage from the ever-lengthening record of misdeeds in his
favour. This is a case where the promise, real or even
fancied, is almost as pernicious as the deed, or misdeed.
From every evasion, every quibble, every violation of the

1Security Council Committee established in pursuance of resolution
253 (1968) concerning the question of Southern Rhodesia.

13

.

Charter in his interest by those who profess to condemn his
racist rebellion, Smith draws hope and the courage to persist in his path of crime. The mere expectation of lifted
sanctions, reinforced by the presence of a few Western
observers, is enough to revive the ebbing strength of the
racist regime by the hope of reinforcements for oppression.
They therefore resist that much longer and many more lives
are lost. We hope it will be borne in mind that the blame for
the resulting loss of lives is never to be placed at the door of
those forced to take up arms in exercise of the right-an
inherent and inalienable right--of self-defence against
armed oppression by an illegal racist minority regime. It is
to be laid at the door of the armed racist oppressor and at
the door of all those who help, support, assist or encourage
the armed racist oppressor, for they must be presumed, as
every man is presumed, to intend the probable consequences of their actions. But to revert to the point. Now that
the armed struggle is succeeding, it is sought to lift sanctions. And by what method7 What is the latest plot hatched
by Ian Smith and his guilty supporters to perpetuate the
crime of racism in Rhodesia? Is it a deep-laid plot? Or is it so
transparent that even a child could see through it? Well it is
this.

the right of free speech or association by all the people of
Zimbabwe. And everywhere throughout the socalled electoral process the guns of Smith’s army and police will be at
hand.
133. Last week /21191/r meezing,l
we heard the spokesman
of the Patriotic Front speak eloquently and convincingly of
the methods likely to be used. The event could never be
regarded as a valid act of self-determination as the term has
been understood in the philosophy of the United Nations
ever since the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, The circumstances are
of the sort in which a “no” indication means “no” but a
“yes” indication cannot necessarily-indeed cannot possibly-mean a valid “yes”; and neither result can constitute
a valid ground for recognizing any resulting government.
Observation of such elections has, therefore, no use, unless
it is to give a semblance of respectability to the ruse, the
subterfuge, the hoax by which Ian Smith hopes to obtain the
lifting of sanctions, as the Patriotic Front advances upon
him. Or else it will only serve to aid and abet pressures or to
satisfy the letter of laws which, playing. the’ game of Ian
Smith, would pressure Governments of States permanent
members of the Council to lift sanctions in such a manner as
to breach a Council decision under Chapter VII in a most
flagrant violation of Article 25 of the Charter.

130. Nearly one year ago, when much of the Zimbabwe
countryside was already controlled by the advancing forces
of the Patriotic Front, Ian Smith concluded an internal
settlement, one of whose avowed aims was to bring about
the lifting of sanctions. So much appears in its preamble.
That internal settlement imposed on the longsuffering people of Zimbabwe, whose voices were and are stifled, a
diluted form of majority rule, a mere fake in which control
of the police and army, the levers of power, is for another 10
years or more, carefully removed from the reach of the
majority and retained effectively in the same hands, more or
less, in whose determined grip it has been kept ever since
and even before the talks on the Tiger.

134. To sum up, the point we have sought to make is that
Ian Smith once drove a British Prime Minister to seek
sanctions from the Security Council by openly insisting on
his control of the armed forces and police. It remains to be
seen whether he can obtain the lifting of thosesanctions this
time by concealing that control under the pretence of
majority rule. We maintain that he should not be allowed to
pull off this trick, and we advocate that, inaccordance with
the draft resolution so lucidly introduced by the representative of Jamaica, the Council should take measures to prevent or forestall all the steps intermediate, in the scheme-of
Ian Smith, to the lifting of sanctions and that it should
reinforce its resolution 423 (1978) by ruling that there
should be no recognition of any government emerging from
the internal settlement or of the spurious constitutionunder
it. We urge that the Council should prohibit the dispatch of
observers to those so-called elections, that ‘it should take
measures to strengthen sanctions and prevent violations
thereof and that it should clearly express its’condemnation
of the racist regime for its barbaric acts:,of aggression
against Mozambique, Zambia and now Angola.
... .
135. I should not like to leave this table without associating the Ghanaian delegation with the tributes which have
been paid to the late Ambassador Baroody..His dedication
and enthusiasm made him for many of us a figure unforgettably associated with the United Nations;.tid
I myself
always found him delightful to listen to. It is true that these
halls will never look or sound the same again without him,
and I should like to convey to the delegation of Saudi
Arabia and, through it, to the bereaved family our condolences and sympathy, our own sadnesslat his final
absence from our midst.

131. The implications of this-if I may borrow Sir
Harold’s phrase-are as obvious to&y as they were when
the talks on the warship broke down. They should also be as
obvious as they were when the Council, at Sir Harold’s
instance, first approved mandatory sanctions. When Cromwell commands his Ironsides, Parliament does not rule.
Every Englishman knows that, and Mr. Smith is, or was, an
Englishman. Whatever the case, he has seen and has probably decided that no parliament of “blacksmiths” will ever
rule in Rhodesia as long as an Ian Smith controls the Selous
Scouts. Not only can it not rule, parliament cannot even be
properly elected. The comparison, it is true, carries the risk
of a descent from the sublime to the ridiculous. But we
believe that it is nevertheless valid enough, and it sums up
the present constitutional situation in Rhodesia.

132. Under such an arrangement as the internal settlement, there could in the first place be no genuine test of the
constitution’s acceptability to the people as a whole. One
has not been tried. anyway. And even if one were, the
circumstances are such as to exclude important sections of
the people-to exclude all those, for example, who support
the Patriotic Front, since they could hardly be expected to
participate willingly in a referendum under the guns of an
136. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker ‘is’ the represeninterested regime still armed, to borrow Sir Harold’s
tative of Benin. I invite him to take a place‘kf ‘the Council
phrase, “with all the powers of a police State”. Nor can any
table and to make his statement.
r,*
elections under such a constitution and held under such
circumstances be free or fair, whether they are observed or
137. Mr. HOUNGAVOU
(Benin) @&$&zrlon porn
not. By the very nature of the case, they cannot be
French): Mr. President, my delegation wishesto thank you
preceded-as they should be-by any genuine exercise of _ and the other members of the Council for’allowing it to
14

participate in this important
Southern Rhodesia.

debate on the question of

;md the happiness of thepeople of Zimbabwe, but to maintain colonialist domination in that part of our continent.
My delegation has on many occasions denounced all these
plans for an imperialist settlement and has drawn attention
to their hidden traps set against the freedom of our peoples
and the true independence of Africa. But the AngloAmericans, in their diplomacy, have raised some “hopes”.
We know the position to&y with regard to thii notorious
Anglo-American plan, as well as the notorious diplomatic
initiatives of the United Kingdom and the United States,
designed, as they have led many African leaders to believe,
to help Smith withdraw as a “gentleman”.

138. My delegation is pleased at seeing you presiding over
the Council at a time when it is seized of an important
question relating to the total liberation of Africa from
colonialism, neo-colonialiim and international imperialism. Your country, Nigeria, is in the vanguard of the struggle for our total liberation. You yourself, as Chairman of
the Special Committee against Apartheid are well versed in
the problems with regard to the liberation of southern
Africa from minority racist and colonialist regimes. That
means that you are highly qualified to lead this debate to a
positive conclusion and one which is satisfactory for Africa.
I need not dwell upon the relations of brotherly love which
are at the basis of ever-increasing militant co-operation
between your country and mine, Benin.

142. The forces of international imperialism cannot for
ever deceive our peoples. The true game of the Western
Powers, and in particular the subtle game of the administering Power, is being put to the test every day, and their
shameful hypocrisy is being clearly exposed. The Western
Powers know how to manipulate the United Nations and to
make a lot of noise about their various “peaceful settle
ments”. The specific case of Southern Rhodesia shows that
their diplomatic initiatives are always opportunistic and the
purposes of those initiatives always concealed. That is why
the People’s Republic of Benin is always sceptical about all
these plans.

139. The People’s Republic of Benin, its vanguard Party,
the Party of the People’s Revolution of Benin, and its neonle
believe that the total liberation of the African continent & a
sine qua RO~Ifor the strengthening of our political freedom,
the development of our national sovereignty and the consolidation of our political independence. The security of no
African State can be guaranteed and peace in our region will
always be threatened so long as racist regimes such as that
of Ian Smith continue to exist and flout the will of the
international community by persisting in their barbarous
colonialist practices of oppression.

143. To revert to the question of the particular responsibility of the administering Power, one cannot but pose some
serious questions and accuse that Power of political machiavellianism. Indeed, what is the meaning of the evasiveness,
the hesitation, the consistency in the reactions and attitudes
of the ruling circles of that Power in the face of the present
escalation by the Smith regime? Is it not a question of a
political bankruptcy, of a decolonization process that got
off on the wrong foot from the very beginning?

140. The specific case of the racist r&ime of the rascally
Ian Smith-the case now before the Council--is a matter of
serious concern to us in Benin. The imperialist Powers of
the capitalist West, and in particular the administering
Power, bear very heavy responsibilities for the present escalation of the acts of provocation and war by a racist minority regime at bay. The administering Power and its allies are
responsible .for the killing and the massacres recently carried out against refugee camps in Zimbabwe, Angola,
Mozambique and Zambia, actions designed to frighten the
Zimbabwe nationalists and undermine their determination
and fighting spirit. This killing and these massacres are
designed, too, to prepare the ground for an internal settlement already under way. International imperialism and its
vassals, the white racist settlers in southern Africa, must
understand that genuine liberation is inevitable. The hypocrisy of the .Westem Powers is all too characteristic. The
People’s Republic of Benin will never stop denouncing, with
frrmness, certain dishonest actions of the imperialist policy,
which attempts on every occasion to delay the liberation
of the oppressed people of Zimbabwe. In international
forums, the masterminds of imperialist diplomacy have
used all their brainpower to mount plan upon plan and
invent bogus solutions whose main purpose is to ensure that
Smith will be maintained in power, with the support of
some African puppets.

144. When we analyse the facts, the actions of the administering Power and the unfulfilled promises of its successive
Governments, we can only render a very severejudgement.
I shall merely emphasixe certain facts. From 1965 to the
present time, the administering Power has taken no radical
measure, such as the use of armed force-which has been
used elsewhere-to put an end to Smith’s rebellion, the deep
origins of which are to be found in the tremendous political
generosity shown to the white British subjects in thecolony,
at the expense of the indigenous colonized peoples. The
only weapon used against the Smith rebellion is the selective
sanctions adopted in 1966 and 1968. In 1978 it wasunfortunately noted that those sanctions had been seriously violated and that a governmental company of the administering Power itself had been involved in this shameful fraud.
The obstinate refusal to agree to the widening of sanctions
and the present impasse in the Committee on Sanctions
against Southern Rhodesia have raised serious doubts
about the credibility and the real will of the administering
Power to decolonize that part of our continent, Africa.

141. The internal agreement of 3 March 1978 is, according
to information published in the Western press itself, only a
rehashing of the old, secret Kissinger plan. Smith’s internal
settlement has settled nothing, and the problem of the
decolonixation of the Territory of Southern Rhodesia, a
British colony, remains-in its entirety. Between 3 March
and today, the situation in the colony has seriously deteriorated. As for.the Anglo-American plan, despite its superflcially attractive aspects, the aim is not to satisfy the deep
aspirations of the people of Zimbabwe by driving from
power the‘white, non-African colony that usurped power

145. The inaction of the administering Power in the face
of the killing and the massacres engaged in by the Smith
clique throughout Africa and the escalation of air raids over
Angola seem to demonstrate sovereign contempt for the
indigenous black people of the colony of Southern Rhodesia. That is an attitude which we can only condemn. Thus,
the administering Power is completely responsible for the
current serious stage in the insane acts of the rascally Ian
Smith.
15

146. It is understood that Smith’s r&ime is illegal. No
Member State should establish relations of any kind with
that regime. Nevertheless, Member States have noted
recently that the rascally Ian Smith made an official visit to
the United States and said to The iVav York Times that that
constituted defacto recognition of his regime by the United
States. Ever since then Smith’s arrogance has increased and
his acts of war and aggression have been stepped up to such
an extent that the Ministers for Foreign Atfairs of the
Organisation of African Unity expressed concern at the
meeting of the Council of Ministers’ at Nairobi. The present
meetings of the Security Council were decided upon at the
Nairobi meeting. The decisions adopted at Nairobi and the
concern expressed there show to what extent Africa is worried and how much Africa has lost its faith in the fine words
of the administering Power. Smith’s trip to the United
States was clearly in violation of the United Nations
sanctions.

an inquiry conducted by a State associated with the
British Crown. According to an inquiry published by the
BBC, guns, ammunition and radar equipment were
shipped in violation of the United Nations embargo by
the Spears Research Corporation, a firm based in the
United States, in Vermont and in Canada. The firm
denied such shipment. The Foreign Oflice declared on
Monday that ‘it was following the affair closely and had
begun consultations with the Governments of the United
States, Canada and Antigua’.”
151. All of this shows that what is occurring today in
Rhodesia has its roots in the violations of resolution 418
(1977) which enable the racist regime of South Africa to
ship weapons to Rhodesia. That is the channel used by
Western Powers to help Smith to remain in power.
152. Some questions come to mind concerning the work
now being done by the Committee established after the
adoption of resolution 418 (1977). My delegation would like
to ask what that Committee does at present. What does it
deal with? This question could be raised by many States that
are entitled to ask for reports. The question of the delivery
of weapons to South Africa and Southern Rhodesia is an
extremely important aspect of the present crisis. The Council should attach great importance to it, since its role is that
of preserving peace and security in the world.

147. The specific question that now arises is this: who
provides Mr. Smith with weapons? Here again we find
directly implicated some Western European Powers that
refuse to abide by the sanctions and that for business or
mercantile reasons cannot stop that dangerous trade with
Southern Rhodesia. That is why we accuse all those Powers
of genocide, of making attempts on the lives of the Rhodesian blacks now in Botswana, in Zambia, in Angola and in
Mozambique.

153. There are today in the West, and particularly in the
,Unitd States and in Great Britain, those of conservative and
reactionary tendencies, and I would even say.racist tendenties, who are working for endorsement of Smith’s internal
settlement through recognition of that scandalous fait.
accompli. The question of sending observer misions for the
so-called elections of April 1979 has been raised. In reactionary poitical circles, particularly in the United States
Congress, there are those who actively work for Smith. My
delegation wishes to denounce all those manauvres and to
condemn the official circles that promote them.

148. The Council must adopt urgent decisions. My delegation believes that one of those decisions should relate to
reactivation of the Committee on Sanctions. There are
several proposals along these lines before the Council.
149. The responsibility that is borne by the racist’&me
of South Africa, a country through which weapons travel to
Southern Rhodesia for the commission of acts of genocide,
is undeniable. However, as everyone knows, the Botha
regime is subject to an embargo on the supply of weapons to
it, under Security Council resolution 418 (1977). It has been
shown that there have been many casesof violation of that
resolution, and there again the direct implication of some
Western Powers cannot be denied. Furthermore, Mr. Botha
himself has acknowledged that he receives weapons despite
the Council embargo. I should like to read to the Council a
brief extract from an article in The New Yofk Times of 20
November 1978, written by Mr. John Burns. It states:

154. The solution of the problem of Southern Rhodesia
must include acceptance by the Western Powers, and in
particular by the administering Power, of true decolonixation by means of a transfer of power to the Patriotic Front
of Zinmbabwe. As long as that reality of history is not
recognixed, the struggle of the people of Zimbabwe will
only be intensified.
155. The Security Council, which condemned the internal
settlement of March 1978, must in like manner condemn the
April elections and the dispatch of any observer missions to
Southern Rhodesia to assist Mr. Smith.

“ ‘If an arms embargo is not feasible, I do not think an
oil embargo is feasible either,’ Mr. Botha said in an
exchange last week. The remark constituted the first
acknowledgement by South Africa that it is still obtaining arms from overseas, despite the mandatory embargo
imposed by the United Nations Security Council last
year.“2

156. The duplicity and complicity of certain Western
Powers in regard to Smith’s insane behaviour are such that
the killings and massacres inZambia, Angola, Zimbabwe,
and Botswana have in no way troubled the consciences of
those Western preachers on human rights. None of the
Western leaders has spoken to denounce Mr, Smith and the
threats that his wild acts of aggression pose to peace and
security. Their silence and even the restrained condemnation on the part of the administering Power encourage
Smith and hi chque to escalate their actionsfurther.

150. There is also proof that there are currently some
casesof violations of resolution 418 (1977), thanks to which
South Africa is able to receive weapons and deliver them to
Southern Rhodesia. I should like to refer to a Reuters
release published in Le Monde of 12 or 13 December 1978. It
reads as follows:
“Weapons of American and C&ad@ manufacture
have been delivered to South Africa after having gone
through Antigua, a former British colony, according to
z Quoted

in English

157. I should now like to approach anotheraspect of the
matter, which my country considers to be of,great importance, namely, the question of the recruitment and training
of the white mercenaries and their dispatch to, Rhodesia.

by the speaker.

16

158. Since the agreement of 3 March, the Western press
has referred to the existence-or
at any rate the deployment-of
officers and agencies which recruit and train
white mercenaries to go and massacre the people of Zimbabwe. All those activities are currently being carried out in
several Western capitals. At times they are conducted right
under the eyes of officials who have taken no measures to
put an end to them. In some Western countries there is not
even any legislation condemning activities leading to the
recruitment of mercenaries. On the pretext of respecting the
freedom of citizens and civil rights, some Western countries
refuse to adopt strict measures against those of their citizens
who are public assassins and who are sought in Africa for
criminal acts. This is an unacceptable situation.

161. In conclusion, I should like to come back to the
question of sanctions.
162. For years Africa has called for the expansion of
sanctions against Southern Rhodesia. The measures which
have been provided under Article 41 of the Charter are
relevant and I should like to read out that Article:
“The Security Council may decide what measures not
involving the use of armed force are to be employed to
give effect to its decisions, and it may call upon the
Members of the United Nations to apply such measures.
These may include complete or partial interruption of
economic relations and of rail, sea, air postal, telegraphic, radio, and other means of communication and
the severance of diplomatic relations.”

159. My country, which has suffered from acts of aggression carried out by mercenaries, will continue to condemn
those countries which are the accomplices of the adventurers and mass killers and which believe that their activities
can stop the march of revolution. That is a dream! But the
threat which mercenary activities pose to peace and security
is an extremely serious one, and the Council cannot discuss
the question of Rhodesia without considering the matter of
the white mercenaries who today commit violations and
ignoble acts against the women and children of the blacks of
Zimbabwe. All such acts which remain uncondemned and
those who support them can only be termed “racist”.

Additional measures are provided in Articles 42 to 48 of
Chapter VII.
163. Africa has never ceased calling for an interruption of
rail, sea, air, telegraphic, postal, radio and other means of
communication, under the terms of Article 41, in the case of
Rhodesia. What is the Council waiting for? Today the
escalation of the acts perpetrated by Mr. Smith and his
supporters is such that these are the only peaceful measures
likely to make those persons see reason. It is extremely
urgent that the Council should reconsider all such measures.

160. It is extremely urgent that Member States should
adopt the most drastic measures to prevent the activities of
recruitment and transport of mercenaries to Southern
Rhodesia. The Council must take up this question in all
seriousness.

The meeting rose at 7.30 p.m.

17

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
throughout
Section.

Nations
publications
the world.
Consult
New York
or Geneva.

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

may
your

LES

PUBLICATIONS
be obtained
bookstore

or

PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
write
to: United

DES

and

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
sent
en vente
dans
les librairies
depositaires
du monde
entier.
Informez-vous
aupr&s
de votre
libraire
h : Nations
Unies.
Section
des ventes.
New York ou Gen&ve.
KAK

l-fOJIY.IMTb

LI3AAHZIR

OPrAHH3AQHR

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las
buidoras
en todas
partes
Unidas,
Secci6n
de Ventas,

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

DE

LAS

Naciones
Unidas
estin
de1 mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Price:

W.S.

et les agences
ou adressez-vous

OCLE~MHEHH~IX

HAUZIICI

&i~~~a~wa
Oorammauwsi
06~e~HHea~b~x
HauaR
MOXKHO ~ynwrb
smax
w ~~‘BHTCTB~X
BO acex
paRonax
~wpa.
H~BOAHT~
cnpaase
BaUleH
KHWrnHOY
lrraraJHHe
“JIW nbnJ.uTre
no anpecy:
Opranwsaqns
HaqnR.
Cexq~a
no npoaaxe
HILWLHHA.
HMO-Hopa
HJIH >fCeHeBa.
COMO

NACIONES

a KHHXCKHLIX
~a11106 H~WHHIIX
B
06’E.eAWHeHHbIX

UNIDAS

en venta
en librerfas
a su librero
o dirfjase

2.50

distributors
Nations,
Sales

y casas distria: Naciones

79-70002-November

1981-2,250
