VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

mentation of the relevant decisions of the Security
Council,
1. Strongly condemns those Governments, particularly the Government of South Africa, which, in violation of the relevant resolutions of the United Nations
and in open contravention of their specific obligations
under Article 2, paragraph 5, and Article 25 of the
Charter of the United Nations, continue to collaborate
with the illegal racist minority regime, and urges those
Governments to cease forthwith all such collaboration;
2. Condemns those Governments which violate the
mandatory sanctions adopted by the Security Council,
as well as certain Governments which continue to fail
to enforce the sanctions, in contravention of the obligations assumed by them under Article 2, paragraph 5,
and Article 25 of the Charter;
3. Deplores the decision of the Government of the
United States of America to allow the entry into the
United States of Ian Smith and some members of the
illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia, in flagrant violation of the decisions of the United Nations, in particular Security Council resolution 253 (1968) of 29 May
1968, and of the obligations under Article 25 of the
Charter;
4. Strongly condemns the Government of South
Africa for its continued support of the illegal racist
minority regime in Southern Rhodesia in flagrant contravention of the resolutions of the Security Council
on sanctions against that regime;
5. Calls upon all Governments which thus far have
not done so:
(a) To take stringent enforcement measures to
ensure strict compliance by all individuals, associations
and bodies corporate under their jurisdiction with the
sanctions imposed by the Security Council and to
prohibit any form of collaboration by them with the
illegal regime;
( b) To take effective measures to prevent or discourage the emigration to Southern Rhodesia (Zimbabwe) of any individuals or groups of individuals
under their jurisdiction;
( c) To discontinue any action which might confer
a semblance of legitimacy on the illegal regime, inter
alia by forbidding the operation and activities of "Air
Rhodesia", the "Rhodesia National Tourist Board" and
the "Rhodesian Information Office", or any other activities which contravene the aims and purposes of the
sanctions;
(d) To invalidate passports and other documents
for travel to the Territory;
(e) To take all effective measures against international companies and agencies which supply petroleum
and petroleum products to the illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia;
6. Strongly condemns the supply of petroleum and
petroleum products to Southern Rhodesia by oil companies of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and other countries which, by that
deliberate act, are circumventing United Nations sanctions and strengthening the illegal regime of Ian Smith;
7. Requests all States, directly or within the framework of the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system of which they
are members, and through the various programmes

181

within the United Nations system, to extend to the
Governments of Botswana, Mozambique and Zambia
all forms of financial, technical and material assistance
in order to enable those Governments to overcome economic difficulties in connexion with their application
of economic sanctions imposed against the illegal regime and the severe economic loss and destruction of
property brought about by the acts of aggression committed by the regime, and requests the Security Council to undertake a periodic review of the question of
economic assistance to the three Governments;
8. Deplores the complicity of successive Governments of the United Kingdom in the violation of United
Nations sanctions by British oil companies, as exposed
in the Bingham report 50 on the supply of petroleum
and petroleum products to the illegal regime of Ian
Smith;
9. Deems it imperative that the scope of sanctions
against the illegal regime be widened to include all the
measures envisaged under Article 41 of the Charter
and reiterates its request that the Security Council
consider taking the necessary measures in that regard
as a matter of urgency;
10. Requests the Security Council to impose,
among other things, a mandatory embargo on the
supply of petroleum and petroleum products to South
Africa in view of the fact that petroleum and petroleum
products are transported from South Africa to Southern Rhodesia;
l l. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples to follow the implementation
of the present resolution and invites the Security Council Committee established in pursuance of resolution
253 ( 1968) concerning the question of Southern Rhodesia to continue to co-operate in the related work
of the Special Committee.
81 st plenary meeting
13 December 1978
33/39.

Question of East Timor

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the inalienable right of all peoples to
self-determination and independence in accordance
with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained
in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Recalling its resolutions 3485 (XXX) of 12 December 1975, 31/53 of 1 December 1976 and 32/34 of
28 November 1977 and Security Council resolutions
384 (1975) of 22 December 1975 and 389 (1976) of
22 April 1976,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
relating to the Territory, 61
50 T. H. Bingham and S. M. Gray, Report on the Supply of
Petroleum and Petroleum Products to Rhodesia (London, Her
Majesty's Stationery Office for the Foreign and Commonwealth
Office, 1978).
61 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/33/23/Rev.1), vol. II, chap. X.

182

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session.

Having heard the statements made on the subject
of East Timar, including the statement by the representative of the Frente Revolucionaria de Timar Leste
Independente, 52
Deeply concerned at the continuing critical situation
in the Territory, resulting from the persistent refusal
on the part of the Government of Indonesia to comply
with the provisions of the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council,
Bearing in mind the part of the Declaration of the
Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of NonAligned Countries, held at Belgrade from 25 to 30 July
1978, relating to East Timor, 53
Mindful that all States should, in conformity with
Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter, refrain in their
international relations from the threat or use of force
against the territorial integrity or national independence
of any State, or in any other manner inconsistent with
the purposes of the United Nations,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
East Timor to self-determination and independence,
and the legitimacy of their struggle to achieve that
right;
2. Reaffirms its resolutions 3485 (XXX), 31/53
and 32/34 and Security Council resolutions 384 (1975)
and 389 (1976);
3. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples to keep the situation in the
Territory under active consideration, to follow the
implementation of the present resolution, to dispatch
to the Territory as soon as possible a visiting mission
with a view to the full and speedy implementation of
the Declaration and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its thirty-fourth session;
4. Draws the attention of the Security Council, in
conformity with Article 11, paragraph 3, of the Charter
of the United Nations, to the critical situation in the
Territory of East Timar and recommends that it take
all effective steps for the implementation of its resolutions 384 (1975) and 389 (1976) with a view to
securing the full exercise by the people of East Timar
of their right to self-determination and independence;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fourth session the item entitled "Question of
East Timor".
81 st plenary meeting
13 December 1978
33/40.

Activities of foreign economic and other
interests which are impeding the implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples in Southern Rhodesia and Namibia and in all other Territories under colonial domination and
efforts to eliminate colonialism, apartheid
and racial discrimination in southern
Africa

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Activities of
foreign economic and other interests which are imped52 fbid., Thirty-third Session, Fourth Committee, 21st meeting, paras. 10-27.
53 A/33/206, annex I, para. 133.

ing the implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples in Southern Rhodesia and Namibia and in all
other Territories under colonial domination and efforts
to eliminate colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination in southern Africa",
Having examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
relating to this question, 54
Taking into consideration the parts of the report of
the United Nations Council for Namibia relating to the
question, 55
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970,
containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration, as well as all other
resolutions of the United Nations relating to the item,
Taking into account the Maputo Declaration in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia and the
Programme of Action for the Liberation of Zimbabwe
and Namibia," 6 adopted by the International Conference in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia, held at Maputo from 16 to 21 May 1977, as
well as the Lagos Declaration for Action against
Apartheid, 57 adopted by the World Conference for
Action against Apartheid,
Recalling the Declaration on Namibia and the Programme of Action in Support of Self-Determination
and National Independence for Namibia, contained in
resolution S/9-2 of 3 May 1978, adopted by the General Assembly at its ninth special session,
Bearing in mind the relevant resolutions adopted by
the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of
the Organization of African Unity at its fifteenth ordinary session, held at Khartoum from 18 to 22 July
1978, 58
Bearing in mind also the Declaration of the Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of NonAligned Countries, held at Belgrade from 25 to
30 July 1978,59
Reaffirming the solemn obligation of the administering Powers under the Charter of the United Nations
to promote the political, economic, social and educational advancement of the inhabitants of the Territories
under their administration and to protect the human
and natural resources of those Territories against
abuses,
Reaffirming that any economic or other activity
which impedes the implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
54 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/33/23/Rev.1), vol. I, chap. IV.
55 fbid., Supplement No. 24 (A/33/24), vol. I.
56 A/32/109/Rev.1-S/12344/Rev.l,
annex V. For the
printed text, see Official Records of the Security Council,
Thirty-second Year, Supplement for July, August and September 1977.
57 Report of the World Conference for Action against Apartheid, Lagos, 22-26 August 1977 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.77.XIV.2 and corrigendum), sect. X.
58 A/33/235 and Corr.I, annex II, resolutions AHG/Res.86
(XV) and AHG/Res.89 (XV).
59 See A/33/206, annex I.
