General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

30

8. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Director General of the lntcrnational Atomic
Energy Agency the rccords of the thirty-second session of the General Asscmbly relating to the Agency's
activities.
97 th plenary mcetinR
8 December 1977
32/50.

Peaceful use of nuclear energy for economic and social development

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency to the General Assembly for
the year 1976, 6 K
Recognizing the need to strengthen the role of the
International Atomic Energy Agency in the promotion
of the application of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes and to augment its resources for technical assistance to the developing countries in this field,
Bearing in mind the need to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons,
Having in mind the significance of nuclear energy
for economic development and, in particular, its important role in accelerating the development of developing countries,
Convinced that the transfer of technology for the
peaceful use of nuclear energy for development can
greatly contribute to progress in general,
Taking into consideration the legitimate right of
States to develop or acquire technology for the peaceful
use of nuclear energy in order to accelerate their economic development,
Affirming the responsibility of States that are advanced in the nuclear field to promote the legitimate
nuclear energy needs of the developing countries by
participating in the fullest possible transfer of nuclear
equipment, materials and technology under agreed and
appropriate international safeguards applied through
the International Atomic Energy Agency on a nondiscriminatory basis in order to prevent effectively
proliferation of nuclear weapons,
Recalling the obligation assumed under international
agreements and contracts by a number of such States to
facilitate the fullest possible exchange of equipment,
materials and scientific and technological information
for the peaceful use of nuclear energy,
Convinced that the objectives of the full utilization
of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes and the prevention of the proliferation of nuclear weapons can be
promoted by the establishment of universally acceptable
principies for international co-operation in the use of
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes,
l. Declares that:
(a) The use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes is of great importance for the economic and
social development of many countries;
(b) All States have the right, in accordance with
the principle of sovereign equality, to develop their
88 Intemational Atomic Energy Agency,

32/105.

Policies of apartheid of the Government
of South Africa 69
A

UNITED NATIONS TRUST FUND FOR SouTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-Gencral on the Unitcd Nations Trust Fund for South
Africa, 70 to which is annexed the report of the Committee of Trustees of the United Nations Trust Fund
for South Africa,
Grave/y concerned over the widesprcad repression
against ali opponcnts of apartheid in South Africa, induding frequent shootings of peaceful dcmonstrators
and the series of deaths of detainees,
Reafjirming that humanitarian assistancc to those
persecuted under repressive and discriminatory legislation in South Africa, Namibia and Southern Rhodesia
is appropriate and essential,
Considering the need for increased contributions to
the Trust Fund and to the voluntary agencies con-

The Annual Report

for 1976 (Austria, July 1977); transmitted to the members of

the General Assembly by a note of the Secretary-General
(A/32/158 and Add.1).

programme fo, the peaceful use of nuclear technology
for economic and social development, in conformity
with their priorities, interests and needs;
(e) Ali States, without discrimination, should have
access to and should be free to acquire technology,
cquipmcnt and materials for the pcaceful use of nuclear
cnergy;
(d) lnternational co-operation in the field covered
by the present resolution should be undcr agreed and
appropriate international safeguards applied through
the International Atomic Energy Agency on a nondiscriminatory basis in order to prevent effectively
proliferation of nuclear weapons;
2. Invites all States as well as the international organizations concerned to respect and observe the principies set forth in thc present resolution;
3. Requests States to strengthen the existing programmes of the International Atomic Energy Agency
for the development of the peaceful use of nuclear
cnergy in the developing countries, the acquisition of
installations, equipment and nuclear materials and information, as well as the training of personnel in the
peaceful use of nuclear energy;
4. Invites ali States to consider convening, at an
appropriate stagc, an international conference or conferences, under the auspices of the United Nations
system, aimed at promoting international co-operation
in the peaceful use of nuclear energy in accordance
with the objectives of the present resolution;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to invite ali
States to communicatc to him their views, observations
and suggestions on such a conference and requests
him to submit a rcport thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-third session.
97th plenary meetinr:
8 December 1977

61l See

also sect. l. foot-note 3, and sect. X.B.3, decision

12/406.
70 A/32/302.

11.

cerned, in order to enable them to meet the growing
needs resulting from escalating repression,
l. Commends the Committee of Trustees of the
United Nations Trust Fund for South Africa for its
efforts to promote humanitarian assistance;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Governments,
organizations and individuals that have contributed to
the Trust Fund and to the voluntary agencies engaged
in rendering humanitarian assistance to the victims
of apartheid and racial discrimination;
3. Appeals far continued and increasing contributions to the Trust Fund and to the voluntary agencies
concerned.
102nd plenary meeting
14 December 1977

B
INTERNATIONAL

full solidarity with the oppressed people of South Africa
and their national liberation movement;
6. Calls upon Member States to report to the Secretary-General on the activities organized to mark the
International Anti-Apartheid Year;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to encourage the
widcst possible observance of the International AntiApartheid Year by Governments and organizations and
to provide all necessary assistance to thc Special Committee in the discharge of its responsibilities;
8. Decides to make a special allocation of $300,000
to the budget of the Special Committee from the budget
of the United Nations, to be utilized for special projects
to be decided upon by the Committee in observance
of the International Anti-Apartheid Year in consultation with the Secretary-General.
102nd plenary meeting
14 December 1977

ANTI-Apartheid YEAR

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the imperative need far stepping up the
international campaign against apartheid, under the
auspices of the United Nations and in pursuance of the
Lagos Declaration far Action against Apartheid71
adopted by the World Conference for Action against
Apartheid, held at Lagos from 22 to 26 August 1977,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution 2082 B (LXII) of 13 May 1977, in which the
Council recommended that the General Assembly
should declare 1978 International Anti-Apartheid Year,
Further taking note of resolution CM/Res.591
(XXIX) adopted by the Council of Ministers of the
Organization of African Unity at its twenty-ninth ordinary session, held at Libreville from 23 June to 3
July 1977, regarding the International Anti-Apartheid
Year, 72
Having considered the special report of the Special
Committee against Apartheid concerning the proposed
International Anti-Apartheid Year, 73
l. Proclaims ,the year beginning on 21 March 1978
International Anti-Apartheid Year;
2. Endorses the programme for the lnternational
Anti-Apartheid Year recommended by the Special
Committee against Apartheid in its special repor,t, as
set forth in the annex to the present resolution;
3. Requests all Governments, intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations, infarmation media and
educational institutions to co-operate in the eflective
observance of the International Anti-Apartheid Year;
4. Requests the specializcd agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, in particular,
to participate fully in the observance of the International Anti-Apartheid Year, in accordance with thcir
mandates and in co-opcration with the United Nations;
5. Invites the Special Committee to take ali appropriate measurcs to promote the world-wide observance of thc Intcrnational Anti-Apartheid Ye:u, in
71 A/CONF.91 /9

31

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Comrnittce

(United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.77.XIV.2 and corrigendum), sect. X.
72 See A/32/310, annex l.
1 3 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtv-second
Session, Supplement No. 22A (A/32/22/ Add-.1-3 ), document
A/32/22/ Add.2.

ANNEX
Programme for the lnternational Anti-Apartheid Y ear

f.

PURPOSE OF THE INTERNATIONAL YEAR

1. The main objective of the International Anti-Apartheid
Year should be to make world opinion fully aware of:
(a) The inhumanity of apartheid and its wider dangers
to international peace;
( b) The struggle of the oppressed people, under the
leadenhip of their liberation movements, to attain freedom
and human equality;
(e) The noble objectives of the liberntion movements of
the South African people and their contribution to the purposes of the United Nations;
(d) The cause of ali those imprisoned, banned, banished
and otherwise persecuted for their opposition to apartheid;
(e)
The imperative need for the cessa,tion of any collaboration with the South African régime in the military, political,
economic or other fields which encourages it to ,persist in the
policies of apartheid;

(f) The need for international assistance to enable the
South African people to eradicate apartheid and establish a
new society, based on the exercise of the right to self-determination by ali -the people of the country as a whole, irrespective of race, colour or creed.

2. The observance of the International
Y car should promote:
(a)

Anti-Apartheid

Further isolation of the South African régime;

Intensification of the international campaign against
apartheid;
(b)

(e) Greatly increased assistance to the oppressed people
of South Africa and their Iiberation movements by Governments and organizations as well as the public in general;
(d) Maximum publicity to -the inhumanity of apartheid
and the international efforts for its elimination.

3. During the International Anti-A partlreid Year, efforts
should be made to promote the establishment of anti-apartheid
and solidarity movements or committees, with broad public
support, in ali regions where they do not exist and to encouragc practica! arrang~ments for closest ,liaison among such
organizations and between them and the United Nations.
ll.

PROGRAMME FOR THE INTERNATIONAL
ANTI-Apartheid YEAR

4. Thc President of the General Assembly, the SecretaryGeneral and the Chairmen of ali United Na.tions bodies con-

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

32

cerned (Special Committee against Apartheid, Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, United Nations Council for Namibia
and Commission on Human Rights), as well as the executive
heads of the specialized agencies, should be invited to issue
messages in connexion with the International Anti-Apartheid
Year. These messages should be widely disseminated ali over
the world.

5. The United Nations bodies concerned should be invited
to consider, as early as possible, their contribution to the
observance of the International Anti-Apartheid Year.
6. Ali Heads of State and Government should be invited
to issue special messages in connexion with the International
Anti-Apartheid Year.
7. Ali Governments and organizations should be invited to
ensure ,the most effective observance of ,the International Day
for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (21 March),
the lnternational Day of Solidarity with the Struggling People
of South Africa (16 June) and the Day of Solidarity with
8011th A frican Political Prisoners ( 11 October).
8. Ali those Governments which have not done so should
be urge<l to cease completely ali kinds of collaboration with
the apartheid régime in military, political, economic, cultural
and any other fields and to implement the corresponding
decisions and resolutions of the United Nations.
9. Ali those Governments which have not done so should
be urged ,to become parties to the International Convention
on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid
during the International Anti-Apartheid Year.
10. The General Assembly should devote a special meeting on 11 October or 1O December 1978 to the International
Anti-Apartheid Year.
B.

Action by the Secretary-General

11. The Secretary-General should be requested to publicize
as widely as possible, through the Centre against Apartheid
and the Office of Public Information of the Secretariat, and
through ali media:
(a) Actions taken by the United Nations and the specialized agencies for the eradication of apartheid;

( b)

Information on political prisoners in South Africa;

(e)

Documents on the struggle for Iiberation in South

Africa.
12. He should be requested to take ali appropriate steps
to promote the full implementation of the resolutions of the
United Nations on apartheid and the Lagos Declaration for
Action against Apartheid.71
13. He should further be requested to make appropriate
arrangements, in consultation with ,the agencies concerned, for
the co-ordination of plans for the observance of the International Anti-Apartheid Year by the United Nations system of
organizations.

C.
14.

Action by Governments

Ali Governments should be requested:

(a) To proclaim the International Anti-Apartheid Year
and encourage cities and non-governmental organizations to
proclaim the Year;
( b) To encourage parliaments to hold special sessions
devoted ,to the International Anti-Apartheid Year, for instance
on 21 March 1978, the International Day for the Elimination
of Racial Discrimination;
(e) To establish national committees for the International
Anti-Apartheid Y ear to ensure maximum publicity for its
objectives, or to designate the anti-apartheid movements or
similar organizations, where they exist, as the national committees for the Year;

(d) To encourage the information media to give maximum
publicity to the International Anti-Apartheid Year and its
purposes and, in this connexion, to ·the just struggle of the

oppressed people of South Africa and their liberation movements;
(e) To promote the widest dissemination of information
against apartheid in educational institutions;
(f) To review actions taken in accordance with the resoJutions of the United Nations on apartheid and to consider
further action, particularly for the full implementation of
the Lagos Declaration for Action against Apartheid concerning the cessation of military, nuclear, economic and other
collaboration with South Africa;
(g) To in crease moral, material and political assistance
to the oppressed people of South Africa and their liberation
movements;

(/z) To invite leaders of the liberation movements and
other opponents of apartheid in South Africa in order to
publicize the objectives of the struggle for freedom and human
dignity in South Africa;

(i) To arrange, wherev& practicable, public collections
for assistance to the oppressed people of South Africa and
their liberation movements;
(j) To make generous special contributions to the United
Nations Trust Fund for Publicity against Apartheid for the
observance of the International Anti-Apartheid Year, and to
increase contributions to funds for assistance to the oppressed
people of South Africa.

D.

Action by specialized agencies and other
intergovernmental organizations

15. The specialized agencies and other institutions within
the United Nations system, as well as other intergovernmental
organizations, should be requested:
(a) To publicize, each within its mandate, the inhumanity
of apartheid and the international efforts for its elimination;
(b) To publicize more widely, or initiate, studies on
apartheid, within their mandates, in consultation with the
Special Committee against Apartheid.

16. The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, in particular, should be invited, in co-operation
with the United Nations, to publicize the actions of ali
United Nations agencies against apartheid and to pay special
attention to material for educational institutions and to audiovisual information.
17. The International Labour Organisation should be
invited to co-operate closely with the Special Committee
against Apartheid with regard to the observance of the International Anti-Apartheid Year by the trade union movement
at the international and national levels.
18. The Universal Postal Union should be invited to encourage the issuance of special stamps for 1he International AntiApartheid Year.
19. The World Health Organization and the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations should be
invited, in co-operation with the United Nations, to publicize
widely the effects of apartheid within their respective mandates.
20. The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
should be invited, in co-operation with the United Nations and
other agencies, to publicize the needs for assistance of the
refugees from South Africa and the inhumanity of the apartheid
system whkh caused the efflux of refugees.

21. The specialized agencies and other institutions within
the United Nations system, as well as other intergovernmental
organizations, should be requested to review assistance provided by them to the oppressed people of South Africa and
their Iiberation movements and consider means to increase
such assistance as required.
E.

Action by trade unions, churches and other
non-governmental organizations

22. Trade unions, churches, anti-apartheid and solidarity
movements and other non-governmental organizations should
be requested:

II.

(a) To undertake further action against apartheid in the
light of the relevant resolutions of the United Nations, particularly General Assernbly resolution 31/6 J of 9 Novernber
1976 entitled "Prograrnrne of Action against Apartheid";
(b) To give priority during the International Anti-Apartheid Y ear to action against apartheid and formula te concrete
prograrnrnes for that purpose;
(e) To co•operate with the Special Comrnittee against
Apartheid in ,promoting the widest and rnost effective observance of the International Anti-Apartheid Year.
F.

Action by the Special Committee against Apartheid

23. The Special Comrnittee against Apartheid should be
requested to take any appropriate action to promote the widest
and most effective observance of the International AntiApartheid Year and, in this connexion:
(a) To rnaintain close co-operation with the SecretaryGeneral, the specialized agencies, the Organization of African
Unity and other intergovernrnental and non-governrnental organizations concerned;
( b) To take active steps to prornote increased assistance
to the oppressed people of South Africa and their liberation
rnovernents-through funds of the United Nations and of the
Organiza,tion of African Unity and other channels-and, in
this connexion, ,to encourage public collections for this purpose;
(e) To prornote the cessation of any política!, rnilitary,
nuclear, econornic and other collaboration with the apartheid
régirne;

(d) To arrange, in co-operation with Governrnents and
appropriate organizations, regional serninars and serninars
for workers, students, wornen and churchmen on aspects of
apartheid;
(e)

33

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

To participate effectively in the World Conference

Strongly convinced of the importance of action by
the trade union movement, at the national and international levels, for the eradication of apartheid,
1. Commends the resolution adopted by the Second
International Trade Unían Conference for Action
against Apartheid on 11 June 1977 76 to the attention
of all Governments and intergovcrnmental and nongovernmental organizations;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the trade union
organizations far their action against apartheid, particularly the world-wide observance of the Protest
Week against Apartheid in January 1977;
3. Invites the trade union organizations to continue and intensify their active support for the struggle
of the oppressed people of South Africa and their
national liberation movement for the eradication of
apartheid;
4. Authorizes the Special Committee against Apartheid to hold annual meetings with trade unions, as recommended in paragraph 11 of its special report, and
to arrange for the participation of representatives of
trade union organizations from southern Africa;
5. Requests the Special Committee to take all appropriate steps to promote and publicize trade union
action against apartheid.
102nd plenary meeting
I 4 December 1977

D

to Cornbat Racisrn and Racial Discrirnination;

(f) To promote accession by all States which have not yet
done so to the International Convention on ,the Suppression
and Punishrnent of the Crirne of Apartheid.74.

24. The Special Commíttee agaínst Apartheid should be
authorized to send delegations to rneet with the executive
heads of specialized agencies and other intergovernrnental and
non-governrnental organizations concerned to consult on plans
for the International Anti-Apartheid Year. It should be authorized further to send representativ,es to various regions
of the world to consult with Goverrunents, organizations and
the inforrnation media to promote the Year.
25. Under the guidance of the Special Committee against
Apartheid, the Centre against Apartheid should be requested
and authorized:
(a) To increase publicity against apartheid and give special emphasis to audio-visual material;
(b) To publish, in co-operation with the Office of Public
Information, a bulletin on the observance of the lnternational
Anti-Apartheid Year;
(e) To take any other appropriate action to promote the
observance of the International Anti-Apartheid Year in all
countries.

e
TRADE UNION ACTION AGAINST apartheid

The General Assembly,
Having considered the special report of the Special
Committee agaiost Apartheid conceroing the Second
Interoational Trade Union Conference for Action
against Apartheid, held at Geneva on 10 and 11
June 1977,75
74 Resolution 3068 (XXVIII), annex.
75 Ofjicial Records of the General Assembly,

Thirty-second
Session, Supplement No. 22A (A/32/22/ Add.1-3), document
A/32/22/ Add.1.

RELATIONS BETWEEN ISRAEL AND SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Recalling its repeated condemnations of the intensification of relations and collaboration by Israel with
the racist régime of South Africa in the political, military, economic and other fields, in particular resolution 31/6 E of 9 November 1976,
Taking note of the special report of the Special
Committee against Apartheid conceroing recent developments in relations between Israel and South
Africa, 77
Recalling Security Council resolution 418 (1977) of
4 November 1977,
Noting with grave anxiety that Israel has continued
further to strengthen its relations with the racist régime
of South Africa in defiance of the resolutions of the
General Assembly,
Considering that the collaboration by Israel has
constituted an encouragement to the racist régime of
South Africa to persist in its criminal policy of apartheid
and is a hostile act against the oppressed people of
South Africa and the entire African continent,
l. Again strongly condemns Israel for its continuing
and increasing collaboration with the racist régime of
South Africa;
2. Demands once again that Israel desist forthwith
from such collaboration and, in particular, terminate
all collaboratioo in the miHtary and nuclear fields;
3. Requests the Special Committee against Apartheid to keep the matter under constant review and
7 6 /bid., document A/32/22/ Add.1,
11 /bid., document A/32/22/ Add.3.

annex.

34

General Assembly-Thirty-se<:"ond Session

report to the General Assembly and the Security Council as appropriate.
102nd plenary meeting
14 December 1977
E
POLITICAL PRISONERS IN SoUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Grave/y concerned over the continuing repression in
South Africa, including the killings of peaceful demonstrators and innocent schoolchildren, mass arrests and
bannings, and trials under arbitrary repressive laws, as
well as ill-treatment, torture and killings of political
detainees,
Noting the reports of the Special Committee against
Apartheid78 and the Ad Roe Working Group of Experts
on Southern Africa of the Commission on Human
Rights, 79 as well as Security Council resolution 417
(1977) of 31 October 1977,
Recallíng its resolution 31/6 C of 9 November
1976 on solidarity with South African political prisoners,
Considering ,that the killings and repression by the
racist régime of South Africa further aggravate the
threat to international pcace and security,
1. Strongly condemns the racist régime of South
Africa far its killings and ruthless repression of opponents of apartheid and racial discrimination, and its
banning orders against organizations and the infarmation media;
2. Again pledges its solidarity with ali political
prisoners and detainees in South Africa;
3. Reiterates its proclamation, in resolution 3411 C
(XXX) of 28 November 1975, that the United Nations
and the international community have a special responsibility towards the oppressed people of South
Africa and their liberation movements, and towards
those imprisoned, restricted or exiled far their struggle
against apartheid;
4. Requests the Special Committee against Apartheid, in co-operation with the Centre against Apartheid
and all appropriate organizations, to publicize as widely
as possible the cause of the political prisoners, detainees
and restrictees in South Africa and to promote campaigns far their unconditional release.
102nd plenary meetin1?
14 December 1977

F
MILITARY AND NUCLEAR COLLABORATION WITH
SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Grave/y concerned over the continued and rapid
military build-up in South Africa,
A larmed at the frantic efforts by the racist réoimc
of South Africa to acquirc nuclear-weapon capability,
Strongly condemning the racist régime of South Africa far its massive violcnce against the oppressed peo18 /bid., Supplrment No. 22 (A/32/22) and Supplement
No. 22A (A/32/22/Add.1-3).
7!l E/CN .4/1222 and Corr. l.

ple of South Africa, its continued illegal occupation of
Namibia, its assistance to the illegal racist minority
régime in Southern Rhodesia and its repeatcd acts of
aggression against independent African States,
Recognizing that the growing militarization of South
Africa and its plans far nuclear development greatly
aggravatc the threat to international peace and security,
Condemning the continued collaboration by certain
Governments and transnational corporations with the
racist régime in defiance of repeated resolutions of thc
United Nations, enabling that régime to develop its
military arsenal and to undertake nuclear development,
Recalling its requests to the Security Council to take
mandatory measures, under Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations, to secure the full implementation
of the arms embargo against South Africa and a cessa tion of ali military co-operation with the racist régime
of South Africa,
Taking note of Security Council resolution 418
(1977) of 4 November 1977,
Expressing serious regret that three permanent members of the Security Council-France, the Uni.ted Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America-have continued to resist a
comprehensive embargo on military and nuclear collaboration with the racist régime of South Africa,
Considering the need far urgent measures to secure
the full implementation of Security Council resolution
418 (1977) and to promotc its extension to cover all
co-operation with the racist régime of South Africa
which, directly or indirectly, facilitates its military buildup and nuclear development, as well as all military and
nuclear co-operation with it,
Taking note of the Lagos Declaration far Action
against Apartheid8º adopted by the World Conference
far Action against Apartheid, held at Lagos from 22
to 26 August 1977,
1. Calls upon all Governments forthwith to implement Security Council resolution 418 (1977) without
any reservations and qualifications whatsoever and
irrespective of any existing contracts and lioences already issued and to ensure that all corporations, organizations and individuals within their jurisdiction
abide by its provisions;
2. Calls upon al! States, in particular France, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America, to co-operate fully
in effective international action, in accordance with
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, to
avert the grave menace to the peace resulting from the
policics and actions of the racist régime of South
Africa;
3. Requests thc Security Council, in particular, to
call u pon ali States, under Chapter VI l of the Charter
and irrespective of any existing contracts:
(a) To refrain from any supply of arms, ammunition, military equipment or vehicles, or spare parts
thereof, to South Africa, without any exceptions;
(/J) To ensure that such supplies do not reach
South Africa through other countries;
(e) To refrain from impor.ting any military equipmcnt or supplics manufactured by, or in collaboration
with, South Africa;
~ 0 A/CONF.91/9
(United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.77.XIV.2 and corrigcndum), sect. X.

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Comnúttee

(d) To cease any exchange of military, naval or
air attachés with South Africa;
(e) To terminate any form of military co-operation
with South Africa;
(f) To revoke all licences and termínate all technical assistance for the manufacture of military equipment and supplies in South Africa;
(g) To end all transfer of nuclear equipment or
fissionable material or technology to South Africa;
(h) To prohibit companies, institutions or agencies
within their jurisdiction from any co-operation with
South Africa, directly or through participation in companies registered in South Africa, in its military build-up
or nuclear development;
( i) To prevent their nationals from working in
South Africa in establishments producing supplies for
military and police forces, or engaged in nuclear development;
(j) To deny visas to South African military and policc personnel and persons engaged in nuclear research
and development;
4. Further requests the Security Council to establish machinery for supervising the implementation of the
measures referred to in paragraph 3 above;
5. Invites all Governments and organizations to
tah all appropriate action to promote the purposes of
the present resolution;
6. Authorizes the Special Committee against Apartheid:
(a) To follow and publicize all developments concerning military and nuclear collaboration with the
racist régime of South Africa and to report to the General Assembly and the Security Council all alleged violations of Council resolution 418 (1977) that may
come to its notice;
(b) To consult with experts, to hold hearings and
to encourage conferences and campaigns in order to
promote a total cessation of military and nuclear collaboration with the racist régime of South A.frica.

102nd plenary meetinR
14 December 1977
G
ECONOMIC COLLABORATION WITH SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31 /6 H of 9 November 1976,
Reaffirming that any collaboration with the racist
régime of South Africa constitutes a hostile act against
the oppressed people of South A.frica and a contemptuous defiance of the United Nations and the international community,
Firmly convinced that mandatory economic sanctions,
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, are essential to facilitate the speedy eradication
of apartheid,
Taking note of the report of the Special Committee
against Apartheid, 81
111 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supplement No. 22 (A/32/22).

35

Condemning the continued and increased collaboration by certain Governments and transnational corporations with thc racist régime of South Africa,
1. Requests the Security Council urgently to considcr mandatory economic sanctions against South
Africa;
2. Calls upan ali States to cease economic collaboration with South A.frica and to take effective
action to prevent such collahoration by corporations
within thcir jurisdiction;
3. Requests all Statcs, in particular:
(a) To prohibit all loans to and invcstments m
South A.frica;
(b) To termínate ali incentives for trade with
South Africa;
(e) To end cxchangcs of tradc missions with South
A.frica;
(d) To impose an embargo on the supply of petrolcum and petroleum products to South A.frica and on
investmcnt in the petroleum industry in South Africa;
(e) To deny facilities to airlines and shipping companies providing scrviccs to and from South Africa;
4. Encourages trade unions, churches, anti-apartheid movements and other organizations in their campaigns against collaboration with South Africa;
5. Requests the Special Committee against Apartheid:
(a) To publicize all available information on collaboration by transnational corporations with the racist
régime of South Africa in its pursuit of apartheid, in
arder that Governments and organizations may take
appropriate action to securc a termination of such
collaboration;
(b) To take ali appropriate steps, in co-operation
with the Organization of African Unrty, to promotc an
oil embargo against South Africa;
(e) To promote action towards the termination
of airline and shipping services to and from South
A.frica;
(d) To take ali other appropriate steps to promote
the implementation of the prescnt resolution;
6. Requests ali Governments and organizations to
co-operatc with the Special Committee in the implementation of the prcsent resolution.
102nd plenary meetinR
14 December 1977

H
ÜISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION ON apartheid

The General Assembly,
Strongly convinced of the need to intensify greatly
the efforts to acquaint world public opinion with the
imperative need for the eradication of apartheid in
South A.frica,
Noting the insidious propaganda activities of the
racist régime of South Africa and its supporters, as
well as its repressive measures designed to silence ali
opposition to apartheid and racial discrimination inside
South A.frica,
Having considered the report of the Special Committce against Apartheid/ 1

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

36

Commending the Centre against Apartheid far its
efforts, in consultation with the Special Committee
against Apartheid, to promote the dissemination of
infarmation against apartheid,
Expressing its appreciation to all Governments which
havc contributed to thc Trust Fund for Publicity against
Apartheid,
Recognizing the important contribution of the specialized agencies to the dissemination of information
against apartheid,
l. Appeals to all Governments to contribute generously to the Trust Fund for Publicity against Apartheid;
2. Requests the Special Committee against Apartheid and the Centre against Apartheid to utilize the
Trust Fund particularly for the production of audiovisual material and far assistance to appropriate organizations with a view to disseminating infarmation
material on apartheid;
3. Requests all Governments and organizations to
co-operate with the Special Committee and the Centre
against Apartheid towards the widest possible dissemination of information on apartheid;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to undertake,
in co-operation with Member States whose transmitters can be heard in southern Africa, a regular programme of radio broadcasts directed at South Africa
and concerned with United Nations efforts against
apartheid and in support of the right of self-determination, as well as with related matters of interes,t to the
peoples of southern Africa;
5. Urges Member States whose radio transmitters
can reach South Africa and adjacent territories to
make available transmission facilities for these broadcasts;
6. Requests the Centre against Apartheid, in cooperation with the Office of Public Infarrnation of the
Secretariat:
(a) To lend all appropriate assistance for these
transmissions, in particular to African radio stations
broadcasting to South Africa;
(b) To expand the production and distribution of
infarmation material in various languages and give
special attention to the production of audio-visual
material;

(e)

To organize essay cornpetitions on apartheid;

7. Requests the Secretary-General and Mernber
States to issue special pos,tage starnps on apartheid;
8. Commends, in particular, the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, thc
International Labour Organisation, the World Health
Organization and the Food and Agriculture Organization of ,the United Nations for their studies and information activities on apartheid;
9. Requests all the specialized agencies to cooperate with the Centre against Apartheid towards coordinated efforts by the agencies and institutions within
the United Nations system for the widest possible dissernination of information on apartheid.
102nd plenary meeting
14 December 1977

I
PROGRAMME OF WORK OF THE SPECIAL COMMITTEE
AGAINST Apartheid

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee against Apartheid82 and its special reports,~ 3
Commending the Special Comrnittec for its activities
in the discharge of the rnandate given to it by the
General Asscmbly,
Considering the need for ,the intensification and expansion of the activities of the Special Cornrnittee during the International Anti-Apartheid Y ear and in view
of the urgent need for effective and co-ordinated international action to eradicate apartheid and to enable
the South African people as a whole, on the basis of
equality, to exercise its right to self-determination,
Recognizíng the importance of adequate assistance
by the Centre against Apartheid to the Special Cornrnittee in the discharge of its rnandate,
Reiterating its determination, as expressed in General
Assembly resolution 3411 C (XXX) of 28 Novernber
1975, to devote increasing attention and all necessary
resources to concert international efforts, in close cooperation with the Organization of African Unity, for
the specdy eradication of apartheid in South Africa
and the liberation of the South African people,
l. Encourages the Special Cornrnittee against Apartheid to intensify its activities to promote the implernentation of the Programme of Action against Apartheid, 84
the Lagos Declaration for Action against Apartheidª~
adopted by the World Conference far Action against
Apartheid, held at Lagos from 22 to 26 August 1977,
and all relevant resolutions of the United Nations in
the light of paragraph 309 of the report of the Special
Cornrnittee;
2. Approves the recomrnendations of the Special
Comrnittee on its prograrnrne of work and on cooperation with other United Nations bodies;
3. A uthorízes the Special Cornrnittee:
(a) To send missions to Member States and to the
headquarters of the specialized agencies and other
intergovernrnental organizations, as required, to promote international action against apartheid and the
observance of thc International Anti-Apartheid Year;
(b) To intensify co-operation with the rnovement
of non-aligned countries, the Organization of African
Unity and other appropriate organizations;
(e) To participate in conferences concerned with
apartheid;
(d) To invite representatives of the South African
liberation rnovernents recognized by the Organization
of African Unity and those of other organizations active in opposition to apartheid, a~ well as experts, for
consultations on various aspects of apartheid and on
international action against apartheid;
(e) To associate representativcs of the South African liberation rnovements recognized by the Organization of African Unity with its rnissions;
82 /bid.
83 /bid.,

Supp/ement No. 22A (A/32/22/ Add.1-3).

~4 Resolution 31/6 J, annex.
8G A/CONF.91/9 (United Nations

E.77.XIV.2 and corrigendum), sect. X.

publication, Sales No.

11.

Resolutions adopted without referenc-,, to a Main Committee

4. Requests and authorizes the Special Committee, in co-operation with the iutcrnational and national
organizations concerned, to organize or promote the
organization of conferences against apartheid;
5. Requests the Special Committee to promote
assistance to the oppressed people of South Africa
and their liberation movements in accordance with the
recommendations contained in its report;
6. Requests all specialized agencies and other institutions within the United Nations system to review
and expand their programmes of assistance to the oppressed people of South Africa, in consultation with
the Special Committee;
7. A uthorizes the Special Committee to send representatives to 'attend meetings of the Governing Board
of th~ United Nations Development Programme, the
Executive Committee of the Programme of the United
N ations High Commissioner for Refugees and other
bodies conoerned with apartheid and assistance to
South Africans;
8. Encourages the Special Committee to promote
international campaigns for:
(a) Cessation of military, nuclear, economic and
other collaboration with the racist régime of South
Africa;
(b) Unconditional release of all persons imprisoned
or restricted for their opposition to apartheid;
(e) Public collections to assist the oppressed people
of South Africa and the South African liberation movements recognized by the Organization of African Unity;
9. Requests all specialized agencies and other institutions within the United Nations system to cooperate with the Special Committee in the discharge of
its task;
10. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Special Committee, to strengthen the Centre
against Apartheid and provide it with the necessary
resources for the performance of its responsibilities, in
the execution of the decisions of the Special Committee, for promoting more effective and co-ordinated
action against apartheid;
11. Decides that verbatim records should be provided for special meeüngs held by the Special Committee in observance of the international days designated by the General Assembly.
102nd plenary meeting
14 December 1977

J
AssISTANCE TO THE NATIONAL LIBERATION MOVEMENT
OF SOUTH AFRICA

The General A ssembly,
Noting that the racist régime of South Africa has
further aggravated racial discrimination, domination
and exploitation of the great majority of the pcople of
South Africa and has intensified ruthless repression in
order to enforce its criminal policy.
Recognizing that the policies and action of the racist
régimc of South Africa have aggravated a threat to the
peace in southern Africa and that their continuation
would lead to a wider conflict,

37

Further recognizing that the eradication of apartheid
and the establishment of a non-racial society in South
Africa are essential for peace and security in southern
Africa,
Recalling its resolutions on the policies of apartheid
of thc racist régime of South Africa,
I. Strongly reaffirms the inalienable right of the
people of South Africa as a whole, irrespective of race,
colour or creed, to determine, on the basis of majority
rule. thc future of South Africa;
2. Further reaffirms the legitimacy of the struggle
of the oppressed people of South Africa and their
national liberation movement for the eradication of
apartheid and the exercise of the right of self-determination by the people of South Africa as a whole;
3. Declares that, in view of the intransigence of
the racist régime, its defiance of resolutions of the
United Nations and its continued imposition of the
criminal policy of apartheid, the national liberation
movement has an inalienable right to continue its struggle for the seizure of power by all available and appropriate means of its choice, including armed struggle;
4. Further declares that the international community should provide all assistance to the national
liberation movement of South Africa in its legitimate
struggle and exercise ali its authority, under the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, including
Chapter VII, to facilitate the transfer of power from
the minority racist régime to the genuine representatives
of ali the people of South Africa.
102nd plenary meeting
14 December 1977

K
SITUATION IN SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Special Committee against Apartheid 86 and the report of the World
Conference for Action against Apartheid, held at
Lagos from 22 to 26 August 1977, 87
Mindful of the special responsibility of the United
N ations and the international community towards the
oppressed people of South Africa and their national
liberation movement and towards those imprisoned,
restricted or exiled for their struggle against apartheid,
Commending the heroic struggle of the oppressed
people of South Africa for their inalienable rights,
Conscious of the crucial stage of the struggle for
frccdom in South Africa and its international significance,
Noti111; that thc racist régime of South Africa is continuing its policy of ap¿¡rtheid, rcpression, "bantustanization" and aggression, in flagrant defiance of
United Nations resolutions, and is thereby gravely aggravating the threat to international peace and security,
1. Strongly condcmns the illcgitimate minority racist
régimc of South Africa for its criminal policics and
actions;
sr, Of]icial Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-second
Sessio11. Supplement No. 22 (A/32/22) and Supplemenl No.
22A (A/32/22/Add.1-3).
H7 A/CONF.91/9 (United Nations publication, Sales No.
F.77.XIV.2 and 3 and corrigendum).

38

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

2. Declares that South Africa belongs to all its
people, irrespective of race, colour or creed;
3. Proclaims its full support of the national liberation movement of South Africa, as the authentic rcpresentative of the South African people, in its just
struggle;
4. Again condemns the establishment of bantustans and calls upon all Govcrnments to implement
fully the provisions of its resolution 31/6 A of 26
October 1976;
5. Declares that any collaboration with the racist
régime and apartheid institutions is a hostile act against
the purposes and principles of the United Nations;
6. Commends all Governments and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations which have
taken action against apartheid and in support of the
South African national liberation movement in accordance with resolutions of the United Nations;
7. Invites all Sta tes and organizations to take all
appropriate measures to persuade those Governments,
transnational corporations and other institutions which
continue to collaborate with the racist régime of South
Africa to abide by the resolutions of the United Nations.
102nd plenary meeting
14 December 1977
L
WORLD CONFERENCE FOR ACTION AGAINST

Apartheid

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the World Conference for Action against Apartheid, held at Lagos from
22 to 26 August 1977, 88
Considering that the Conference has been an important event in promoting international action in support of the struggle of the South African people to
eradicate apartheid and racial discrimination and to
build a society based on the principie of equality of
all persons, irrcspective of race, colour or creed,
Mindful of the special responsibility of the United
Nations and the international community towards the
oppressed people of South Africa and their liberation
movements and towards those imprisoned, restricted or
exiled for their struggle against apartheid,
1. Endorses the Lagos Declaration for Action
against A partheid 89 and commends it to all Governments and to all intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations for appropriate and urgent action;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure maximum publicity to the Lagos Declaration and to all the
documents and records of the World Conference for
Action against Apartheid;
3. Expresses its great appreciation to thc Government of Nigeria, the Organization of African Unity,
the South African liberation movements recognized by
thc Organization of African Unity and all others concerned for their co-operation in ensuring the succcss
of the Conference;
4. Encourages the Special Committee against Apartheid to takc all appropriate steps, within its mandate,
88 Ibid.

s 9 A/CONF.91/9 (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.77.XIV.2 and corrigendum), sect. X.

towards the cffective implementation of the Lagos
Declaration.
102nd plenary meetin{?
14 December 1977

M
lNTERNATIONAL DECLARATION AGAINST Apartheid
IN SPORTS

The General A ssembly,
Recalling its rcsolution 31 /6 F of 9 November 1976
on apartheid in sports,
Reaffirming the importancc of effective international
action to abolish apartheid in sports and in ali other
fields,
Having considered the report of the Ad Hoc Committce on the Drafting of an lnternational Convention
against Apartheid in Sports. 90
I. A dopts a!l(/ proclaims the International Dcclaration against A/,c.,.theid in Sports, recommended by the
Ad Hoc Commitkc on the Drafting of an International
Convention against Apartheid in Sports ami annexed
to the present resolution;
2. Requests the Ad Hoc Committee to draft an
international convention against apartheid in sports for
submission to the General Assembly at its thirty-third
session;

3. Authorizes the Ad Hoc Committee to consult
with representatives of the organizations concerned and
cxperts on apartheid in sports;
4. Decides that summary records should be provided for meetings of the Ad Hoc Committee;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all
necessary assistance to the Ad Hoc Committec in the
discharge of its task.
102nd plenary meeting
14 Decembcr 1977
ANNEX
lnternational Declaration against Apartheid in Sports

The General Assemb[y,
Recalling the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, in which Member Sta tes pledge to take joint and separ,, '.e
action in co-operation with the Organization for the achievement of universal respect for, and observance of, human
rights and fundamental freedoms for ali without distinction
as to racc, sex. languagc, or religion,
Considerin¡; the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,91
which states that ali human beings are boro free and equal
in dignity and rights and· that cveryone is entitled to ali the
rights and frcedoms set forth in the Declaration without
distinction of any kind such as race, colour or national origin,
Recalling that, in accordance with the principies of the
lnternational Convention on the Elimination of Ali Forms of
Racial Discrimination. 9 2 States undertake not to sponsor,
defend or support racial discrimination,
Recallini further that the International Convention on the
Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Aparthefr/93

no Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supp/ement No. 36 (A/32/36).
ni Resolution 217 A (III).
!l2 Resolution 2106 A (XX}, annex.
n Resolution 3068 (XXVIII), annex.

11.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

39

declares that apartheid is a crirne violating the principies of
international law, in particular the purposes and principies of
the Charter of the United Nations, and constituting a serious
threat to international peace and security,

Con1·i11ced that an intcrnational declaration against apartheid
in sports would make it possible to take more effective measures at the international and national levels with a view to
completely isolating and ..:liminating apartheid,

Rccalling that the General Assembly has adopted a number
of resolutions in which the policies and practices of apartheid,
including the application of apartheid in thc field of sport, and
collaboration with the racist régime in all areas, are comlemned,

Proclaims this I ntcrnational Dcclaration against A ¡>arthcid in
Sports:

Reaffirming the legitimacy of the struggle of the people of
South Africa for the total elimination of apartheid and racial
discrimination,
Recognizing that the eradication of apartheid and rendering
of assistance to the South African people to establish a nonracial society is one of the primary concerns of the international community,

Article 1

States affirm anú support this Declaration as an expression
of international condemnation of apartheid and as a measure
to contrihute towards the total eradication of the system of
apartheid. and to this end resolve to take strong action and
to exert the greatest possible influence in order to ensure the
total climination of apartheid in sports.
Article 2

Convinced that more effective measures must be taken as
a matter of priority, during the International Anti-Apartheid
Year and the Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, to eliminate apartheid in ali its manifestations,

States shall take all appropriate action to bring about the
total cessation of s·porting contacts with any country practising apartheid and shall refrain from official sponsorship,
assistance or encouragement of such contacts.

Reaffirming its unqualified support for the O!ympic principie
that no discrimination be allowed on the grounds of race,
religion or political affiliation and its belief that merit should
be the sole criterion for participation in sports activities,

Article 3

Considering that international representative sporting contacts based on the Olympic principie can play a positive role
in promoting peace and the development of friendly relations
among nations of the world,
Recognizing that there can be neither adherence to the
principie of merit selection nor fully integrated non-racial
sport in any country practising apartheid until the apartheid
system i,tself is eradicated,
Condemning the enforcement, by the racist régime of South
Africa, of racial discrimination and segregation in sports,
Commending the sportsmen inside South Africa who are
struggling against apartheid and upholding the principie of
non-racialism in sport,
Condemning the repressive measures taken by the racist
apartheid régime against the non-racial sports bodies and
their leaders in South Africa,
Rejecting the policy of so-calied "multina,tional" sport,
enuncia.ted •by the South African ,racist régime, as no more
than a device for perpetuating apartheid in sports and an
attempt by the régime to mislead international public opinion
in order to gain acceptance for participation in international
sport,
Recognizing the importance in the international campaign
against apartheid of the boycott of South African sports teams
selected on the basis of apartheid,
Convinced that an effective campaign for the total boycott
of South African sports teams can be an important measure
in demonstrating the abhorrence of apartheid by Governments
and pe,oples,
Commending all Governments, sportsmen, sports bodies
and other organizations which have taken action against
apartheid in sports,
Noting with concern that sorne national and international
sports bodies have continued contacts with racist apartheid
sports bodies in violation of the Olympic principie and resolutions of the United Nations,
Recognizing that participation in sports exchanges with
teams selected on the basis of apartheid violates the fundamental human rights of the great majority of the people of
South Africa and directly abets and encourages the commission
of the crime of apartheid, as defined in the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of
Apartheid, and encourages the racist régime in its pursuit of
apartheid,
Condemning sports contacts with any country practising
apartheid and recognizing that participation in apartheid in
sports condones and strengthens apartheid and thereby becomes
the legitimate concern of all Governments,

States shall take ali appropriate action towards the exclusion
or expulsion of any country practising apartheid from international and regional sports bodies. They shall give full support
to national sports bodies attempting to exclude such countries
from membership of international and regional sports associations or to prevent such countries from participation in sports
activities.
Article 4
l. States shall publicly declare and express total opposition
to apartheid in sports as well as full and active support for
the total boycott of ali teams and sportsmen from the racist
apartheid sports bodies.

2. States shall pursue a vigorous programme of public
education aimed al securing strict adherence to the Olympic
principie of non-discrimination in sports and widespread national acceptance for the spirit and Ietter of United Nations
resolutions on apartheid in sports.
3. Sports bodies shall be actively encouraged to withhold
any support from sporting events organized in violation of
the Olympic principie and United Nations resolutions. To this
end, States shall convey the United Nations resolutions on
apartheid in sports to ali national sports bodies, urging them:
(a)
To disseminate such information to ali their affiliates
and branches;

( b) To take ali necessary action to ensure strict compliance with those resolutions.
Article 5

States shall take appropriate actions against their sporting
teams 1rnd organizations whose members collectively or individually participate in sports activities in any country practising apartheid or with teams from a country practising apartheid, which in particular shall include:
(a)
Refusal to provide financia! or other assistance to
enable sports bodies, teams or individuals to participate in
sports activities in countries practising apartheid or with teams
and individual sportsmen selected on the basis of apartheid;
( b)
Re fusa! to provide financial or other assistance for any
purpose to sports bodies whose team members or affiliates
participatc in such sporting activities;
(e)
Withdrawal of access to national sporting facilities
to such teams or individuals;

(d)
Non-recognition by States of ali professional sporting
contracts which involve sporting activities in any country practising apartheid, or with teams or individual sportsmen selected
on the basis of apartheid;
(e)
Denial and withdrawal of national honours or awards
to such teams or individuals;

(/) Denial of official receptions to teams or sportsmen participating in sports activities with .teams or individual sportsmen from any country practising apartheid.

40

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

Article 6

Article 17

States shall deny visas and/or entry to representatives of
sports bodies, members of teams or individual sportsmen from
any country practising apartheid.

The provisions of this Declaration concerning the boycott of
South African sports teams shall not apply to non-racial sports
bodies endorsed by the Special Committee against Apartheid,
the Organization of African Unity and the South African liberation movements recognized by it and their members.

Article 7

States shall establish national regulations and guidelines
against participation with apartheid in sports and shall ensure
that effective means exist for bringing about compliance with
such guidelines.
Arríe/e 8
States shall co-operate with anti-apartheid movements and
other organizations which are engaged in promoting the implementation of the principies of this Declaration.
Article 9

States undertake to encourage actively and publicly all
official bodies, prívate enterprises and other groups engaged in
promoting, organizing or servicing sports activities to refrain
from undertaking any action which in any way supports, assists
or enables the organization of activities involving apartheid in
sports.
Article 10

States shall urge all their regional, provincial and other authorities to take whatever steps are necessary to ensure the
strict comp\iance wi,th the provisions of this Declaration.
Article 11

States agree to use their best endeavours to terminate the
practice of apartheid in sports, in accordance with the principies
contained in this Declaration and, to this end, States agree
to work towards the prompt preparation and adoption of an
international convention against apartheid in sports based on
the principies contained in this Declaration which would inelude sanctions for violation of its terms.
Article 12

l. States and international, regional and national sports
bodies shall actively support projeots, undertaken in collaboration with the Organization of African Unity and the South
African liberation movements recognized by it, towards ,the
formation of non-racial teams truly representative of South
Africa.
2. To this end, States and ali appropriate organizations
shall encourage, assist and recognize genuine non-racial sports
bodies in South Africa endorsed by the Special Committee
against Apartheid, the Organization of African Unity and the
South African liberation movements recognized by it.
3. States shall also give active support to sportsmen and
sports administrators in their opposition to apartheid in sports.
Article 13

International, regional and national sports bodies shall uphold the Olympic principie and cease ali sports contact with
the racist apartheid sports bodies.
Article 14
International sports bodies shall not impose financia! or
other penalties on affiliated bodies which, in accordance with
United Na,tions resolutions and the spirit of the O!ympic
Charter, refuse to participate in sports contact with any country practising apartheid.
Article 15

National sports bodies shall take appropriate action to persuade their international federation to exclude racist apartheid
sports bodies from membership and from ali internationa1 activities.
Arride 16

All national Olympic committees sha\l declare their opposition to apartheid in sports and to sports contact with South
Africa, and shall actively encourage ali affiliates and constituent
members to end ali sports contact with South Africa.

Article 18

AH international, regional and national sports bodies and
Olympic committees shall endorse the principies of this Dec1aration and support and uphold ali provisions contained
therein.

N
BANTUSTANS

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31/6 A of 26 October 1976,
entitled "The so-called independent Transkei and other
bantustans'',
Condemning the racist régime of South Africa for its
threats against Lesotho for having refused recognition
of the so-called "independent" Transkei,
Further condemning the racist régime of South Africa for its stubborn pursuit of the bantustan policy and
its plans to declare the so-called "independence" of
Bophuthatswana,
Reiterating that the bantustan policy is designed to
divide the African people of South Africa and deprive
them of their inalienable rights in the country,
Convinced that the racist régime seeks to establish
bantustans as reservoirs of cheap labour, strategic hamlets and buffer zones against the struggle for freedom
in the country as a whole,
Noting that the African people of South Africa have
rejected and opposed bantustans and the tribal chiefs
who have collaborated with the racist régime in the
creation of these bantustans,
I. Again denounces the establishment of bantustans
as designed to consolidate the inhuman policy of apartheid, to destroy the territorial integrity of the country,
to perpetuate white minority domination and to deprive
the African people of South Africa of thcir inalienable
rights;
2. Denounces the declaration of the so-called "independence" of the Transkei and that of Bophuthatswana and any other bantustans which may be created
by the racist régime of South Africa and declares them
totally invalid;
3. Reafjirms the inalienable rights of the African
people of South Africa in the country as a whole;
4. Declares its firm support to Lesotho and any
other States which may be subjeoted to threats and
pressures by the racist régime in the pursuit of its
bantustan policy;
5. Again calls upon ali Governmcnts to deny any
form of rccognition to thc so-called "independent" bantustans, to refrain from any dealings with thcm and to
reject travel documents issued by them;
6. Again requests all States to take effcctive measures to prohibit all individuals, corporations and othcr
institutions undcr their jurisdiction from having any
dealings with thc so-called "independent" bantustans.
102nd plenary meeting
14 December 1977

II.

Resolutiou adopted without referenee to a Main Committee

o
INVESTMENTS IN SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31/6 K of 9 November 1976,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee against Apartheid, 94
Convinced that a cessation of new foreign investments in South Africa would constitute an important
step in the struggle against apartheid, as such investments abet and encourage the apartheid policies of
that country,
Noting with regret that the Security Council has been
unable to reach agreement on steps to achieve the
cessation of such investments in South Africa,
Welcoming as positive steps the decisions of those
Govemments which have taken measures to achieve
the cessation of further investments from ·their countries
in South Africa,
Noting that while there has been sorne decrease in
the flow of new foreign investments into South Africa
since resolution 31 / 6 K was adopted, a number of
foreign economic and financia! interests have continued
and increased their investments,
Urges the Security Council, when studying the problem of the continued stmggle against the apartheid policies of South Africa, to consider again steps to achieve,
at an early date, the cessation of further foreign investments in South Africa.
104th plenary meeting
16 December 1977

32/149.

Report of the Security Council

The General Assembly
Takes note of the report of the Security Council
covering the period from 16 June 1976 to 15 June
1977. 95
106th plenary meeting
19 December 1977

32/184.

United Nations Conference on Science
and Technology for Development96

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of
12 December 1974 containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States and 3362 (S-VII) of
16 September 1975 on development and international
economic co-operation,
Recalling its resolution 31/184 of 21 December
1976, in which it decided to convene the United Nations Conference on Science and Technology for De0 4 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supplement No. 22 (A/32/22).
95 /bid., Supplement No. 2 (A/32/2).
96 See also sect. V, resolution 32/ 115, and sect. X.B.4,
decisions 32/430 and 32/431.

41

velopment during 1979 and to take a final decision
on the question of the site of the Conference at its
thirty-second session,
Recalling also its resolution 32/115 of 15 December 1977,
T aking note of the offer made by the Govemment
of Austria to act as hos,t to the United Nations Conference on Science and Technology for Development,97
l. Decides that the United Nations Conference on
Science and Technology for Development shall be held
at Vienna for two weeks in 1979 at an appropriate
time;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to invite:
(a) Ali States to participate in the Conference;
( b) Representatives of organizations that have received a standing invitation from the General Assembly
to participate in the sessions and the work of ali international conferences convened under its auspices in
the capacity of observers, to participate in the Conference in that capacity in accordance with Assembly
resolutions 3237 (XXIX) of 22 November 1974 and
31/152 of 20 December 1976;
(e) Representa ti ves of the national liberation
movements recognized in its region by the Organization
of African Unity to participate in the Conference in
the capacity of observers in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 3280 (XXIX) of 10 December
1974;
(d)
The United Nations Council for Namihia to
participate in the Conference in accordance with paragraph 3 of General Assembly resolution 32/9 E of
4 November 1977;
(e)
Toe specialized agencies and the International
Atomic Energy Agency, as well as interested organs
of the United Nations, to be represented at the Conference;

(f) Interested intergovernmental organizations to
be represented by observers at the Conference;
(g) Directly concerned non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and
Social Council to be represented by observers at the
Conference;

3. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that
the necessary arrangements are made for the effective
participation in the Conference of the representatives
referred to in paragraph 2 ( b) and (e) above, including
the requisite financia! provisions for their travel expenses and per diem;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to make the
necessary arrangements to co-operate with the Government of Austria with a view to holding the Conference,
to submit to the Conference ali relevant documentation
and to arrange for the necessary staff, facilities and
services that it will require, including the provision of
summary records of its meetings;
5. Decides that the languages of thc Conference
shall be thosc uscd in the General Assembly and its
Main Committces.

107th plenary meeting
19 December 1977

n, See A/C.2/3 l /3 ami A/C.2/32/2.
