A/63/PV.80

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-third session

80

th plenary meeting
Wednesday, 22 April 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. D’Escoto Brockmann. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nicaragua)

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Agenda item 122 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/63/725/Add.4)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I would like,
in keeping with established practice, to invite the
attention of the General Assembly to document
A/63/725/Add.4, in which the Secretary-General
informs the President of the General Assembly that,
since the issuance of his communication contained in
documents A/63/725 and addenda 1 to 3, Cape Verde
has made the necessary payment to reduce its arrears
below the amount specified in Article 19 of the
Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly
takes note of the information contained in this
document?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now invite
the attention of the General Assembly to document
A/63/L.69, circulated under sub-item (d) of agenda
item 49, “Protection of global climate for present and
future generations of mankind”.

Members will recall that at the 2nd plenary
meeting, on 19 September 2008, the General Assembly
decided to allocate this sub-item to the Second
Committee. In order for the General Assembly to
proceed expeditiously with the consideration of the
draft resolution A/63/L.69, may I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to consider sub-item (d)
of agenda item 49 directly in plenary under heading B,
“Promotion of sustained economic growth and
sustainable development in accordance with the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and
recent United Nations conferences”?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Spanish): May I further
take it that the General Assembly agrees to proceed
immediately to the consideration of sub-item (d) of
agenda item 49?
As I see no objection, we shall now proceed
accordingly.
Agenda item 49 (continued)
Sustainable development
(d) Protection of global climate for present and
future generations of mankind
Draft resolution (A/63/L.69)
The President: I am very pleased to preside over
this meeting to consider and take action on the draft
resolution entitled “International Mother Earth Day”
(A/63/L.69). I wish to acknowledge the presence of my

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

09-30962 (E)

*0930962*

A/63/PV.80

dear friend the President of the Plurinational State of
Bolivia, Evo Morales Ayma. As we all know, Bolivia
has taken the lead in bringing this draft resolution
before the General Assembly, and we are grateful for
the personal attention that His Excellency President
Morales has given this important initiative.
The proclamation of 22 April as International
Mother Earth Day is an acknowledgement that the
Earth and its ecosystems provide us with life and
sustenance throughout our lives. It also recognizes our
responsibility, as called for in the 1992 Rio Declaration
on Environment and Development, to promote
harmony with nature and the Earth to achieve a just
balance among the economic, social and environmental
needs of present and future generations of humankind.
“Mother Earth” is a common expression for our planet
in many cultures. It reflects the interdependence that
exists among human beings, other living species and
the planet we all inhabit.
The draft resolution has been authored by the
Plurinational State of Bolivia and is also sponsored by
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Barbados, Belarus,
Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cape Verde, Chile, China, the
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Dominica, the Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Guatemala,
Haiti, Honduras, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Luxembourg, Mongolia, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Paraguay, the Philippines,
Portugal, Saint Lucia, Serbia, Seychelles, Somalia,
Spain, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Togo,
Uruguay and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

of the challenges that we face regarding the well-being
of the planet and all the life it supports.
(spoke in Spanish)
The Assembly will now take action on draft
resolution A/63/L.69, entitled “International Mother
Earth Day”. May I take it that the Assembly decides to
adopt draft resolution A/63/L.69?
Draft resolution A/63/L.69
(resolution 63/278).

was

adopted

Address by Mr. Evo Morales Ayma, President of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
will now hear an address by the President of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia.
Mr. Evo Morales Ayma, President of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia, was escorted into
the General Assembly Hall.
The President (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of
the General Assembly, I have the honour to welcome to
the United Nations His Excellency Mr. Evo Morales
Ayma, President of the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
and to invite him to address the Assembly.

This is truly a wonderfully broad endorsement.

President Morales Ayma (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I would like to welcome the decision today,
22 April 2009, by the United Nations to designate this
day as the International Day of Mother Earth. As
Governments, Presidents and representatives of the
States that make up the United Nations, we have an
enormous responsibility towards life and towards
humankind. We know we have a role to play, a task to
carry out and a responsibility, as Governments, to work
for equality for our peoples, for unity and for dignity.
Above all, we must work for humankind itself,
because, in recent years and decades, we have seen the
ongoing and deep damage done to Mother Earth. That
is why this initiative of the national Government to
designate one date, 22 April, to pay tribute to Mother
Earth is, of course, not a festival but a day of deep
reflection on the planet Earth.

The proclamation of 22 April as International
Mother Earth Day aims to invite States, the United
Nations and the rest of the intergovernmental system,
organized civil society and other stakeholders to
observe the Day each year. It provides a timely
opportunity to raise public awareness around the world

We recall that, in past centuries, there was a
continuous struggle for human rights. The major social
movements battled in various continents and countries
in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, when human
rights were still not recognized under international law.
Thanks to the struggle of the peoples of North

Since the issuance of document A/63/L.69, the
following countries have joined the list of sponsors of
the draft resolution: Albania, Algeria, Andorra,
Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belize, Eritrea, Finland,
Germany, Grenada, Guyana, Jordan, Maldives,
Myanmar, Peru, Slovenia, Sweden, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Turkey.

2

09-30962

A/63/PV.80

America, Europe and all continents, the rights of a few
and the slavery of many were recognized.
However, countries are constantly providing for
human rights in their constitutions. I would say that the
past century, the twentieth, was the century of human
rights. After many struggles waged and demands issued
in various regions and continents, human rights were
finally recognized. In the twentieth century, civil and
political rights were recognized from 1948 on. In 1966,
economic, social and cultural rights were recognized.
Sixty years ago, human rights were not respected
throughout the world. What would human rights be
today if they had not been recognized?
But 60 years ago they were recognized, and now
we are convinced that, with today’s declaration of
International Mother Earth Day, planet Earth, Mother
Earth, has also won her rights. And this new century,
the twenty-first, should be the century of Mother
Earth’s rights. The decision we have taken today, under
the leadership of the President of the General
Assembly, is important. It is a singular, historic and
unprecedented event for humankind, and those who
have decided to support this great initiative will go
down in history, the new history of awakening
humankind.
That is why I reiterate once again that the twentyfirst century is the century of the rights of Mother
Earth and of all living beings. If we are to live in
harmony with nature, we need to recognize that not
only we human beings have rights, but that the planet
does as well. Animals, plants and all living beings have
rights that we must respect. What is happening to us
now with climate change is the direct result of not
respecting the rights of Mother Earth. The United
Nations must ensure that the rights of Mother Earth
and of all living beings are respected. The great
challenge of the United Nations in the twenty-first
century is to be aware of and watch over the rights of
everyone and everything.
I know that this task will not be easy. Many
people, in particular certain lawyers — forgive me for
saying so — will say that only human beings have
rights. In our view, it is difficult to accept that. While
some human beings believe themselves to be at the
centre of the world and the universe, I also know that,
in the end, reason, good sense and reality will prevail.
Another important thing that I would like to point
out is the importance of coexisting with nature,

09-30962

because human life is not possible without Mother
Earth. Every day, at least in the mountains of the Andes
region, we see our mountains losing their snowcaps.
Our lakes are drying up. The islands are beginning to
disappear. That is serious for humankind.
But I would also like to recall that in Bolivia, in
particular among the local indigenous peoples that I am
familiar with, Mother Earth is sacred to life. That is
why we undertake sacred rituals of tribute to our rivers,
forests, lakes and animals and have many tunes to
express our respect for Mother Earth. I am convinced
that Mother Earth is more important than humankind,
and therefore the rights of Mother Earth are as
important as those of any human being.
I would ask the representatives of the countries
that comprise the United Nations to consider that Earth
would have no problems if there were no human
beings, but human beings would not be human beings
without Mother Earth. I greatly regret our current,
ongoing plight. The problems of the so-called
financial, energy and food crises are the results of
human beings’ failure to respect planet Earth. I
therefore wish to tell the President and members of this
Assembly and our 192 Governments that our challenge
is to agree on a universal declaration of the rights of
Mother Earth. To contribute to that task, I would like to
propose four rights of great importance to humankind.
First is the right to life, which means the right to
exist. It is the right of no ecosystem, species, animal,
vegetable, sea, river or lake to be eliminated or pushed
to extinction by the irresponsible behaviour of human
beings. We human beings must recognize that Mother
Earth and all living beings have a right to exist and that
our rights end when we set off the extinction or
elimination of nature.
Second is the right of regeneration for the
planet’s biocapacity. Mother Earth must be able to
regenerate its biodiversity. Human activity on the
planet and its resources cannot be unlimited.
Development cannot be infinite. There is a limit, and
that limit is the capacity of animal and vegetable
species, forests, water sources and the very atmosphere
to regenerate themselves. It is more important to
produce oxygen than carbon dioxide. If we human
beings consume and, worse still, destroy more than
Mother Earth can replace and recreate, we will slowly
kill our home. We will gradually poison our planet, all
human beings and ourselves.

3

A/63/PV.80

Third is the right to a clean life. That means the
right of Mother Earth to live without pollution, because
not only we humans, but also the fish, animals and
trees have the right to live well. The Earth itself has the
right to live in a clean environment, free of poisons and
toxins.
Fourth is the right to harmony and balance with
and among all and everything. It is the right to be
recognized as a part of a system in which each of us
and everything is interdependent in the right to live in
balance with human beings.
Millions of living species live on our planet, but
only we human beings have the capacity and
consciousness to control our own evolution in order to
promote harmony with nature.
Until now, human beings have been prisoners of
development capitalism, which states that man is the
sole owner of the planet. Now it is time to recognize
that the Earth does not belong to us. It is the other way
around: we belong to the Earth, and it is our mission in
the world to watch over the rights, not only of human
beings, but of Mother Earth and of all living beings.
In conclusion, I would like everyone to say with
me, jallalla Pachamama — long live Mother Earth!
The President (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of
the General Assembly, I wish to thank the President of
the Plurinational State of Bolivia for the statement he
has just made.
Mr. Evo Morales Ayma, President of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia, was escorted from
the General Assembly Hall.
The President (spoke in Spanish): This is a very
important day for me, and personally speaking, I am
very happy with the resolution that we have just
adopted. I wanted to express my happiness by putting
on my best suit. I am very proud of this suit, because it
is the dress of my homeland — Latin America — and a
gift from President Evo Morales.
(spoke in English)
I am very pleased that we have adopted this
historic resolution that establishes International Mother
Earth Day. I wish to thank President Evo Morales
Ayma for his inspiring words and for honouring the
Assembly with his presence today. He deserves our
congratulations for making our concerns about our
beleaguered planet a bigger part of public discourse. I

4

thank representatives for their insightful interventions
and for having collaborated in expediting the approval
of the resolution.
I believe the Assembly’s adoption of International
Mother Earth Day has special significance at this point
in our human odyssey. As scientists have pointed out,
we are approaching, and may have already reached, a
tipping point at which the damage that we are doing to
the environment is irreversible. We may face a future
of inexorable decline as we destroy the fragile
ecosystems that support all life on the planet. The
question before us is how to slow this decline or, in the
best of scenarios, how to reverse it and return our
planet to good health.
We are also approaching a tipping point in our
collective awareness of the terrible harm our species is
inflicting on dear Mother Earth. We are now aware of
the miraculous intricacy of our land and marine
biodiversity, as well as its fragility. Two years ago, this
noble body declared 2010 as the International Year of
Biodiversity as part of the effort to slow the horrendous
rate of loss of our planetary health and wealth. Still, we
continue to squander our natural abundance in the
name of a quasi-religious faith in profit and idolatry of
the marketplace. The unfolding economic and financial
crisis must be seen not only as a policy failure, but as a
warning that our hyperconsumption, unfettered greed
and obsessive accumulation of power and dominance
have no future if we are to survive.
The Assembly is sending a special message of
hope with the proclamation of Mother Earth Day. We
are putting people and the well-being of the planet at
the centre of our attention and recognizing responsible
stewardship of our dwindling resources as a shared
responsibility. Mother Earth, after all, nurtures and
sustains life and our very humanity. It is only right that
we, as sisters and brothers all, take care of Mother
Earth in return.
Let us become good stewards once again. Let us
listen to the wisdom of indigenous peoples who,
despite all odds, have sustained their profound links to
nature. Let us support the billion small food producers
who, with sustainable farming methods, can continue
to provide us with healthy food and not be driven into
abject poverty by unfair trade policies and rapacious
agro-industries.
Our decision today marks one more symbolic step
in changing the dominant mindset that has brought us

09-30962

A/63/PV.80

so close to self-destruction. This morning we have
another opportunity to pause and reflect on this
moment in history — its challenges and its
opportunities.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of sub-item (d) of agenda item 49.

Before adjourning this meeting, may I invite
members to remain seated so that we may begin the
informal segment to hear statements by Ms. Maude
Barlow, senior adviser to the President on water issues,
and Mr. Leonardo Boff, special invitee of the President
of the General Assembly.
The meeting rose at 11 a.m.

09-30962

5
