S/PV.8691

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8691st meeting

Wednesday, 18 December 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Barkin. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Trullols Yabra
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mrs. Gasri
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Syihab
Ms. Alsabah
Mr. Ugarelli
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Kuzmin
Mr. Molefe
Mrs. Dickson

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-42006 (E)
*1942006*

S/PV.8691

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Sudan to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Ms. Bensouda.
Ms. Bensouda: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to present my Office’s thirtieth report on
the Darfur situation, pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).
In June, when I last briefed the Council (see
S/PV.8554), I emphasized that the recent events in the
Sudan presented a unique opportunity to ensure that
the suspects against whom warrants of arrest had been
issued by the International Criminal Court (ICC) in the
Darfur situation finally faced justice in a court of law.
I urged the authorities in the Sudan and the Council
to seize that opportunity. I also expressed my hope
that the Sudan would begin a new era of cooperation
with my Office and, more generally, the Court. Today,
emboldened by the events over the past six months, I
repeat those messages, with greater confidence that the
Sudan will honour its commitments to deliver justice
for the victims in the Darfur situation.
Over the past six months, the Sudan’s extraordinary
transition has continued. On 17 August, the
Constitutional Declaration, which sets out a political
framework for the following 39 months, was signed
by the Transitional Military Council and the Forces
for Freedom and Change. On 21 August, the new
Sovereign Council, composed of six civilians and five
military personnel, was sworn in. Shortly thereafter, a
new Cabinet was inaugurated, led by Prime Minister
Abdalla Hamdok.
2/16

18/12/2019

Those political changes have already yielded a
number of positive developments in relation to the
Darfur situation. Foremost among these is the Juba
Declaration for Confidence-building Procedures and the
Preparation for Negotiation, signed on 11 September by
the Sovereign Council and a coalition of armed groups
across the Sudan, including in Darfur. The Declaration
sets out a comprehensive road map for peace across
the Sudan, with the ultimate aim of a national peace
agreement. Given the correlation between peace,
stability and the prevention of atrocity crimes, it is
essential that all sides commit to this initiative and that
the ongoing crimes in Darfur stop.
As the Council is aware, there are ICC arrest
warrants for the five suspects in the Darfur situation,
and each of these remains in force, notwithstanding
the ongoing developments in the Sudan. In response to
my last report to the Council, the representative of the
Sudan confirmed that investigations by the Sudanese
public prosecutor were ongoing in relation to Mr. Omer
Al-Bashir, Mr. Abdel Raheem Hussein and Mr. Ahmad
Harun. All are believed to be in detention in Khartoum.
The exact whereabouts of the remaining two Darfur
suspects, Mr. Ali Kushayb and Mr. Abdallah Banda,
are unknown.
Mr. Al-Bashir has been tried in the Sudan for
financial crimes. Last week, on 14 December, he
was reportedly sentenced to two years in detention.
A statement issued by the Sudan’s public prosecutor
shortly after the verdict indicated that a number of other
cases are pending against Mr. Al-Bashir, including in
relation to the 1989 coup that brought him to power and
crimes against humanity in Darfur.
In my last report to the Council, I emphasized
that, pursuant to the fundamental principle of
complementarity enshrined in the Rome Statute, the
primary responsibility to investigate and prosecute
crimes rests with national criminal jurisdictions.
In response, the representative of the Sudan noted
the reference to complementarity, describing it as
“positive”.
I was encouraged by the fact that he also emphasized
that “fighting impunity is a noble cause of justice” and
that this “falls primarily within the responsibility of the
relevant national investigative and judicial institutions”.
While that position is entirely consistent with the Rome
Statute, the principle of complementarity ensures
that, while States have the primary responsibility for
19-42006

18/12/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

bringing perpetrators to justice, the ICC’s jurisdiction
is engaged if States are inactive or otherwise unwilling
or unable to genuinely exercise that duty.
With that in mind, in the present circumstances,
notwithstanding recent media reports in relation to
Mr. Al-Bashir, the Office is not aware of any concrete
information suggesting that the suspects in the Darfur
situation are currently subject to domestic investigation
or prosecution for the same criminal conduct alleged
in the relevant ICC arrest warrants. Unless and until
the Sudan can demonstrate to the ICC judges that it is
willing and able to genuinely investigate and prosecute
the Darfur suspects for the crimes alleged in their
respective arrest warrants, those cases will remain
admissible before the ICC. The Sudan must ensure
that the five ICC suspects in the Darfur situation are
brought to justice without undue delay, in a courtroom
either in the Sudan or in The Hague. In that way, the
Council’s referral of the Darfur situation to my Office
can finally yield tangible results in court for the victims
the Council sought to protect, and progress can be made
towards resolving the Council’s referral of the Darfur
situation to the ICC.
In June I made it clear that my Office is ready
to engage with the Sudan. Since then I have been
encouraged by public statements made by high-level
Sudanese officials, which have indicated a clear
commitment to accountability in the Sudan. Notably,
Prime Minister Hamdok declared before the General
Assembly on 27 September (see A/74/PV.10) that the
Sudan is determined to uphold its commitment to the
principles of international law, international human
rights, as well as to the efforts aimed at eradicating
all forms of discrimination, exploitation, injustice and
inequality. In early November, the Prime Minister
reportedly visited Darfur, including camps for
internally displaced persons where Darfuris reportedly
appealed for justice. On 17 October, in response to the
special report of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission and the Secretary-General of the United
Nations on the strategic assessment of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) (S/2019/816), the representative of the
Sudan told the Council (see S/PV.8643) that the Sudan
is a new country that seeks to join the international
community as a peace-loving member that seeks
international cooperation, is committed to international
law and respects the basic rights of its citizens.

S/PV. 8691

A commitment to international law must include
the Sudan’s duties under the Charter of the United
Nations, pursuant to which the Sudan is bound by the
Council’s decisions, including its decision to refer the
Darfur situation to the ICC. Respect for international
human rights and the basic rights of Sudanese citizens
must include a willingness to ensure accountability
for the gross human rights violations against Sudanese
Darfuri citizens, as alleged in the ICC arrest warrants.
The Sudan now has the opportunity to demonstrate
that commitment to international law and respect
for international human rights by complying with
its obligations arising from resolution 1593 (2005)
and working with my Office. I have consistently
emphasized that this cooperation is crucial to the
Office’s independent and impartial investigations in the
Darfur situation. In that regard, it is my sincere hope
that in the near future, my Office will be granted access
to the Sudan to facilitate our work and discuss the way
forward. The Sudan has a legal duty to cooperate with
my Office, pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005) and the
jurisprudence of the Appeals Chamber of the ICC.
Cooperation with the ICC would clearly demonstrate to
the Council and the international community writ large
that the Sudan is committed to achieving justice for the
victims in the Darfur situation and that it has followed
through on its declared commitments and assurances
with visible and practical steps.
Despite the positive developments in the Sudan,
including in relation to the peace process, crimes in
Darfur regrettably continue. They must stop. The
Darfur situation remains a priority for my Office, and
I am pleased to report that substantial progress was
made in the investigations during the reporting period.
In addition, my team continues to monitor events
in Darfur, and when circumstances require, I will
investigate and, where appropriate, prosecute those
most responsible for crimes in Darfur that fall within
the Court’s jurisdiction.
Clashes between Government forces and the
Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid (SLA/AW) have
reportedly continued in the Jebel Marra area, resulting
in approximately 60 civilian casualties. Unfortunately,
that fighting has also led to the displacement of more
than 2,300 people in Darfur, mostly women and
children, and has exacerbated the already unstable
living conditions in camps for nearly 2 million
internally displaced persons in the region. I am deeply
troubled by the fact that sexual and gender-based

19-420063/16

S/PV.8691

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

violence, as well as grave violations against children,
have persisted in Darfur throughout this ongoing armed
conflict. Since June, UNAMID has reported sexual and
gender-based violence against 17 victims, including
seven minors, and grave violations against 84 children,
including 35 girls. Although UNAMID has identified
the perpetrators of those atrocities as mostly SLA/AW
fighters, they have also noted violations by the Rapid
Support Forces (RSF), among other groups.
Additionally, in July UNAMID reported that
SLA/AW elements were responsible for the temporary
abduction of several local and international staff
members from international non-governmental
organizations around Golo and Jebel Marra, and the
looting of critical humanitarian equipment. That
disturbing incident closely followed the RSF’s alleged
seizure of UNAMID facilities that I mentioned to the
Council earlier this year (see S/PV.8554). I am pleased
to note that UNAMID now reports that the Sudanese
authorities have provided assurances that those
facilities will be handed over to the Darfur state for the
purposes of health, education and other services. It is
with those essential human rights monitoring functions
in mind that I commend the Council on its adoption
of resolution 2495 (2019), extending the mandate of
UNAMID until 31 October 2020.
In my statement before the Council in June, I
also expressed deep concern regarding the alleged
attacks by Government forces on peaceful protesters in
Khartoum on 3 June. As those present will recall, those
Government forces were allegedly made up of the RSF,
whose members include former Janjaweed militias
linked to systematic human rights abuses in the Darfur
region between 2003 and 2008. The new Administration
has since created a commission of inquiry to investigate
human rights violations that occurred in the course of
those attacks. I sincerely hope that this investigation
will be conducted in an independent, impartial and fair
manner by the competent domestic authorities.
In relation to the recent judicial activities, on
30 October a confidential status conference was held
by the Trial Chamber in Mr. Abdallah Banda’s case.
Its purpose was to discuss the status of the case and
the way forward to ensure Mr. Banda’s appearance at
trial. As I mentioned, Mr. Banda’s arrest warrant has
not been executed, and he remains a fugitive from the
Court. Following that status conference, the Chamber
made a number of requests, including for submissions
from the Prosecution and the defence on their
4/16

18/12/2019

respective positions on trials in absentia in the specific
circumstances of Mr. Banda’s case. Those confidential
submissions were filed on 13 December, and the parties
now await further direction from the Chamber.
It would be remiss of me not to express my sincere
gratitude for the principled support and cooperation
that my Office continues to receive from a number of
States. I particularly welcome the public statements
that members of the Council have made to encourage
the Sudan to cooperate with my Office. It is time to
embark on a new chapter in the relationship between the
Sudan and my Office rooted in a commitment to finally
bring those most responsible for the atrocity crimes
perpetrated against the people of Darfur to justice.
My Office is ready and willing to do so, and we hope
that our hand extended in cooperation in the pursuit
of justice is met favourably by the new authorities in
the Sudan.
My Office also continues to benefit from essential
support provided by various organizations and
individuals committed to the cause of justice in Darfur.
I particularly want to express my sincere and heartfelt
appreciation to Darfur’s victims’ groups, in which many
courageous women and men work tirelessly to ensure
that justice in the Darfur situation remains a critical
issue in the Sudan’s transition. I am humbled and
inspired by their strength, courage and determination.
I will finish where I began, with a request for
the reinvigorated support and engagement of the
Sudan and the Council in the Darfur situation. The
Sudan continues on its extraordinary journey. Its
publicly stated commitments to international law and
international human rights and justice have created a
renewed expectation for accountability in the Darfur
situation. The Sudan is now on a path towards greater
peace and stability. If that can be achieved, justice for
the victims will be essential to a comprehensive and
enduring peace in Darfur. In its transition process, the
Sudan has benefited from the support of the Council
and the United Nations system, the African Union
and multiple States and regional organizations. Now
a principled caucus must rally to strongly support and
encourage the Sudan in its pursuit of justice in Darfur.
In response to the special report on UNAMID,
the representative of the Sudan told the Council on
17 October that the Sudan of today is totally unlike the
Sudan the Security Council has come to know over the
past three decades. Those are promising words that must
19-42006

18/12/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

be translated into action. I now invite the Sudan, with
the support of the Council, and all stakeholders in the
Darfur situation to work with my Office and in doing so
demonstrate that the Sudan of today is unambiguously
committed to achieving long-awaited justice for the
victims in Darfur. As has been most eloquently said in
some timeless words, “The arc of the moral universe is
long, but it bends towards justice.”
We must seize the opportunity now to take concrete
steps to end impunity for the alleged crimes in Darfur.
Before the Council and the representatives of the
Sudan here today, I reiterate my Office’s willingness
to engage in dialogue and cooperation with the Sudan
so that justice can finally be served for the victims of
atrocity crimes in Darfur, either in a Sudanese court or
before the ICC.
The President: I thank Prosecutor Bensouda for
her briefing.
I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): We welcome Prosecutor Bensouda, whom
we thank for the information she has presented to the
Council in her role as Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, and which highlights the great
challenges facing her Office.
We would like to begin by expressing our
satisfaction with the progress made since the last
report. We warmly welcome the signing of the Juba
Declaration for Confidence-building Procedures and
the Preparation for Negotiation. Ensuring the ceasefire
and humanitarian actors’ access to the various areas of
conflict in the Sudan is essential if Sudanese society is
to continue advancing towards peace.
We are pleased that the national justice system
is investigating the cases of Mr. Hussein, Mr. Harun
and Mr. Al-Bashir. We welcome the recent conviction
of Mr. Al-Bashir to two years’ imprisonment for
corruption. However, we are concerned that the crimes in
question are minor and different from those established
in the International Criminal Court’s indictments. We

S/PV. 8691

therefore want to remind the new authorities in the
Sudan of how important it is that States cooperate with
the Court so that it can achieve its objectives.
We regret the loss of life in the Jebel Marra area
resulting from disputes between the Government and
the Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid. We urge
the parties to the conflict to ensure the protection of
civilians. We also call on the members of the Council to
unite their efforts to reduce crime in the refugee camps
that are home to thousands of people displaced by the
conflict. In the Dominican Republic’s view, eliminating
sexual abuse as a war crime is a priority. Such offences
must not be tolerated and their perpetrators must be
brought to justice. We urge the new Sudanese authorities
to prioritize the fight against sexual abuse and genderbased violence in their plan for governing. Addressing
such harmful actions is crucial to the healthy and safe
development of Sudanese children and the elimination
of violence against women.
We warmly welcome the news that the buildings
belonging to the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur that were seized by armed
forces will be handed over to the authorities for the
purpose of providing health care, education and other
social services.
Lastly, the Dominican State reaffirms its support
for the International Criminal Court, and we urge the
international community to join the efforts to assist the
courageous people of the Sudan. The new Sudanese
leadership is tasked with strengthening the protection
of human rights and eliminating impunity in order to
promote the resilient advancement of Sudanese society.
Mrs. Dickson (United Kingdom): I too would like
to thank the Prosecutor for her thirtieth report on the
situation in Darfur pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005)
and her briefing to the Council today. I want to take
this opportunity to thank the Prosecutor and her team
for their dedication in pursuing the investigations and
continuing to seek justice for victims in Darfur.
The International Criminal Court (ICC) has
an important role to play in seeking justice and
holding perpetrators of the most heinous crimes to
account, and the United Kingdom strongly supports
its efforts. Since the Prosecutor’s last briefing (see
S/PV.8554), we have seen positive developments in
the Sudan with the agreement on a transitional period
that sets out a pathway for leading the Sudan into a
democratic future. The appointments of a civilian

19-420065/16

S/PV.8691

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Prime Minister and a Cabinet of technocrat ministers
are welcome steps, as are the pledges to protect human
rights and the rule of law. There are still significant
challenges for the transitional Government to address,
however. We welcome the commitment to building
a credible Sudanese judicial system and the pledge
to seek accountability for past crimes, including by
establishing an independent commission of inquiry
into the brutal attacks on protesters earlier this year.
The United Kingdom will support the Prime Minister
of the Sudan and the transitional Government in those
efforts and in building a new Sudan, as called for by the
Sudanese people.
The Sudanese people have suffered as a result of
their country’s long history of internal conflict. Past
crimes cannot be forgotten, and we must ensure that
accountability is delivered. That includes the crimes
committed during the conflict in Darfur, which
according to United Nations estimates left more
than 300,000 people dead and 2.5 million displaced.
Those victims deserve to see justice served, as well
as the achievement of a long-term solution to the root
causes of the conflict. Almost 2 million people remain
internally displaced in Darfur, and the United Kingdom
is concerned about the reports of further violence and
displacement in northern Jebel Marra and of returning
internally displaced persons being met with violence.
The transitional Government has stated that securing
long-lasting peace in the Sudan is a priority and has
demonstrated positive steps by engaging with armed
groups and entering into peace talks.
The United Kingdom welcomes the signing of
declarations in Juba and the resumption of talks on
10 December. We continue to urge all groups to engage
productively and without any preconditions in those
discussions. Sustainable peace underpinned by justice
and accountability must be found for the victims of this
conflict and for the people of the Sudan.
The security situation and the safety of the civilians
of Darfur must be a priority as we consider a transition
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding in the region.
We appreciate that, during the momentous changes in
the Sudan, there have been limited opportunities for
the Prosecutor and her team to achieve their desired
progress on this case. We welcome the Prosecutor’s
briefing and note that she has been able to strengthen
her case. The United Kingdom once again renews its
call to all State parties to cooperate with the ICC. We
encourage the transitional Government in the Sudan to
6/16

18/12/2019

engage constructively with the Office of the Prosecutor
with the intention of making progress with regard
to this case. We stand ready to support the civilian
administration as it seeks to build the rule of law
throughout the Sudan and ensure that those responsible
for the horrific crimes committed in the Sudan are held
to account and that those horrors to not recur.
Finally, we again thank the Prosecutor and her team
for their continued commitment to making progress
in their investigations, despite long-standing access
restrictions and a lack of cooperation. We urge them
to continue with that important work and to strive to
achieve justice for the victims of the conflict in Darfur.
Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): I too want
to thank Prosecutor Bensouda for her briefing and
her report.
As a key actor in the multilateral system and a
permanent court of universal scope, the International
Criminal Court requires the full cooperation of us all.
More than ever, it must be able to successfully carry out
its assigned tasks, namely, delivering independent and
impartial justice where national jurisdictions are unable
to do so, as well as ending impunity for the most serious
crimes and, in doing so, contributing to stabilization
and reconciliation efforts. The Court continues to be
responsible for carrying out those tasks in Darfur today,
14 years after the adoption by the Council of resolution
1593 (2005).
France reiterates its support for the work that
has been done by the Office of the Prosecutor and its
teams — which we too commend — to bring justice
to the victims of the crimes that were committed.
France is convinced that that is a necessary condition
for a successful Sudanese transition. The fight against
impunity must indeed be made a priority in order to
move towards a fair and democratic system. We welcome
Prime Minister Hamdok’s commitments in that regard,
and we call on the Sudanese authorities in particular
to provide the relevant commission of inquiry into the
events of 3 June with the necessary means to conduct
its work independently. The results of that investigation
should enable us shed to light on the violent dispersion
of the sit-in and identify those responsible, who must
be held accountable before the courts for their actions.
The situation in Darfur remains precarious.
Fighting continued to claim dozens of civilian lives
during the reporting period and displaced several
thousand people, in particular women and children.
19-42006

18/12/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Women and girls continue to suffer sexual and genderbased violence, while serious crimes continue to be
committed against children. In that regard, France too
would like to reiterate the crucial role that the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur plays
in protecting civilian populations and reporting human
rights violations. Despite the precarious situation,
however, France views the transition as an opportunity
to begin a new chapter between the Sudanese authorities
and the International Criminal Court that would enable
the Sudan to finally comply with its obligations under
resolution 1593 (2005). We call on the Sudan to allow
the Prosecutor’s teams to travel to Darfur. That would
serve as a strong signal that would also make it possible
to establish the dialogue needed to form a relationship
of trust.
France welcomes the arrest and detention of three
of the five Darfur suspects wanted by the International
Criminal Court. We also take note of the decision
of a national court this past Saturday to sentence
Mr. Al-Bashir to two years in detention for acts of
corruption, as well as the case that was filed against
those primarily responsible for the 1989 coup d’état.
We call on the Sudanese authorities to prosecute the
alleged crimes detailed in the corresponding arrest
warrants issued by the International Criminal Court
or to submit them to the Court, in accordance with
the principle of complementarity. Such developments
would very concretely demonstrate the Sudan’s
commitment to taking a decisive step towards justice,
peace and providing recognition to the victims of the
crimes committed in Darfur. In parallel, we hope that
the negotiations with the armed groups in Darfur and
in two states in the Sudan, which have just resumed in
Juba, will lead to an agreement that will enable lasting
peace to be built. We encourage all the armed groups
to join that negotiation process without delay. It was
in that spirit that we facilitated a meeting between
Prime Minister Hamdok and Abdul Wahid Al-Nur on
29 September in Paris.
Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in
Chinese): China listened to the briefing delivered by
Prosecutor Bensouda.
We note that the situation in the Darfur region of
the Sudan has seen big improvements recently. China
calls on the international community to take concerted
efforts and provide more help to the Darfur region so that
it can achieve lasting peace and security and sustainable
development. That is in the common interests of the

S/PV. 8691

Sudan and the countries in the region. The international
community should fully respect the legal sovereignty of
the Sudan and avoid interfering in its internal affairs. It
should also attach importance to the legitimate appeals
of the Sudanese Government and the African Union
regarding the engagement of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) on the situation in Darfur and respect the
opinions of the Sudanese Government. China is ready
to work with the international community to play a
constructive role in achieving peace, stability and
development in the Darfur region. China’s position on
the engagement of the ICC on the situation in Darfur
remains unchanged.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea)
(spoke in Spanish): First, allow me to thank Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, for her briefing on her thirtieth report on the
activities of the Court carried out during the reporting
period, in accordance with paragraph 8 of resolution
1593 (2005).
As the report states, the new Administration in
Darfur has taken significant steps to ensure peace,
security and stability in the country. That fact deserves
recognition and praise from all parties, given the
significant political advances that have been made in
Darfur. In that connection, we welcome the signing
of the Juba Declaration for Confidence-building
Procedures and the Preparation for Negotiation, signed
on 11 September by the Sovereign Council and a
coalition of armed groups across the Sudan, including
in Darfur. We hope that the road map set out in the
declaration can be implemented and that the people
of the Sudan will see the signing of the long-awaited
peace agreement that they deserve.
As far as the Court is concerned, it bears
remembering that it was established for a reason,
and we expect it to fulfil its mandate efficiently,
impartially and transparently in the Sudan. All the
Darfur victims deserve justice, and accountability is
fundamental to achieving stable and lasting peace in
Darfur. All the perpetrators of crimes against humanity
and genocide must therefore be brought to justice.
However, we continued to see slow or limited progress
on judicial activities, including on investigations by
the International Criminal Court during the reporting
period. We also note that, despite the activities that the
Court has undertaken to fulfil its mandate, there is a
persistent lack of cooperation with the Court from some
States, even some that are Parties to the Rome Statute.

19-420067/16

S/PV.8691

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

That is why, as a country that is not a party to the
Statute, we hope that the International Criminal
Court will continue to act solely as a complementary
institution, prioritizing Sudanese jurisprudence and
thereby joining the regional and international efforts
to strengthen the Sudan’s capacity to promote the
rule of law and safeguard human rights, as we believe
that it is only joint efforts and mutual trust among the
parties and institutions that will enable the Sudan to
be stable, peaceful and prosperous. In that process, the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Sudan must
be respected.
In conclusion, the position of Equatorial Guinea on
the Court is well known. For that reason, any comments
by my country’s delegation with regard to any of the
activities of the International Criminal Court should
never be interpreted as a recognition of its jurisdiction,
which we reject.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): I would like to thank Prosecutor Fatou
Bensouda for her briefing.
We have seen historic developments in the Sudan in
the past few months. It was against that backdrop that in
June, at the previous Council briefing (see S/PV.8554)
on the situation in Darfur by the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), my delegation
called for opening a new chapter in the history of the
relations between the ICC and the Sudan. We should
welcome the latest encouraging developments. In
his statement here in New York during the General
Assembly’s high-level week (see A/74/PV.10), Prime
Minister Hamdok included among his priorities respect
for human rights, the strengthening of the rule of law
and the development of transitional justice processes.
In addition, several of the suspects subject to arrest
warrants issued by the ICC have been arrested and
are now under investigation, and the Sudan’s former
President, Omer Al-Bashir, has just been convicted
of financial crimes. However, we note that there is no
indication that the investigations concern the crimes for
which the suspects in question are wanted by the ICC.
Belgium continues to believe that the transitional
Government has a unique opportunity to finally render
justice for the victims. As the Prosecutor just noted,
in accordance with the principle of complementarity
enshrined in the Rome Statute, there are two options
available to the Sudanese authorities in complying with
their international obligations. They can decide either
8/16

18/12/2019

that they will prosecute the five suspects themselves
or that they are unable to do so and must therefore
take the necessary measures to arrest and transfer the
individuals concerned to the Court.
In the immediate term, we call on the transitional
Government to respond positively to the request for
cooperation from the Office of the Prosecutor. The
aim is to initiate a dialogue to ensure that a judicial
process can take place effectively, whether in The
Hague or in the Sudan with the support of the ICC, if
necessary. In addition, the Sudanese authorities should
facilitate the access of the Office of the Prosecutor to
their territory to enable it to contact key witnesses and
collect additional evidence. We should point out that in
accordance with Council resolution 1593 (2005) and as
confirmed by the Court’s Appeals Chamber in May, the
Sudan is still obliged to cooperate fully with the ICC
and its Prosecutor.
In our view, the situations in Darfur and in the
rest of the Sudan are inextricably linked. We deplore
the persistence of violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law, especially sexual and
gender-based violence and violence against children.
Given the current context, the Council’s support for the
Court, which still has jurisdiction over the most serious
crimes committed in Darfur since 1 July 2002, is more
essential than ever. The calls from the people and civil
society of Darfur for justice for the victims of the
crimes committed there have increased greatly since the
transition began. They are full of hope, and we cannot
ignore the fact that justice will be an indispensable part
of any lasting peace solution in Darfur, as in the rest of
the Sudan.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would first of all like to note that the
signing of the Interim Constitutional Declaration has
been an important step on the path to stabilizing the
situation in the Sudan over the long term. We want
to point to the mediation efforts of Ethiopia and the
African Union in the negotiation process, which
were a practical embodiment of the notion of African
solutions to African problems. However, we must give
due credit to the people of the Sudan themselves, who
were able to overcome their differences and reach
agreement against a backdrop of unrelenting external
pressure whose purpose was not to help the parties
get down to negotiations but merely to manipulate
the political landscape in Khartoum to suit their own
narrow interests.
19-42006

18/12/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

With regard to the state of affairs in Darfur, we
are seeing a noticeable improvement in the security
situation and a certain degree of normalization on the
humanitarian front. The general dynamics have not
changed in the areas that the Blue Helmets had already
withdrawn from. And most importantly, no negative
security trends have emerged. The sporadic clashes in
the Jebel Marra region between Government forces and
the Sudan Liberation Movement/Abdul Wahid group,
which is still the main spoiler for the peace process,
do not change that assessment. In that connection,
we believe it will be essential to continue with the
phased drawdown and withdrawal of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur. We
hope that a dialogue with the Sudanese authorities will
help to create the right conditions and determine the
parameters for subsequent international support to the
peace process in Darfur. The challenges that Darfur
is now facing are related to peacebuilding rather than
peacekeeping. The time has come to concentrate on
Darfur state’s restoration and economic development,
and that should be the priority now.
As for the activities of the International Criminal
Court regarding Darfur, we have read Prosecutor
Bensouda’s most recent report. Just as before, we
have seen no progress in its work and our views and
approaches therefore remain unchanged.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, I would like
to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda for her very comprehensive
briefing. My delegation has taken note of the thirtieth
report of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) on the investigation of the situation in
Darfur, submitted pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).
Today I will focus on three issues.
The first is the recent developments in the Sudan.
The security situation in Darfur remains relatively
stable, with few disruptions in the trends that have
emerged since 2016. We have witnessed some
remarkable developments since Ms. Bensouda’s last
briefing in June (see S/PV.8554) that present a real
opportunity for a fair and comprehensive peace in
Darfur. A transitional Government is now in place
and has taken significant steps to secure peace in
Darfur. We are encouraged by the ongoing peace
talks, which for the first time in the modern history
of the Sudan involve almost all of the armed groups
in the country. Indonesia supported the adoption in
October of resolution 2495 (2019), which renewed the
mandate of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid

S/PV. 8691

Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) for 12 months, in line
with the request of the Prime Minister of the Sudan.
We fully endorse the focus of UNAMID’s mandate on
supporting the peace process and the implementation
of any peace agreement. Those gains should serve as a
stepping-stone to further tangible progress, including
sustainable peace and socioeconomic recovery.
Secondly, concerning the many persistent
challenges on the ground, several conflict drivers
remain to be addressed. Internally displaced persons
(IDPs) are confronted by security challenges and a
lack of access to land and economic opportunities.
My delegation consistently stresses the imperative for
the full protection of civilians and the observance of
international humanitarian law. We remain concerned
about incidents that have had an impact on human
rights and the protection situation that continue to
occur across Darfur and target the most vulnerable,
including IDPs, women and children. We extend our
deepest sympathies to the victims and to the people
of the Sudan who have been impacted by the conflict
in their country. There is an urgent need to uphold
accountability and ensure that the Sudanese regain their
confidence in law enforcement and judicial institutions.
That brings me to my third point, namely, the
proceedings of the ICC. Efforts to pursue justice
must be part of the wider efforts to achieve peace in
Darfur. While peace cannot be complete or sustainable
without justice, justice cannot prosper in the absence
of peace. The Security Council has a responsibility to
ensure that the Sudan complies with the provisions of
resolution 1593 (2005). At the same time, according to
the Rome Statute, the role of the ICC is complementary
to national criminal jurisdiction. My delegation
believes that the referral of the situation in Darfur
should neither nullify the principle of complementarity
or prevent the Sudanese national court from invoking
its jurisdiction. While calling on the Sudan to take up
those responsibilities promptly and properly, we must
also empower the Sudan’s judicial authority to exercise
its sovereignty, including through adequate capacitybuilding in the justice system.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the holding of this meeting on the
report of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) on the situation in Darfur, held pursuant
to resolution 1593 (2005), and commends Prosecutor
Fatou Bensouda on her very detailed briefing.

19-420069/16

S/PV.8691

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Côte d’Ivoire notes with satisfaction the political
changes that have taken place in the Sudan over the
past months and their positive impact on the entire
country, including in the Darfur region. Accordingly,
my delegation commends the efforts of the Sudanese
Prime Minister, Mr. Abdalla Hamdok, in pursuing
peace and stability for the Sudanese people, in general,
and for the people of Darfur, in particular. My country
also welcomes the mediation and support initiatives of
the countries of the region, the African Union and the
United Nations to lead the Sudanese parties towards
reaching a political solution to this conflict, which has
claimed many victims.
Despite the progress made, the situation in Darfur
remains precarious, as demonstrated by sporadic
clashes between Government forces and elements of the
Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid faction in Jebel
Marra and the persistence of criminal activity in the
region. My delegation also remains concerned about
recurrent allegations of human rights violations and
sexual and gender-based violence against the people. It
is therefore important that urgently needed measures be
taken to ensure full protection for civilians and respect
for human rights and basic freedoms.
Given our firm commitment to respect human
rights and based on our own experience, Côte d’Ivoire
reaffirms that the fight against impunity and the
principle of accountability are imperative to achieving
genuine national reconciliation and the establishment
of lasting peace in Darfur. Côte d’Ivoire therefore
commends the laudable activities of the Office of the
Prosecutor in promoting justice and the fight against
impunity for crimes committed in Darfur. My country
also welcomes the commitment and determination of
the Sudanese authorities to effectively respond to the
justice needs of the victims of the crisis. In that regard,
Côte d’Ivoire urges the Court to support their efforts in
the implementation of resolution 1593 (2005).
My country calls for frank cooperation between the
Court and the new Sudanese authorities through joint
measures to promote accountability and strengthen
national judicial institutions. My delegation is of the
view the that the Sudan needs multifaceted support more
than ever in order to prevent any recurrence of conflict.
The success of the political process and peacebuilding
will be achieved only through the involvement of all
subregional, regional and international actors.
10/16

18/12/2019

In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its call for
constructive cooperation among the ICC and the States
and actors involved in the process of resolving the
crisis in Darfur. My country reiterates its full support
for the Prosecutor and her Office in their commitment
to promoting justice.
Ms. Alsabah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC). We take note of her briefing on
her Office’s thirtieth report on the Sudan.
The Sudan has entered a new era of freedom, peace
and justice. Darfur, which has emerged from conflict
and has begun a new phase of peacebuilding, is an
integral part of the Sudan. That is why the Security
Council must take into account the new changes and
developments on the ground, especially as the peace
process involving the Sudanese parties continues on
the path towards achieving peace. Justice must also
be the result of an agreement among the Sudanese
themselves and based on their national laws in the first
place. Accordingly, we hope that the proceedings of
the ICC will not hinder the efforts to achieve peace in
the Sudan.
We also hope that the Sudanese people will be
allowed to move forward on the transition process
and promote stability and security in the Sudan in a
manner that meets the aspirations of the brotherly
Sudanese people.
The ICC judgement against the former President of
the Sudan, Mr. Omer Al-Bashir, has not been endorsed
by international organizations of which the Sudan is a
member, such as the League of Arab states, the African
Union and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
Those organizations are part of the international and
regional partnerships with the United Nations in line
with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
As our term on the Security Council is coming to an
end, and as the Council’s only Arab member, the State
of Kuwait recalls decision 514 adopted by the League of
Arab States at its twenty-second Summit held in Sirte
in 2010. The decision represents the position of Arab
States on the proceedings of the ICC. The decision
also rejects any attempt to politicize the principles of
international justice or exploit them to undermine the
sovereignty, unity or stability of other States.
In conclusion, as this is our last discussion of
this issue for this year, we reiterate our commitment
19-42006

18/12/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

to respecting the principles of the Charter, including
those calling for respect for the sovereignty of States.
We stress the importance of respecting the sovereignty
and independence of the Sudan.
Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful for the convening of this meeting and the
informative briefing by Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda.
Peru welcomes the political developments that have
taken place in the Sudan since the 17 August political
agreement aimed at the establishment of a civilianled transitional Government. We also welcome the
signing of the constitutional declaration and the Juba
Declaration for Confidence-building Procedures and
the Preparation for Negotiation, and the opening of the
country to humanitarian access. Also important are the
efforts of the Sovereign Council and the Government
to bring to the negotiation table armed groups that are
not yet party to those agreements, in particular the
Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid faction, which
continues to pose a security challenge, especially to
the civilian population and humanitarian personnel in
the Jebel Marra area, and whose actions are leading to
newly internally displaced persons.
We are also pleased that the new Sudanese
authorities have visited Darfur and expressed their
willingness to consolidate peace in that region, which
includes meeting the demands of victims for justice and
developing a constructive relationship of cooperation
with the International Criminal Court. In line with the
principle of complementarity, that involves allowing
the Court to fulfil its primary responsibility, which is to
prevent the most serious crimes from going unpunished.
In particular, we must ensure that the crimes of which
former President Omer Al-Bashir is accused, as well as
those of other suspects with a current arrest warrant,
are held to account.
Similarly, it will be necessary for the Sudanese
authorities — as well as all States — to spare no effort
to comply with the obligation to detain and hand over
fugitives suspected of crimes against humanity, war
crimes and genocide. Moreover, it will be important
for the International Criminal Court to cooperate with
the Sudanese Government to pursue those goals. In
that context, we wish to reiterate our support for the
important work of the Prosecutor of the Court and her
team. We encourage her to continue her efforts to fulfil
her mandate and uphold the values of the Rome Statute.

S/PV. 8691

We believe it is necessary to reaffirm the need for
States, including members of the Security Council,
to cooperate with the International Criminal Court
and its Prosecutor to achieve justice for the crimes
perpetrated in Darfur. It is our conviction that the
primary responsibility of the Council to maintain
international peace and security and the competency
of the Court over the most serious crimes must be
understood as complementary and interdependent
tasks. That constitutes a commitment that we made to
universal jurisdiction and to the victims of the atrocities
committed in Darfur.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, I wish to thank
Prosecutor Bensouda for her comprehensive report on
the situation in the Sudan, particularly with regard to
jurisdiction over very serious crimes, atrocities and
human rights violations that have been committed
in Darfur.
Germany witnesses with much respect the
promising yet fragile political developments in the
Sudan. We will continue to support the Sudan on its
path to a truly civilian Government, formed on the
basis of free elections, in order to fulfil the democratic
aspirations of the Sudanese people. The democratic
aspirations of the Sudanese people necessarily include
Sudanese-led transitional justice, which is why we
look forward to learning more about the transitional
Government’s ideas on transitional justice
Good governance, the rule of law, respect for
human rights and free elections are key factors on the
way to achieving lasting peace and stability. We also
know that reconciliation is fundamental to that end, but
that it can happen only when those who are responsible
for atrocities, especially in the Darfur conflict, are
held accountable and prosecuted. Germany therefore
encourages the authorities in the Sudan to ensure
accountability and make headway towards the future
by addressing the past. Ending impunity for the most
serious crimes is critical for preventing further grave
crimes and constitutes the foundation of a peaceful
and prosperous future for the country. We concur with
the Prosecutor that accountability for crimes under
the Rome Statute and full respect for the rule of law
and human rights are indispensable prerequisites
for sustainable peace, stability and development in
the Sudan.
In line with the principle of complementarity, it
is the primary responsibility of the territorial states

19-4200611/16

S/PV.8691

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

to investigate and prosecute crimes under the Rome
Statute. In that vein, we have taken good note of the
statement issued by the Sudan’s Public Prosecutor, as
reported by Prosecutor Bensouda, shortly after the
verdict on Mr. Al-Bashir, which indicated that a number
of other cases are pending against him, including in
relation to the 1989 coup d’état that brought him to
power and to crimes against humanity in Darfur.
However, if justice for crimes under international
criminal law are not part of the national jurisdiction,
the Sudan should cooperate with the United Nations and
the International Criminal Court (ICC) in the interest
of ensuring accountability. Germany strongly supports
the ICC with regard to its investigations concerning all
serious crimes committed since 2005. Those crimes
cannot go unpunished.
We have also taken good note of the Prosecutor’s
statement regarding the confirmation by the
representative of the Sudan that investigations by the
Sudanese Public Prosecutor were ongoing in relation
to Mr. Al-Bashir, Mr. Abdel Raheem Hussein and
Mr. Ahmad Harun. All are believed to be in detention in
Khartoum. In our view, it is crucial that they eventually
face justice with regard to their responsibilities for the
situation in Darfur, not only on charges of corruption
but for events that took place over the past years.
We call on all United Nations States Members, in
particular those on the Security Council, to keep up
their support for the Court in order to end impunity.
We also call on those States that have not yet joined the
Rome Statute to consider doing so.
Mr. Molefe (South Africa): At the outset, allow me
to thank the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her comprehensive
briefing on the situation in the Sudan. South Africa
continues to support the full implementation of
resolution 1593 (2005), which referred the situation in
Darfur to the ICC Prosecutor to investigate war crimes
and crimes against humanity.
South Africa welcomes the report of the Prosecutor
and continues to call for the ICC to conduct effective
and fair prosecutions in accordance with its mandate. At
the same time, we continue to underscore the principle
of complementarity, which underpins the framework
of the Rome Statute, with States bearing the primary
responsibility to investigate and prosecute crimes.
12/16

18/12/2019

South Africa welcomed the agreement signed
on 17 August between the Forces for Freedom and
Change and the Transitional Military Council in
the Sudan on the establishment of a new civilian-led
transitional Government and transitional institutions.
We furthermore welcome the inauguration of the Prime
Minister and the Sovereign Council on 21 August. We
underscore that those are important steps to deliver
peace and security for the people of the Sudan. South
Africa welcomes the vital mediation role undertaken by
the African Union and Ethiopia, as well as the support
extended by the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, the United Nations, the League of Arab
States and others in the international community.
We are deeply concerned about the continuing
violence and loss of life in Darfur, as indicated by
the Prosecutor in her report. South Africa deplores
the fact that violence has been directed at civilians in
particular. What is of particular concern is that women
and children remain the most vulnerable and affected
by sexual violence, which continues to be a weapon of
war in Darfur. South Africa calls on the military and
security forces to ensure the full protection of civilians
and respect for human rights and freedoms in Darfur.
We urge all stakeholders in the Sudan to engage
in constructive dialogue in order to restore peace and
stability in the country. In that regard, the support of
all stakeholders within the international community
remains vital, which is also vital for regional stability.
Mr. Lewicki (Poland): As this is the last time we
take the floor as a member of the Security Council while
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
is in the Chamber, let me reiterate Poland’s continued
and unwavering support for her and her Office. Both
the Office of Prosecutor and the ICC continue to
play a crucial role in fighting impunity and ensuring
accountability. In that connection, their work lies at the
heart of the Security Council’s mandate, because there
can be no sustainable peace without justice.
As the Prosecutor said, the new Sudanese authorities
have an opportunity to demonstrate their commitment
to international law and respect for human rights by
complying with their international obligations under
resolution 1593 (2005). That is why we encourage the
new authorities of the Sudan to fully cooperate with
the Office of the Prosecutor and because, as I have just
mentioned, it would be extremely difficult to achieve
19-42006

18/12/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the long-term peace and well-being of the Sudanese
people without providing them with justice.
Poland takes note of the reported investigation
and prosecution in the Sudan of some of the suspects
in the Darfur situation. We also acknowledge that the
Sudan has the primary responsibility to investigate
and prosecute those suspects. However, we also note,
as did the Prosecutor, that reportedly there is currently
no information indicating that any of the ICC suspects
are subject to domestic investigation or prosecution in
the Sudan for the crimes alleged in the relevant ICC
arrest warrants. Therefore, we concur that the Court’s
warrants for all five suspects in the Darfur situation
should remain in force and, that as a court of last resort
where the Sudan will not or cannot deliver genuine
justice for the victims in Darfur, the ICC must be given
the support it needs, including the arrest and surrender
of suspects to ensure fair and effective prosecutions,
consistent with its mandate.
We note that in recent months there have been a
number of positive developments in relation to the
Darfur situation. The signing of the Juba Declaration for
Confidence-building Procedures and the Preparation
for Negotiation and the subsequent agreement of the
parties on, inter alia, a ceasefire and the opening of
humanitarian access to areas of ongoing conflict in
the Sudan, including in Darfur, merit recognition.
The same goes for the reported meetings of Prime
Minister Hamdok with Mr. Abdul Wahid Al-Nour and
the Prime Minister’s visit to Darfur, including camps
for internally displaced persons (IDPs). We greatly
appreciate that those steps were taken.
However, the overall security situation in Darfur
has remained volatile and, regrettably, clashes have
reportedly continued in the Jebel Marra area between
Government forces and the Sudan Liberation ArmyAbdul Wahid, which has not joined the peace talks
process so far. We are seriously concerned by the
reported increase of criminality in Darfur, including
against women and children, particularly in IDP camps,
and violence against those who attempt to return to their
area of origin in that region. The still high number of
IDPs is also concerning. We reiterate our condemnation
of the targeting of the civilian population, especially
those most vulnerable, and note the critical mandate of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur in Darfur, which includes the protection of
civilians and reporting on human rights abuses. We call
again on parties to the conflict in Darfur to stop the

S/PV. 8691

hostilities and violence, fully respect international law,
including international humanitarian law and human
rights law, as well as the relevant Security Council
resolutions. As we have reiterated on a number of
occasions, respect for international humanitarian law
and human rights law is not a matter of choice but one
of international legal obligations,
Poland shares the hope that the Sudan’s new
authorities will pursue peace and justice and open
a new chapter of cooperation with the ICC and the
Office of the Prosecutor. We reiterate the call on all
to provide full support to the Sudan’s authorities, the
Office of the Prosecutor and all other stakeholders
that work on ensuring peace and accountability for the
crimes committed in Darfur. The Sudanese people, and
in particular Darfur’s victims and witnesses, to whom
we pay tribute, deserve nothing less than our solidarity,
responsibility and commitment.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
I thank the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) for her briefing. Today’s briefing
provides an important opportunity to recognize the
positive developments in the Sudan over the past
months, including efforts to begin to forge a just and
comprehensive peace and address long-standing human
rights concerns in the Sudan.
When we met with the Prosecutor on this item
in June (see S/PV.8554), we were concerned about
security force excesses against peaceful protesters and
were unsure what path the Sudan’s transition would
take. We are pleased to gather today, eight months after
the ouster of Omar Al-Bashir, for the first briefing
since the establishment of a civilian-led transitional
Government. We have been encouraged by concrete
steps parties in the Sudan have taken to build a more
stable, secure and human rights-respecting future. The
formation of the civilian-led transitional Government
this summer, the signing of the Juba Declaration for
Confidence-building Procedures and the Preparation
for Negotiation in September and ongoing negotiations
between the Government and armed opposition forces
have increased the prospects for an enduring peace
across the Sudan. We have also been pleased to see
the appointment of women to key leadership positions,
including the first female Chief Justice of the Sudan.
Ensuring the inclusion and participation of women in all
branches of Government is vital for the Sudan’s future.

19-4200613/16

S/PV.8691

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The ouster of Omar Al-Bashir — a symbol
of genocide, crimes against humanity and other
atrocities — has both tangible and symbolic implications.
It means that he can no longer engineer horrific crimes
against his own people, but it also signals to the Sudan’s
victims that power cannot be secured indefinitely
through violence. The United States was honoured to
host Prime Minister Hamdok in Washington, D.C., in
early December — the first Sudanese Head of State
to visit Washington in over three decades. During
the visit, the United States announced the decision to
elevate our diplomatic representation in Khartoum and
pursue an exchange of ambassadors with the Sudan.
Secretary Pompeo explained the decision by stating
that the Prime Minister’s Government had
“demonstrated a commitment to peace negotiations
with armed opposition groups, established a
commission of inquiry to investigate violence
against protesters and committed to holding
democratic elections”.
The constitutional declaration makes justice
a centrepiece of the transition, committing to
accountability for crimes against the Sudanese people
since the start of the Al-Bashir regime, developing the
justice system and promoting legal reform to ensure
equality for all regardless of gender, religion or ethnicity.
We have seen positive signals that the Prime Minister
and his Government will not overlook Darfur’s victims.
The Prime Minister’s visit on 4 November to Darfur,
including to an internally displaced persons camp, sent
a powerful signal to both victims and perpetrators of
past violence. We urge the Government to make good
on its promises and address the root causes of conflict
in order to create the conditions that will allow people
to return home.
There are few in the Sudan more deserving of facing
justice than Omar Al-Bashir. While we are encouraged
by his conviction on 14 December, we note that the
charges were narrowly focused on corruption and
money-laundering. As we have said for over a decade,
there will be no lasting peace in the Sudan unless there
is genuine accountability for all of the crimes that have
been committed against the Sudanese people. To date,
no one has been held accountable for the deaths of
almost 300,000 people in Darfur, the rampant sexual
violence or the looting and burning of homes. Those
most responsible for the crimes suffered in the conflicts
in Darfur and the two areas should be held accountable
for their actions, including by ensuring that they have
14/16

18/12/2019

no power to hijack the Sudan’s future. The United States
is deeply committed to supporting Sudanese efforts to
ensure justice and encourage open inclusive national
dialogues about how transitional justice mechanisms
can facilitate truth, justice, reconciliation and healing.
While we support justice for past abuses, we are
concerned by reports of ongoing violence. Fighting
between security forces and the Sudan Liberation
Army-Abdul Wahid in the northern Jebel Marra area
has displaced more than 2,000 people and sexual
violence remains a grim reality for many. The violence
and abuses are symptoms of unresolved challenges
facing the Sudan, including weak political and judicial
systems that have failed to ensure accountability on
all levels, as well as the absence of a durable peace
agreement in Darfur. We are committed to supporting
the Sudan in those endeavours. The United States
has historically been and will continue to be a strong
supporter of meaningful accountability and justice for
victims of atrocities through appropriate mechanisms.
Perpetrators of atrocity crimes must face justice, but
we must also be careful to recognize the right tool for
each situation.
Finally, I must reiterate our long-standing and
principled objection to any assertion of ICC jurisdiction
over nationals of States that are not party to the Rome
Statute, absent a Security Council referral or the consent
of such States. Our concerns regarding the ICC and the
situation in Afghanistan are well known. However, our
position on the ICC in no way diminishes the United
States commitment to supporting accountability for
atrocity crimes, violations of international humanitarian
law and gross violations of human rights.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Siddig (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Since
December 2018, the Sudan has seen significant positive
developments that have created a new political reality
that will undoubtedly lead to a system rooted in
freedom justice and the rule of law. We have launched a
serious process to lay the solid foundations of a civilian
and democratic Government, led by the people and
subject to law and justice. In this new reality, there is no
place for impunity. Accountability is its cornerstone,
prosecution and legal recourse rulings are protected and
enforced, and its boundaries are freedoms that respect
human rights. It will be a reality where children are
19-42006

18/12/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

taken care of and protected, women are empowered and
dealt with on equal footing, young people are heard,
and old people and people with disabilities are attended
to and provided for. There will be full equality based on
citizenship as a basis for rights and duties. Under this
new reality, priority will be given to persons affected
by war and conflict, whether martyred, killed, injured,
disappeared, displaced or refugees.
Tomorrow, 19 December, will mark the first
anniversary of the Sudanese revolution against
injustice, persecution and dictatorship in favour of
freedom, justice and a life of dignity. The fire of the
revolution continues to burn, demanding peace, freedom
and justice rooted in fighting impunity, ensuring
accountability and providing justice to victims
The people of Darfur have suffered in the past,
especially under the former regime. Under that regime,
Darfur saw infighting, destruction, death, strife
and conspiracies. People in Darfur were powerless,
their rights violated, their resources depleted and
their purported will fabricated. They were forced to
become emigrants, refugees and internally displaced
persons (IDPs). Many of them continue to suffer
marginalization and underdevelopment in all forms,
including poverty, hunger and disease. That is why
the transitional Government has placed Darfur and its
people at the top of its priorities during the transitional
period. We have undertaken to achieve comprehensive,
just and lasting peace by ensuring the voluntary return
of IDPs, resolving land disputes and enforcing the goals
of the revolution: justice and accountability.
Dialogue towards lasting peace has already started.
On 11 September, the Sovereign Council and the coalition
of armed groups across the Sudan, including Darfur,
signed the Juba Declaration for Confidence-building
Procedures and the Preparation for Negotiation. The
Declaration sets a comprehensive road map to settle the
dispute across the Sudan, culminating in lasting peace
agreements. Since 10 December, direct negotiations
between the two parties have started in Juba to end
the war in Darfur and South Kordofan and Blue Nile
states. The Juba Declaration has been extended for an
additional two months, to 15 February 2020, as a clear
sign that the negotiating teams of the Government and
the armed groups are serious and honest about reaching
a peace agreement that would end the long war and
the armed conflict and be followed by meeting the
aspirations of the Sudanese people as soon as possible.

S/PV. 8691

His Excellency Prime Minister Abdalla Hamdok
started a tour of neighbouring countries seeking peace,
beginning with Juba, followed by Egypt and Eritrea.
Yesterday, he visited Chad and met with the leaders
of the armed resistance to include a larger number
of stakeholders from Darfur in the peace process.
His Excellency has also held several meetings with
most leaders of the armed opposition over the past 14
months, including Abdul Wahid Mohamed Al-Nour
in Paris. On 4 November, His Excellency also visited
some IDP camps in Darfur, where he listened to the
people and promised a new era of lasting peace, justice
and dignified living and prosperity.
The Sudanese judiciary completed its proceedings
against former President Mr. Omar Al-Bashir, who has
been held in Kobar prison since 11 April. Regarding
the first charge of corruption against him, the court
sentenced Mr. Al-Bashir on December 14 to two years’
incarceration at a social rehabilitation centre within the
prison where he is being held, following a trial that started
in August. The deposed President has been convicted of
illegal self-enrichment and foreign exchange dealings.
According to a 14 December statement by the Public
Prosecutor, this is only the first case against the former
President and will be followed by other cases under
article 130 of the Sudanese Criminal Code — homicide
and other charges related to crimes against humanity
and undermining of the constitutional order. The public
prosecution is currently interrogating him and the
remaining detainees, Mr. Abdel Rahim Mohammed
Hussein and Mr. Ahmad Haroun in cases related to
the 1989 coup against the civilian Government and
other crimes.
There are at least five other cases currently
under investigation, most importantly those related to
crimes committed against our people in the state of
Darfur, which are a top priority for the Government’s
transitional justice programme. There is no lasting
peace without justice. Providing justice to victims
is not a mere slogan; it must be followed by concrete
and informed measures that would satisfy the victims
and those affected. The transitional Government has
the responsibility to fight impunity through credible
national measures. Failure to combat impunity would
embolden those people to commit further violations
and encourage others to believe that they will not
be punished. We recall that our Government of the
revolution has appointed a qualified judge as the first

19-4200615/16

S/PV.8691

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

woman Chief Justice in the Sudan. This is a first, not
only in the Sudan, but also in the region.
We are satisfied that the report presented by
Ms. Bensouda has recognized the gradual progress and
improvements in Darfur. The various reports issued by
the Peace and Security Council of the African Union
and the Secretary-General of the United Nations
have called for a continued drawdown of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), in accordance with the same schedule, and
for a transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding and
achieving stability in Darfur. Demonstrating that the
Sudanese Government is serious about peace in Darfur,
we have asked to for an extension of the UNAMID
mandate for an additional year. That will provide more
time to arrange the situation on the ground and to give
the peace file further attention, while addressing the
root causes of the problem in order to provide justice to
victims, martyrs, missing persons, internally displaced
persons and refugees, including issues related to land.
Following the success of the December revolution,
the Sudan is opening a new chapter of cooperation and
coordination with the international community on this
important matter. My country is making tremendous

16/16

18/12/2019

efforts to improve the human rights situation in the
Sudan, which on 25 September culminated in the signing
of an agreement to inaugurate an Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in the
capital, as well as field offices in the states of Darfur,
Blue Nile and South Kordofan states and eastern Sudan.
This is in line with the constitutional declaration that
established the transitional Government and with the
aspirations of the Sudanese people to a new, modern
and democratic national State rooted in human rights.
In closing, we stress that fighting impunity is a
noble goal of justice and is not a point of contention.
It represents, as we said, one of the most important
priorities for the December revolution and one of the
elements necessary to achieving peace in the Sudan. It
is first and foremost the responsibility of the competent
domestic and national legal authorities. The transitional
Government is fully convinced of the need to fight
impunity and committed to it. We have launched
serious efforts to settle this issue once and for all in a
manner that will satisfy the Sudanese people, especially
the victims of Darfur. We will not allow any person to
escape punishment and accountability.
The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m.

19-42006
