IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

4. Also requests the Secretary-General to include the
views received from Member States in accordance with
paragraph 3 of the present resolution in a report to be sub­
mitted to the General Assembly at its forty-fifth session;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-fifth session the item entitled "Draft Code of Crimes
against the Peace and Security of Mankind", to be consid­
ered in conjunction with the examination of the report of
the Commission.
72nd plenary meeting
4 December 1989
44/33. Report of the United Nations Commission on In­
ternational Trade Law on the work of its twenty­
second session
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December
1966, by which it created the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law with a mandate to further the
progressive harmonization and unification of the law of in­
ternational trade and in that respect to bear in mind the in­
terests of all peoples, in particular those of developing
countries, in the extensive development of international
trade, as well as its resolution 43/166 of 9 December 1988,
Reaffirming its conviction that the progressive harmoni­
zation and unification of international trade law, in reduc­
ing or removing legal obstacles to the flow of international
trade, especially those affecting the developing countries,
would significantly contribute to universal economic co­
operation among all States on a basis of equality, equity
and common interest and to the elimination of discrimina­
tion in international trade and, thereby, to the well-being
of all peoples,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law on the work of
its twenty-second session,30
Noting that the Commission adopted a draft convention
on the liability of operators of transport terminals in inter­
national trade31 and recommended in the decision in para­
graph 225 of its report that the General Assembly should
convene an international conference of plenipotentiaries
for a duration of three weeks in 1991 to conclude, on the
basis of the draft convention, a convention on the liability
of operators of transport terminals in international trade,
Recognizing the need for the Commission to have ade­
quate sources of funding for its programme of training and
assistance in international trade law,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
on the work of its twenty-second session;
2. Reaffirms the mandate of the Commission, as the
core legal body within the United Nations system in the
field of international trade law, to co-ordinate legal activi­
ties in this field in order to avoid duplication of effort and
to promote efficiency, consistency and coherence in the
unification and harmonization of international trade law
and, in this connection, recommends that the Commis­
sion, through its secretariat, should continue to maintain
close co-operation with the other international organs and
organizations, including regional organizations, active in
the field of international trade law;
30 Ibid., Forty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/44/17).
31 Ibid., annex I.

-

--

-

305

3. Calls upon the Commission to continue to take ac­
count of the relevant provisions of the resolutions con­
cerning the new international economic order, as adopted
by the General Assembly at its sixth 3 2 and seventh 33 spe­
cial sessions;
4. Expresses its appreciation to the Commission for the
valuable work done in preparing a draft convention on the
liability of operators of transport terminals in interna­
tional trade;
5. Decides that an international conference of plenipo­
tentiaries shall be convened at Vienna from 2 to 19 April
1991 to consider the draft convention prepared by the
Commission and to embody the results of its work in a
convention on the liability of operators of transport termi­
nals in international trade;
6. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To invite all States to participate in the conference;
(b) To invite representatives of organizations that have
received a standing invitation from the General Assembly
to participate in the sessions and the work of all interna­
tional conferences convened under its auspices in the
capacity of observers to participate in the conference in
that capacity, in accordance with Assembly resolutions
3237 (XXIX) of 22 November 1974 and 31/152 of
20 December 1976;
(c) To invite representatives of the national liberation
movements recognized by the Organization of African
Unity in its region to participate in the conference in the
capacity of observers in accordance with General Assem­
bly resolution 3280 (XXIX) of 10 December 1974;
(d) To invite the specialized agencies and the Interna­
tional Atomic Energy Agency, as well as interested organs
of the United Nations and interested international organi­
zations, to be represented at the conference by observers;
7. Reaffirms the importance, in particular for develop­
ing countries, of the work of the Commission concerned
with training and assistance in the field of international
trade law and the desirability for it to sponsor seminars
and symposia, in particular those organized on a regional
basis, to promote such training and assistance, and, in this
connection:
(a) Expresses its appreciation to the Commission for
organizing the symposium on international trade law held
in conjunction with the twenty-second session of the Com­
mission and to the Governments whose contributions en­
abled the symposium to take place;
(b) Invites Governments, the relevant United Nations
organs, organizations, institutions and individuals to
make voluntary contributions to the United Nations Com­
mission on International Trade Law symposia and, where
appropriate, to the financing of special projects, and other­
wise to assist the secretariat of the Commission in financ­
ing and organizing seminars and symposia, in particular in
developing countries, and in the award of fellowships to
candidates from developing countries to enable them to
participate in such seminars and symposia;
8. Repeats its invitation to those States that have not
yet done so to consider signing, ratifying or acceding to
the c_onventions elaborated under the auspices of the Com­
m1ss10n;
9. Approves the initiative of the Commission34 to have
prepared an official Arabic language version of the Con32 Resolutions 3201 (S-Vl) and 3202 (S-VI)
33 Resolution 33 2 (S-VII).
6
14 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-ji>Urth Ses.,ion,

Supplement No. 1 7 (A/44117), ,·hap. VIII.

General Assembly-Forty-fourth Session

306

vention on the Limitation Period in the International Sale
of Goods, of 14 June 1974, 35 as amended by the Protocol
of 11 April 1980. 36
72nd plenary meeting
4 December 1989
44/34,

International Convention against the Recruit­
ment, Use, Financing and Training of Merce­
naries

The General Assembly,
Considering that the progressive development of inter­
national law and its codification contribute to the im­
plementation of the purposes and principles set forth in
Articles 1 and 2 of the Charter of the United Nations,
Mindful of the need to conclude, under the auspices of
the United Nations, an international convention against
the recruitment, use, financing and training of mercena­
ries,
Recalling its resolution 35/48 of 4 December 1980, by
which it established the Ad Hoc Committee on the Draft­
ing of an International Convention against the Recruit­
ment, Use, Financing and Training ofMercenaries and re­
quested it to elaborate at the earliest possible date an
international convention to prohibit the recruitment, use.
financing and training of mercenaries,
Having considered the draft convention prepared by the
Ad Hoc Committee in pursuance of the above-mentioned
resolution37 and finalized by the Working Group on the
Drafting of an International Convention against the Re­
cruitment, Use, Financing and Training ofMercenaries, 38
which met during the forty-fourth session of the General
Assembly,
Adopts and opens for signature and ratification or for
accession the International Convention against the Re­
cruitment, Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries,
the text of which is annexed to the present resolution.
72nd plenary meeting
4 December 1989
ANNEX
International Convention against the Recruitment, Use,
Financing and Training of Mercenaries
The States Parties to the present Convention,
Reaffirming the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations and in the Declaration on Principles oflnternational
Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,9
Being aware of the recruitment, use, financing and training of merce­
naries for activities which violate principles of international law, such as
those ofsovereign equality, political independence, territorial integrity of
States and self-determination of peoples,
Affirming that the recruitment, use, financing and training of merce­
naries should be considered as offences ofgrave concern to all States and

35 Official Records of the United Nations Conference on Prescription
(Limitation) in the International Sale of Goods, New York, 20 May-14
June 1974 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.74.V.8), p. 101.
36 Official Records of the United Nations Conference on Contracts for
the International Sale of Goods, Vienna, JO March-I I April /980(United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.82.V.5), p. 191.
37 Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-fourth Session,
Supplement No. 43 and corrigendum (A/44/43 and Corr.I), sects. 11.C
and Ill.
38 A/C.6/44/L.9, annex.

that any person committing any ofthes6-0ffences should be either prose­
cuted or extradited,
Convinced of the necessity to develop and enhance international co­
operation among States for the prevention, prosecution and punishment
of such offences,
Expressing concern at new unlawful international activities linking
drug traffickers and mercenaries in the perpetration of violent actions
which undermine the constitutional order of States,
Also convinced that the adoption of a convention against the recruit­
ment, use, financing and training of mercenaries would contribute to the
eradication of these nefarious activities and thereby to the observance of
the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter,
Cognizant that matters not regulated by such a convention continue to
be governed by the rules and principles of international law,
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1
For the purposes nf the present Convention,
A mercenary 1s any person who:

1.

(a) Is specially recruited locally or abroad in order to fight in an
armed conflict;
(b) Is motivated to take part in the hostilities essentially by the desire
for private gain and, in fact, is promised, by or on behalfofa party to the
conflict, material compensation substantially in excess of that promised
or paid to combatants of similar rank and functions in the armed forces
of that party;

(c) Is neither a national ofa party to the conflict nor a resident ofter­
ritory controlled by a party to the conflict;
(d)

Is not a member ofthe armed forces ofa party to the conflict; and

(e) Has not been sent by a State which is not a party to the conflict on
official duty as a member of its armed forces.
A mercenary is also any person who, in any other situation:

2.

(a) Is specially recruited locally or abroad for the purpose of par­
ticipating in a concerted act of violence aimed at:
(i) Overthrowing a Government or otherwise undermining the
constitutional order of a State; or
(ii)

Undermining the territorial integrity of a State;

(b) Is motivated to take part therein essentially by the desire for sig­
nificant private gain and is prompted by the promise or payment of
material compensation;
(c) Is neither a national nor a resident ofthe State against which such
an act is directed;
(d)

Has not been sent by a State on official duty; and

(e) Is not a member of the armed forces ofthe State on whose terri­
tory the act is undertaken.
Article 2
Any person who recruits, uses, finances or trains mercenaries, as de­
fined in article 1 of the present Convention, commits an offence for the
purposes of the Convention.
Article 3
I. A mercenary, as defined in article I of the present Convention,
who participates directly in hostilities or in a concerted act ofviolence, as
the case may be. commits an offence for the purposes ofthe Convention.
2. Nothing in this article limits the scope ofapplication ofarticle 4 of
the present Convention.
Article 4
An offence is committed by any person who:
(a) Attempts to commit one of the offences set forth in the present
Convention;
(b) ls the accomplice of a person who commits or attempts to com­
m,1 any of the offences set forth in the present Convention.
