S/2006/645

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
14 August 2006
Original: English

Letter dated 10 August 2006 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I am writing to you in order to provide an update to members of the Security
Council on major developments which have taken place subsequent to the
finalization of my recent report to the Council on Darfur (S/2006/591), issued on
28 July 2006.
In the past few weeks, there has been an upsurge in violence in the region,
mostly in Northern Darfur and areas near the Chad border, resulting in civilian
deaths and displacement and jeopardizing the ability of humanitarian organizations
to provide life-sustaining assistance to hundreds of thousands of war-affected
people. The violence emanated principally from fighting between Darfur Peace
Agreement signatories and non-signatory groups.
In mid-July the faction of the Sudan Liberation Movement/Army (SLM/A)
loyal to Minni Arkoi Minawi clashed repeatedly with rebel groups that have not
signed the Darfur Peace Agreement, in and near the towns of Birmaza, Muzbat,
Umm Sidir and Donkey Hosh in Northern Darfur. Reports indicate that both sides
suffered high casualties during the course of the fighting. Allegations have also been
made that the Government provided support to Minawi’s forces during the attacks
and that Chadian forces crossed the border to support military action by rebel
groups opposing the Agreement.
Early in July the Minawi faction of the SLM/A also captured Korma town, in
Northern Darfur, which had been aligned with the SLM/A faction loyal to
Abdelwahid al-Nur, who has refused to sign the Darfur Peace Agreement. In the
ensuing weeks, Minawi elements of the SLM/A, often accompanied by armed
tribesmen, looted villages and livestock in the area around Korma and Tawila town,
killing at least 100 civilians in the process.
As a direct result of the unrest in Northern Darfur, during July 2006
approximately 20,000 internally displaced persons sought refuge in camps for the
displaced located north of El Fasher. The new arrivals reported indiscriminate
killings, rape and abduction in their villages.
During the same period there was also fighting in Western Darfur, where
Government forces and rebels clashed in the Jebel Moon area, and in Southern
Darfur, where in one particularly reprehensible incident several hundred militiamen
attacked a group of women collecting shelter materials outside Kalma camp, south
of Nyala, raping 17 of them.

06-46593 (E) 140806

*0646593*

S/2006/645

July was a harrowing month for humanitarian workers in Darfur as well.
According to statistics compiled by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, there were 36 reported attacks on humanitarian operations during the
month, and nine staff members were killed. The attacks included the ambush or
hijacking of 19 vehicles transporting humanitarian assistance personnel or materials.
As a result of the fighting and direct targeting of humanitarian workers, only
50 per cent of the civilians affected by the conflict can be reached by humanitarian
organizations. The rest, some 1.6 million people, are either inaccessible or can be
reached only by putting the lives of aid workers directly at risk. In addition to those
operational blockages, only 43 per cent of the $799 million required for the 2006
humanitarian assistance operation in Darfur has been made available.
In the meantime, there has been some progress in implementation of the
Darfur Peace Agreement, although some deadlines relating to key aspects of the
agreement have been missed. The Government submitted its plan for disarming the
Janjaweed to the African Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS) on 23 June 2006.
In respect of power-sharing, the State assemblies of Northern and Southern
Darfur convened emergency sessions to amend their interim state constitutions to
allow for increased numbers of ministers and assembly members in accordance with
the Darfur Peace Agreement. Minni Arkoi Minawi has been appointed Senior
Assistant to the President, and representatives of his faction of the Sudan Liberation
Movement/Army have met with Government officials in Khartoum to establish joint
committees to address implementation of the Agreement. With regard to the sharing
of wealth, the joint assessment mission called for in the Agreement has been
initiated.
Nevertheless, implementation of the Darfur Peace Agreement is behind
schedule and facing difficulties. Both signatories to the Agreement have violated the
ceasefire arrangements, while non-signatories have violated pre-existing ceasefire
obligations. Basic aspects of mechanisms for implementing the ceasefire are yet to
be clarified, including the relationship between the previous N’Djamena ceasefire
commission and the current ceasefire monitoring mechanisms based on the Darfur
Peace Agreement. While the plan for disarming the Janjaweed has been submitted
by the Government, the Darfur Peace Agreement required the Government to restrict
Janjaweed activity to designated areas by 20 July 2006. The violence of the last six
weeks indicates that this has not yet been achieved.
In relation to power-sharing, a number of critical deadlines have passed. All
senior state and national Government and civil service appointments were to have
been finalized and the parties were to have established the Transitional Darfur
Regional Authority by 15 June 2006. The same deadline had been set for key actions
in the area of wealth-sharing, including the establishment of the Darfur
Reconstruction and Development Fund and the Darfur Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Commission. A later deadline of 15 July 2006 had been set for
establishment of a compensation commission. All the above-mentioned deadlines
have been missed.
In that tremendously difficult environment, AMIS has been making efforts to
fulfil its obligations emanating from the Darfur Peace Agreement, but it continues to
encounter enormous challenges in doing so. The AU mission also faces continued
uncertainty with regard to its funding. Despite a relatively positive result from the

2

06-46593

S/2006/645

Brussels pledging conference of 18 July, information made available by the African
Union Commission indicates that there may not be sufficient funding in place to
support AMIS for the remainder of its current mandate, which expires on
30 September 2006.
As the Council is aware, supporting implementation of the Darfur Peace
Agreement by strengthening AMIS until the transition to a United Nations operation
on 1 January 2007 is the central, two-step proposal of my recent report on Darfur
(S/2006/591). In response to the Government of Sudan’s opposition to that proposal,
the United Nations has engaged it in continuous, intensive consultations to address
whatever concerns it may have. While five such consultations have taken place,
those contacts must now bring about a mutually agreeable solution on the issue.
As part of the process of consultation, I received from President Al-Bashir, on
8 August 2006, a copy of the plan of the Government of Sudan to restore stability
and protect civilians in Darfur. A preliminary review of the document does not
indicate a willingness on the part of the Government of Sudan to agree to a
transition to a United Nations operation in Darfur.
While the Government maintains its firm opposition, the situation on the
ground is deteriorating, and the AU mission’s ability to function for the remainder
of 2006 is being jeopardized by a funding crisis. The Council may wish to give
urgent consideration to the preceding issues in order to ensure that the efforts of the
international community to put an end to the suffering of the people of Darfur can
be brought to a successful conclusion.
I should be grateful if you would bring this letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

06-46593

3
