S/2016/819

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 September 2016
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali
I. Introduction
1.
In its resolution 2295 (2016), the Security Council extended the mandate of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
(MINUSMA) until 30 June 2017 and requested me to report on a quarterly basis on
its implementation, focusing on progress in the implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali and the efforts of MINUSMA to support it.

II. Major political developments
A.

Implementation of the peace agreement
2.
The signatory parties have taken important steps towards the implementation
of the peace agreement, including the conclusion of an arrangement aimed at paving
the way for the establishment of interim administrations. However, significant
challenges remain in advancing political and security measures owing to the
continued mistrust among the signatory parties. Progress in the gradual restoration
of State authority in the north, the cantonment of combatants and the further
integration of armed groups into national security mechanisms remaine d limited.
Political and institutional measures
3.
Referring to the decree on the interim administrations signed on 18 May, the
signatory armed groups suspended their participation in the subcommittee on
political and institutional matters of the Agree ment Monitoring Committee on
20 May. The groups criticized the Government for, inter alia, taking unilateral
decisions on the decree. Subsequently, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Algeria,
Ramtane Lamamra, spearheaded consultations with the Coordinatio n des
mouvements de l’Azawad (CMA) and the Platform to resolve the impasse. On
31 May, CMA and the Platform coalition of armed groups issued a statement in
Algiers, calling for the rapid establishment of interim administrations, and signed a
memorandum of understanding (“protocole d’entente”) to strengthen their
coordination on security, political and administrative matters. On 15 June,
Mahamadou Diagouraga was appointed as the High Representative of the President
for the implementation of the peace agreement. His office replaced the national
committee for the coordination of the implementation of the peace agreement.

16-16502 (E)

300916

*1616502*

S/2016/819

4.
Meanwhile, on 19 June, the Malian parties reached an agreement on the
modalities for the establishment of the interim administrations in t he five northern
regions. The ceremony was attended by the Secretary-General of the Mouvement
national de libération de l’Azawad (MNLA), Bilal Ag Acherif, who travelled to
Bamako for the first time in six years. Algeria and MINUSMA played a major role
in facilitating his visit.
5.
In spite of the above-mentioned progress, during the reporting period, there
was an increase in tensions between CMA and the Platform over the control of
Kidal, which had been latent since the Anéfis talks of October 2015 and the
subsequent entry into Kidal of the Groupe d’autodéfense des Touaregs imghad et
alliés (GATIA), which is part of the Platform, in February 2016. On 6 June, the
Platform denounced what it considered to be an inequitable division of power in
Kidal between CMA and the Platform, to which CMA reacted by stating that CMA
remained in charge of the management of the town. On 14 July, representatives of
CMA and the Platform held discussions in Niamey, at the invitation of the
Government of the Niger, to address outstanding political and security issues
between them. On 17 July, an agreement was reached by the two groups on the joint
management of Kidal and other measures to reduce tensions.
6.
However, on 19 July, shooting erupted between CMA and the Platform in
Kidal, resulting in the deaths of a combatant from each group and a civilian. On
21 July, CMA and the Platform clashed again in Kidal, resulting in the deaths of at
least 14 people and the injuring of 89 others, including both combatants and
civilians. The fighting continued through 22 July. In a statement issued on 21 July,
MINUSMA condemned the violation of the ceasefire, called for an immediate
cessation of hostilities and announced its intention to conduct an investigation as
soon as the security situation permitted. My Special Representative for Mali used
his good offices to engage with the leadership of the armed groups and called for
calm through a message broadcast on the MINUSMA radio station, Radio Mikado.
He also convened a meeting of the international mediation team, who agreed that
the issue should be addressed in the framework of the Agreement Monitoring
Committee.
7.
On 25 July, the Agreement Monitoring Committee held its 10th meeting in
Bamako, with representatives of both CMA and the Platform present. The armed
groups reiterated the need for the urgent establishment of interim administrations
wherever possible. The Government announced that resources had been allocated
for the interim administrations and urged CMA and the Platform to swiftly nomi nate
their candidates for appointment. The parties agreed to, inter alia, adjust the
timeline for the establishment of the interim administrations in the light of the
fighting in Kidal and create an ad hoc committee to accelerate the operationalization
of the Operational Coordination Mechanism and of the mixed patrols starting in the
Gao region. On that same day, my Special Representative facilitated the return of a
GATIA leader from Niamey to Bamako and his subsequent meetings with
government officials in order to appease the tensions in Kidal.
8.
On 30 July, fighting broke out again between CMA and the Platform in the
vicinity of Touzik, approximately 35 kilometres (km) south -east of Kidal, resulting
in five combatants killed on each side, three CMA combatants injured and four
combatants captured by the Platform. The situation escalated further on 9 August,
when fighting erupted once more between CMA and the Platform near Adjlal, 70 km

2/23

16-16502

S/2016/819

north-east of Kidal, and Touzik despite a suspension of hostilities agreed by the
Technical Commission on Security on 2 August. The clash resulted in 7 CMA
combatants killed, 32 others injured and 5 others abducted by GATIA. At least
1 combatant from the Platform was killed and 10 others injured. Both parties issued
press statements on 9 August blaming each other for the resumption of hostilities,
which ended on 10 August.
9.
On 12 August, CMA and the Platform began talks in Bamako under the
auspices of High Representative Diagouraga, in collaboration with my Special
Representative, the Government of Algeria, the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States and the European Union. The talks were aimed
at reaching agreements on: (a) a cessation of hostilities and security arrangements;
(b) peaceful coexistence and inclusivity; and (c) acceleration of the implementation
of the peace agreement. However, no consensus was reached on any of the issues.
As a means to de-escalate tensions, at its meeting held on 25 August, the Technical
Commission on Security decided that the mixed units foreseen for Gao would be
deployed to Kidal and would begin mixed patrols on October. On 16 September,
16 GATIA combatants attacked a CMA checkpoint at In Tachdait, 90 km north -west
of Kidal in the Kidal region, killing at least four CMA combatants. On
18 September, the Platform reportedly took over and occupied a CMA position in
In-Khalil, 110 km north of Tessalit in the Kidal region.
10. During the reporting period, and as requested by the parties, MINUSMA
provided financial and logistical support for tripartite communication campaigns by
Malian stakeholders, to sensitize the public on the interim administrations and the
special security measures, including the mixed patrols, in 10 out of 11 regions, with
the exception of Kidal, given the recurrence of conflict between the parties.
11. Preparations for the upcoming elections have advanced. On 28 June, the
Government announced that the regional and local elections would be held during
the first quarter of 2017, the presidential election in July 2018 and legislative
elections in November 2018. On 4 July, the Government began the review of the
1992 constitution, with technical assistance from MINUSMA. On 10 August, the
Government convened the electoral college for the communal elections, whic h were
first planned for 25 September but subsequently postponed to 20 November. The
mandate of communal authorities had expired in 2014, but had been extended by
several decrees. Following this announcement, opposition parties and a number of
civil society organizations expressed concerns about the challenges facing the
planned elections in the north, given the lack of interim administrations, the weak
presence of State authority, persistent insecurity and the difficulty in including
refugees and displaced persons. To ease tensions, my Special Representative
facilitated meetings between the Government and the opposition parties and
underlined the importance of dialogue, transparency and inclusiveness. On
9 September, the Parliament adopted the new electoral law. The law provides for,
inter alia, a minimum of 30 per cent of female candidates in the lists.
12. On 12 and 13 July, over 500 people, mostly youth, protested in Gao against the
establishment of the interim administrations and the exclusion of non -combatants
from the cantonment and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration processes.
At least 3 individuals were killed and 46 injured during the demonstrations, as a
result of the use of force by the Malian defence and security forces. Other

16-16502

3/23

S/2016/819

demonstrations were held in Bamako, on 14 July and 17 August, and in Timbuktu,
on 17 July.
13. The restoration of State authority in the north continued to face challenges.
Since my most recent report (S/2016/498), there has been a 2 per cent decrease
(from 35 to 33 per cent) in the number of State officials deployed to the northern
regions. During the reporting period, the Governor of Ménaka and Taoudenni took
up his functions, and as at 20 September, the Governors of G ao, Ménaka, Mopti and
Timbuktu were performing their duties in their respective regions, while the
Governor of Taoudenni was based in Timbuktu and the Governor of Kidal had yet to
deploy owing to security challenges. On 20 June, the National Assembly appro ved a
draft law on the supplementary budget and allocated approximately $3.4 million for
the operationalization of State functions in the Ménaka and Taoudenni regions.
MINUSMA implemented rehabilitation projects in the areas of rule of law (justice
and corrections), defence and security, national reconciliation and social cohesion,
as well as logistics in the Ménaka region.
14. In the Gao region, all three prefects and 12 sub -prefects had resumed duties in
the urban centres of Ansongo, Bourem and Gao. In the Ménaka region, one out of
four prefects and four out of nine sub-prefects were present. In the Mopti region,
seven out of eight prefects were in place, whereas only 33 out of 55 sub -prefects
were present. In the Timbuktu region, three out of five prefec ts and 17 out of
31 sub-prefects were deployed. There was no government presence in the regions of
Kidal and Taoudenni.
15. On 18 May, 10 additional commissioners, including two women and five
members of the signatory armed groups, were appointed to the Truth, Justice and
Reconciliation Commission, increasing the number of its commissioners to 25. The
deployment of the Commission’s personnel to the field and opening of its six
regional offices had not yet commenced.
16. On 2 August, MINUSMA supported the organization by the Supreme Islamic
Council of Mali and the Ministry of National Reconciliation of a national forum on
the peace agreement, which brought together religious leaders from all faiths. The
forum urged the Government to ensure that the national conference on
understanding would be as inclusive as possible in order to achieve national
reconciliation.
Defence and security measures
17. The redeployment of the Malian defence and security forces to the northern
regions remained dependent on their ability to acquire equipment and receive
training. MINUSMA and the forces developed a joint plan, in line with the human
rights due diligence policy, for MINUSMA support to the Malian armed forces in
the areas of training, logistics, intelligence and op erational coordination. Moreover,
in support of the redeployment of the Malian police, gendarmerie and National
Guards to the north, the MINUSMA police component strengthened its posture in
the centre and north of Mali through the deployment of a formed po lice unit in Gao
and 25 additional individual police officers in Ansongo (Gao region), Douentza
(Mopti region), Goundam (Timbuktu region) and Ménaka. In strict compliance with
the human rights due diligence policy, MINUSMA conducted seven risk
assessments for support provided to the Malian armed forces, gendarmerie and
police, as well as to the Operational Coordination Mechanism.

4/23

16-16502

S/2016/819

18. On 18 August, a month after the attack on their base in Nampala (as described
in para. 28), the Malian armed forces requested MINUSMA to help upgrade the
protection of their bases, provide air support and conduct joint patrols. In Leré
(Timbuktu region), MINUSMA proposed that the Malian armed forces co -locate
their soldiers in the MINUSMA camp to facilitate their operations and provide
better force protection.
19. Military observers conducted 159 patrols in the Gao, Kidal and Timbuktu
regions and reported violations of the ceasefire in Tabagoud (Timbuktu region) on
27 June, in Atila (Timbuktu region) on 12 July, in Kidal on 21 a nd 22 July and
2 August, and in the vicinity of Adjlal and Touzik on 30 July and 9 and 10 August.
However, no ceasefire violation has been recognized by the Technical Commission
on Security since September 2015. There has been an increase in the establishm ent
of checkpoints and military bases by the signatory armed groups, especially in the
Timbuktu region, where the number of checkpoints increased from 32 to 48.
20. The Malian parties continued to make progress on the issue of interim security
measures. At the meeting of the ad hoc committee to accelerate the
operationalization of the Operational Coordination Mechanism, held on 25 and
26 July, the Government agreed to make equipment, including uniforms and
vehicles, available. On 20 September, at the meeting of the subcommittee on
defence and security matters of the Agreement Monitoring Committee, CMA
designated 200 combatants who would join the first mixed patrol in Gao on
20 October. The combatants were expected to undergo the special disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process.
21. The disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process did not commence
during the reporting period. Progress continued to be made on the building of the
remaining five out of eight cantonment sites in Ber (Timbuktu region), Ilouk,
Tabankort and Tin Fatimata (Gao region) and Tessalit (Kidal region). All locations
are expected to be operational by October. To date, neither CMA nor the Platform
have provided lists of the combatants to begin the cantonment and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes. In partnership with local
non-governmental organizations and the International Organization for Migration
(IOM), MINUSMA is implementing 44 community violence reduction projects
directly reaching 30,000 community members, especially youth, around cantonment
sites. The Trust Fund in Support of Peace and Security in Mali funded a resiliency
programme for women and youth in the Gao, Kidal, Mopti and Timbuktu regions,
reaching more than 1,350 youth. MINUSMA provided technical support to the ad
hoc working group on disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, which
comprised representatives of the Government, CMA, the Platform and the World
Bank and sought to finalize the draft national disarmament, demo bilization and
reintegration programme. On 21 September, CMA provided the lists of nominees for
the national commissions on disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and on
integration, as well as for the National Council for Security Sector Reform.
22. MINUSMA continued to support the Government on security sector reform.
The Mission provided material and technical support for the establishment of the
National Council for Security Sector Reform. However, the Council is not yet
operational. MINUSMA, IOM and Mali’s bilateral partners continued to support the
National Directorate of Border Management in the Ministry of Territorial
Administration in its task of finalizing the review of the national border policy. In

16-16502

5/23

S/2016/819

coordination with the European Union Capacity Building Mission in Mali,
MINUSMA worked closely with the Ministry of Internal Security and Civil
Protection to finalize the internal security programming law. On 9 June, President
Ibrahim Boubacar Keita signed a decree establishing the institutional framework for
security sector reform, which was an important step forward in reviving efforts to
reform and reconstitute the Malian defence and security forces.

B.

Other political developments
23. On 7 July, President Keita reshuffled his cabinet for the fifth time, increasing
the number of ministers from 32 to 34, including 8 women. The new appointments
included a member of CMA and a member of the Platform. On 29 August, President
Keita designated Soumeylou Boubeye Maiga, former Minister of Defence, as the
new Secretary General of the Presidency with the rank of minister. On 3 September,
the Minister of Defence and Veterans was replaced by the Minister of Territorial
Administration. The portfolio of territorial administration was merged with that of
the Minister of Decentralization and Reform of the State.

C.

Regional cooperation
24. On 31 May, my Special Representative for West Africa and the Sahel,
Mohamed Ibn Chambas, visited Mali as part of a tour of the countries of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) aimed at reaffirming the United Nations
engagement at the regional level and discussing the implementation of the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel with the countries concerned and
subregional actors. The Malian authorities called for enhanced coordination of
international efforts in support of the Sahel and support for the G -5 Sahel. On
26 July, the Government launched the activities of the National Committee for the
Coordination of G-5 Sahel Actions in Mali. The Committee’s permanent secretariat
coordinates activities and monitors the implementation of the G -5 Sahel road map,
with a focus on sustainable development and the fight against terrorism and
organized crime. My Special Representative for Mali travelled to the Nig er on
25 July, Algeria on 25 and 26 August and Mauritania on 5 and 6 September to
discuss regional support for Mali and MINUSMA.
25. In July, the United Nations participated, along with other bilateral and
multilateral partners, in an African Union-led technical assessment mission to Mali
to help develop regional options to address terrorism and transnational organized
crime in the Sahelo-Saharan region. The mission made a number of
recommendations to enhance security and stability through political, recon ciliation
and confidence-building initiatives, the enhancement of the capacity of MINUSMA,
the strengthening of Malian security institutions, the reinforcement of existing
regional structures and mechanisms for coordination and cooperation in the area of
security, and the establishment of an intervention force.

III. Major security developments
26. The slow implementation of the peace agreement continued to fuel the volatile
security situation in central and northern Mali, which in turn further obstruc ted

6/23

16-16502

S/2016/819

progress on its implementation. During the reporting period, there were persistent
attacks against the Malian and international forces, the resumption of armed
confrontation between CMA and the Platform and increased intercommunal
violence.

A.

Asymmetric attacks
27. During the reporting period, there was a significant increase in attacks against
the Malian defence and security forces and MINUSMA, with 39 attacks perpetrated
against the Malian forces, 27 attacks against MINUSMA and one attack against a
MINUSMA contractor, compared to nine attacks against the Malian forces and
15 attacks against MINUSMA in the previous reporting period. A total of
13 peacekeepers and five MINUSMA contractors were killed, and 32 peacekeepers
and five MINUSMA contractors injured, compared to six killed (five peacekeepers
and a contractor) and 11 personnel injured in the previous reporting period. A total
of 52 soldiers of the Malian armed forces were killed, and 72 others injured, in
attacks.
28. The attacks have become increasingly frequent, bold and well coordinated. On
19 July, assailants on 18 vehicles and several motorbikes attacked a camp of the
Malian armed forces and checkpoints in Nampala, in the Ségou region, killing
15 soldiers and injuring 34 others. Assailants set fire to the camp and checkpoints
after having looted them. On 31 July, the National Assembly extended the state of
emergency, first declared on 21 November 2015, until 29 March 2017. On 3 August,
Ansar Eddine released a video of five Malian soldiers abducted during the attack.
On 9 and 10 August, the bodies of five soldiers reported missing during the attack
on 7 August on a convoy of the Malian armed forces in Ténenkou (Mopti region)
were found.
29. Meanwhile, on 29 May, five peacekeepers were killed in an attack agai nst a
MINUSMA military convoy 25 km north-west of Mopti. On 31 May, one
peacekeeper was killed and five peacekeepers and eight civilian staff injured in a
complex attack against the Sector East headquarters in Gao. Between 5 and
7 August, MINUSMA vehicles hit roadside bombs on three separate instances, two
near Kidal camp and another 11 km south of Aguelhok, resulting in the death of a
peacekeeper and the injury of five others. Ansar Eddine claimed responsibility for
the attack on 7 August. In addition to complex attacks using rockets, mortars,
improvised explosive devices and mines, two attacks were perpetrated against
MINUSMA using remote controlled explosive devices in the Kidal region. Such
devices had previously been used mostly in the Gao region. The h ighest incidents of
attacks using improvised explosive devices have occurred along the Douentza -Gossi
and Gao-Anéfis axes.
30. The signatory armed groups were also targeted by Al -Qaida in the Islamic
Maghreb in the Timbuktu region. On 21 July, four MNLA co mbatants, including the
spokesperson in Ber (Timbuktu region), were found dead after having been
abducted the previous day. On 29 June, Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb allegedly
killed the local commander of the High Council for the Unity of Azawad, part o f
CMA, in Ber.
31. In May, Malian and French forces launched seven counter -terrorism operations
in the Goundam (Timbuktu region) and Ménaka sectors, resulting in the arrest of

16-16502

7/23

S/2016/819

35 suspected terrorists. On 22 May, Mali and the Niger conducted a joint cross border counter-terrorism operation in Andéramboukane (Ménaka region).
32. In line with its new mandate, MINUSMA adopted a more proactive and robust
operational approach, within the means available. Operation Medica, carried out in
mid-August, was one such example, during which MINUSMA carried out area and
axis control along the main supply routes from Timbuktu to Douentza (Mopti
region) and Gossi (Timbuktu region) with the aim of identifying and arresting
terrorists. MINUSMA also conducted four operations to neutralize threats, targeting
improvised explosive devices, in particular in the Mopti, Kidal and Timbuktu
regions. MINUSMA continued to carry out coordinated patrols with the Malian
armed forces and with French forces.
33. MINUSMA continued to provide assistance to the Government in
operationalizing the specialized unit on terrorism and transnational organized crime,
including by providing assistance in the establishment of a specialized investigative
brigade and in training 35 personnel of the Malian defence and security forces on
countering suicide bombings. In coordination with partners, MINUSMA supported
the Government in drafting a national counter-terrorism strategy. The Mission also
provided technical and strategic support to the Ministry of Relig ious Affairs and
Culture in its efforts to prevent violent extremism and the radicalization of youth.
34. From 5 to 9 September, during a visit to Mali, the Counter -Terrorism
Implementation Task Force, together with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, held consultations with the Government on the next phase of the
Integrated Assistance for Countering Terrorism Initiative and on priority projects
proposed by Task Force entities as a result of strategic gaps identified in the
implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in the
country. The aim was to provide an “All-of-UN” integrated, coherent and
coordinated technical assistance framework for counter -terrorism and the prevention
of violent extremism, taking into account the priorities of the Government and
ensuring that there would be no duplication of efforts.

B.

Protection of civilians
35. The major physical threats to civilians noted during the reporting period
include armed banditry; targeted attacks by armed elements, often due to political
dynamics; civil unrest; intercommunal violence, often due to land disputes; mines,
improvised explosive devices and explosive remnants of war; and attacks by violent
extremists, terrorists and State actors. In response to such threats and to prevent
attacks against civilians, MINUSMA continued to carry out medium - and longrange patrols in the northern regions, while United Nations police focused their
patrols on urban areas. MINUSMA also enhanced early warning mechanisms,
including through community liaison assistants and humanitarian actors.
36. Intercommunal clashes increased in central regions. On 25 June, 18 civilians
were killed and 44 injured in violence between the Bambara and Markas
communities in the Djenné circle, in the Mopti region. Between 26 August and
3 September, six civilians were killed and nine others injured in the Mopti region as
a result of clashes between members of the Bambara and Fulani communities. In
support of the Government, MINUSMA has helped to calm the situation, including
by facilitating intercommunal dialogue.

8/23

16-16502

S/2016/819

37. During the clashes on 21 and 22 July in Kidal, MINUSMA responded swiftly
and robustly to place themselves between CMA and the Platform. MINUSMA flew
two attack helicopters from Gao to Kidal as a show of force and deployed
unmanned aerial systems and two military utility helicopters for enhanced
monitoring. On 23 July, MINUSMA established checkpoints in Kidal and started
conducting foot patrols to discourage fighting among the armed groups a nd to
protect civilians. When fighting in the vicinity of Kidal town also broke out,
MINUSMA assumed a deterrent posture and created a safe haven in close proximity
to its camp in the event that civilians should seek protection. A total of 13 civilians
sought refuge in the camp, and the Mission relocated 10 civilians to Gao. The
fighting in late July in Kidal between the signatory armed groups led to the deaths
of seven civilians.
38. On 2 September, unidentified armed assailants attacked Boni, 80 km east o f
Douentza, in the Mopti region, and briefly occupied the town. The assailants
torched the mayor’s office and the gendarmerie commander’s house and abducted a
deputy mayor. On 3 September, MINUSMA deployed a detachment of a battalion
from Douentza to conduct patrols and monitor the situation in Boni with the support
of attack helicopters. The peacekeepers stayed in the town for four nights and
conducted zone control in close coordination with the Malian armed forces.
39. At the Leaders’ Summit on Peacekeeping, held in London on 7 and
8 September, the United Nations Military Gender Advocate of the Year Award was
awarded to Major Aichatou Ousmane Issaka (Niger) who had been in Sector East
since 2015. The award seeks to recognize the efforts of a peacekeeper w ho has
promoted the principles of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000). Major Issaka
had reached out to women in the local community and joined what would have
otherwise been all-male patrols, making them more approachable for women and
children.

C.

Mine action, weapons and small arms
40. The United Nations Mine Action Service continued to educate conflict affected communities in central and northern Mali about explosive hazards,
reaching 34,961 people, and destroyed 84 explosive remnants of war. A s part of
capacity-building assistance to the Malian authorities, MINUSMA trained 315
personnel of the Malian defence and security forces on the mitigation of explosive
threats. MINUSMA also constructed a weapons and ammunition storage facility and
refurbished 11 others.

IV. Human rights
41. MINUSMA documented 117 cases of violations and abuses of human rights
and international humanitarian law involving 202 victims, including 23 children,
compared with 96 cases involving at least 131 victims in the previous reporting
period. The cases involved 19 instances of executions or attempted killings;
18 instances of ill-treatment or torture; 15 instances of illegal detention, involving
31 individuals; 22 instances of extortion or looting; 10 direct attacks a gainst
humanitarian or peacekeeping personnel; four instances of abduction; four instances
of the recruitment of child soldiers, involving nine children; two instances of sexual

16-16502

9/23

S/2016/819

violence; one instance of the military use of a hospital; one instance of forc ed
displacement; and 21 instances of lack of due process as a result of ineffective
investigations. Among these abuses, serious abuses, including killings and illegal
taxation, were reportedly committed by elements deployed to newly erected
checkpoints and military bases by the signatory armed groups, especially in the
Timbuktu region. Government forces, CMA, the Platform and other armed groups
remained the primary alleged perpetrators, mostly in the northern and central parts
of Mali. The human rights investigation conducted by MINUSMA in the aftermath
of the fighting in the Kidal region confirmed two instances of arbitrary
execution/killing, four cases of physical abuse, one case of abduction, two cases of
looting, three cases of ill-treatment and one case of an occupation of a hospital.
Dozens of civilians were also forcefully displaced.
42. MINUSMA verified that at least nine children were associated with the
Platform, which is part of GATIA, in the Kidal region. Three others were reported
among the ranks of CMA, the Coalition du peuple de l’Azawad and the Mouvement
populaire pour le salut de l’Azawad in the Timbuktu region. On 29 July, MINUSMA
coordinated the transfer of four children associated with GATIA in Kidal to Bamako
and, with the support of the United Nations Children’s Fund, handed them over to
the National Directorate for the Promotion of Children and Families. However, on
4 August, the Directorate handed them over to a member of Parliament with ties to
GATIA, in violation of the standard protocol for the care of children associated with
armed groups. The Mission called on armed groups to prevent any further
recruitment of children and urged the signatory parties to take concrete steps to
reduce the impact of conflict on children. For instance, the United Nations provided
assistance to MNLA on the action plan to end the recruitment and use of children in
armed conflict and sexual violence against children. On 30 June, the Platform
signed a statement committing to fight conflict-related sexual violence in Mali and
ratified a one-year implementation plan to tackle this challenge.
43. During the reporting period, a total of 106 individuals (of whom four were
presumed minors) were arrested for terrorism-related activities in the central and
northern regions: 66 by the Malian defence and security forces; 36 by international
forces; and 4 by MINUSMA. Of those arrested, 3 were tortured by the Malian
defence and security forces and 2 by MINUSMA; 36 were illegally detained by the
Malian defence and security forces or French forces; and 1 was killed by
MINUSMA. A United Nations board of inquiry has conducted an investigation into
the cases involving MINUSMA. Corrective measures will be implemented
following the completion of the investigation. Excessive use o f force by the Malian
defence and security forces was reported during counter -terrorism operations.
44. As at 20 September, MINUSMA had identified 224 conflict -related detainees,
including those detained for terrorism-related charges held in State-run detention
facilities. Among the detainees were six minors. During the reporting period, the
authorities released 81 people for various reasons, including lack of evidence and
trial.
45. The illegal detention of individuals by armed groups continued. Since my most
recent report, 13 additional individuals were detained by CMA, the Platform,
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb and others, bringing the total to 27 (14 combatants
and 13 alleged civilians).

10/23

16-16502

S/2016/819

46. Limited progress was made in combating impunity for serious violations and
abuses, including conflict-related sexual violence committed in 2012. MINUSMA
held 13 human rights trainings for the Malian armed forces, police, gendarmerie and
legal authorities, in collaboration with the European Union Training Mission in Mali
and United Nations police. In total, over 1,050 State representatives participated in
the trainings, including 118 women. The Ministry of Justice and Human Rights
launched 12 investigations into alleged human rights violations as a result of
monthly meetings with MINUSMA aimed at reviewing and addressing human rights
violations documented by the Mission.
47. Effective 1 July, the specialized protection functions of the Child Protection
Unit and the Office of the Senior Women’s Protection Advisor we re consolidated
within the human rights component of MINUSMA.

V. Humanitarian situation
48. The humanitarian situation in Mali remained volatile. In the lean season (June
to September), more than 3 million people, or 16 per cent of the Malian popula tion,
were food insecure, including approximately 420,000 who needed immediate food
assistance. At the end of the academic year in June, 296 out of 2,380 schools
remained closed in the crisis-affected regions of Gao, Kidal, Mopti, Ségou and
Timbuktu. A total of seven schools remained occupied by the signatory armed
groups in Gao, Kidal and Timbuktu regions. Ténenkou, in the Mopti region,
remained the most affected, with 69 per cent of schools closed.
49. The delivery of humanitarian assistance in northern and central Mali was
constrained during the reporting period, compared to the previous reporting period,
owing to the impact of the rainy season on roads, an increase in criminal assaults
against humanitarian workers and the deterioration of the security s ituation in the
Kidal region. As at 20 September, 18 security incidents involving humanitarian
actors had been reported, compared to 11 such incidents in the previous reporting
period. On 6 June, a warehouse containing a one -month supply of food rations
pre-positioned by humanitarian actors for 11,000 people was looted in Kidal.
Furthermore, contamination by explosive hazards, including explosive remnants of
war, improvised explosive devices and mines, in the northern and central regions
continued to restrict humanitarian and civilian access. The continuous closure of the
airfield in Kidal added to the access challenges. MINUSMA provided humanitarian
actors with helicopter flights between Gao and Kidal to the extent possible.
50. Despite challenging conditions, humanitarian actors continued to operate in
the crisis-affected regions, against the backdrop of the limited provision of basic
social services by the Government. Humanitarian actors supported the Government
in providing food to approximately 420,000 people in the Gao, Mopti and Timbuktu
regions and facilitated education on explosive hazards in conflict -affected
communities in central and northern Mali. Humanitarian organizations provided
cash assistance and non-food items to returnees. They also supported incomegenerating agricultural activities to assist the returnees with reintegration into their
communities and promote peaceful coexistence between returnees and host
community members in the Gao, Mopti and Timbuktu regions. Humanitarian actors
continuously urged armed groups to enhance humanitarian access and respect for
humanitarian principles.

16-16502

11/23

S/2016/819

51. The fighting in the Kidal region in July and August led to the forced
displacement of civilians. Since my most recent report, the number of internally
displaced persons decreased by 25 per cent, to approximately 39,000, while
approximately 134,000 Malian refugees remained in Burkina Faso, Mauritania and
the Niger.
52. In July, seasonal flooding caused 13 deaths, destroyed 1,500 houses and
affected approximately 10,000 people in the regions of Gao, Kidal, Koulikoro,
Ménaka, Mopti, Ségou, Sikasso and Timbuktu, according to government figures.
Humanitarian partners supported the Government in distributing relief items.
53. As at 20 September, only $101 million of the total of $354 million for the
humanitarian response plan for 2016 had been financed.

VI. Economic development and cultural preservation
54. The return of basic services to the north continued to be hampered by
insecurity, limited progress in the return of State authority and the slow
operationalization of the Malian regional development agencies. Despite these
difficulties, United Nations agencies continued their efforts in support of
development and the peace process. The United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) provided technical expertise and financial support to the steering
committee set up by the Government to develop the national strategy for the
prevention of and response to violent extremism and terrorism. The Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations initiated a programme of livelihood
support to 2,500 vulnerable agro-pastoralist households, who were mostly displaced
people and returnees in the new region of Ménaka. MINUSMA a nd the United
Nations country team allocated the full amount of $4 million a vailable over 20152016 to quick-impact projects, which led to the launch of 107 projects targeting
more than 290,000 direct beneficiaries in the northern regions by 30 June. Quick impact projects contributed to building confidence in the Mission’s mandate and the
peace process, including by demonstrating the early dividends of security and
stability to the population. Over the reporting period, the Trust Fund in Support of
Peace and Security in Mali funded an additional 16 projects, reaching 225,469
people in the north, thanks to 11 donors.
55. The Peacebuilding Fund disbursed 100 per cent of its $10.9 million in
earmarked funds through projects and joint programmes implemented by the United
Nations country team in the Gao and Timbuktu regions with a view to fostering
peacebuilding efforts. The projects enabled 3,856 children, including 1,768 girls, to
attend school and set up 650 income-generating activities for internally displaced
persons, returnees and refugees. Another project improved access to justice and
security for 460 women affected by gender-based violence. From 17 to 22 July, a
joint mission by UNDP and the Peacebuilding Support Office visited the Liptako Gourma region, including Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger, from 4 to 9 September,
to assess the viability of a cross-border peacebuilding programme benefiting
communities in the three countries.
56. MINUSMA and the United Nations country team ensured a more efficient
division of tasks and complementarity of efforts through the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework Plus for 2015-2019, which facilitated an
integrated response and division of tasks according to the comparative advantages

12/23

16-16502

S/2016/819

of MINUSMA and each agency. Over the reporting period, the Government
approved the Framework Plus workplan for 2016. The early recovery cluster has
also fostered an integrated approach among UNDP, the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and MINUSMA, on the basis of a mapping exercise of
interventions in the north. In addition, the programme criticality assessment for the
Gao, Kidal and Timbuktu regions and for parts of the Mopti and Ségou regions was
approved on 6 September, after a process led by the United Nations Children’s Fund
and with the active participation of the United Nations country team and
MINUSMA.
57. On 23 June, MINUSMA and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization provided logistical support for the delivery of information
technology equipment and furniture to nine private libraries of ancient manuscripts
in Timbuktu. On 28 June, the first of three phases was completed in the
rehabilitation of the three mosques designated as world heritage sites in Timbuktu.
On 27 September, the International Criminal Court sentenced Ahmad Al Faqi
Al Mahdi, a member of Ansar Eddine, to nine years’ imprisonment. Al Faqi
Al Mahdi, who surrendered to the Court on 26 September 2015, pled guilty to the
charge of war crimes related to intentionally directing attacks against Muslim
shrines and mausoleums in Timbuktu in 2012.

VII. Deployment and capacities
Military
58. As at 20 September, the strength of the military component of MINUSMA
stood at 10,635 personnel, or 80 per cent of the authorized strength of 13,289.
Women accounted for 1.6 per cent of the force. Key outstanding capabilities
included a combat convoy battalion, an armed helicopter unit for Sector North, an
additional special forces company for Sector West, additional infantry c ompanies
and specialist training, mentoring and equipment for the disposal of explosive
ordnance. MINUSMA urgently required an attack helicopter unit and a military
medium utility helicopter unit, as those currently in Sector East would be repatriated
in early 2017. A replacement of one military medium-utility helicopter unit in
Sector West was also needed by the end of 2016. MINUSMA remained
underresourced in terms of armoured personnel carriers. Even with the deployment
to the Mission of 27 additional armoured personnel carriers, MINUSMA would be
38 armoured personnel carriers short of the number originally planned. In addition,
the new mandate included a requirement for an additional 77 armoured personnel
carriers.
Police
59. As at 20 September, the strength of the police component of MINUSMA stood
at 1,274 personnel, or 66 per cent of its authorized strength of 1,920, with 78 per
cent of individual police officers (14 per cent of them women) and 63 per cent of
formed police unit personnel (4.5 per cent of them women) deployed. MINUSMA
continued to require four formed police units, 11 additional armoured personnel
carriers to meet the required standards, a small section of riverine police capacity
and additional specialized police personnel, including experts in forensics,

16-16502

13/23

S/2016/819

improvised explosive devices, intelligence, transnational organized crime, the
trafficking of illicit drugs, small arms and light weapons and counter -terrorism.
Civilian personnel
60. As at 20 September, 85 per cent of all MINUSMA civilian staff had been
deployed, including 85 per cent of international staff, 86 per cent of United Nations
volunteers and 80 per cent of national staff. Women occupied 28 per cent of the
international posts, 28 per cent of United Nations Volunteer positions and 20 per
cent of national staff posts. From 7 to 14 July, a civilian staffing review was
conducted in order to adjust the Mission’s staffing according to the tasks to be
carried out under the new mandate. The review concluded that MINUSMA should
strengthen its mission support capacity, refocus its civilian capacity towards the
implementation of the peace agreement and the support to national institutions as
they redeploy to the north, enhance its coordination and cooperation with the United
Nations country team and foster its engagement with regional stakeholders and
mechanisms.
Camp construction and securing supply routes
61. Harsh climatic conditions, an unstable security environment and a lack of
required ground and air transportation infrastructure continue to limit the capacity
of MINUSMA to sustain stable supply routes. MINUSMA plans to establish a new
major logistics hub in Gao to better serve all MINUSMA locations in northern Mali.
Negotiations with Algeria, Benin and the Niger are ongoing with a view to opening
supply routes to Mali.
62. MINUSMA completed its relocation to the operational base on 30 June and to
its new headquarters on 31 August.
Safety, security and welfare of Mission personnel
63. In response to of the significant security threat in Mali, MINUSMA continued
to upgrade and strengthen the defence infrastructure of all existing camps, including
by reinforcing its facilities against blasts and installing protected command
positions and bunkers. In high-risk areas, the Mission improved living conditions
for civilian and uniformed personnel. On 6 July, the tethered aerostat for
surveillance deployed in Kidal was determined to not be viable, given volatile
weather conditions and the costs of maintenance under such conditions. MINUSMA
and Headquarters were engaged in discussions to identify an alternative technical
option to the aerostat capabilities.
64. MINUSMA implemented several pilot projects using surveillance and early
warning technology to improve the intelligence-gathering capacity of the Mission
and to prevent attacks. In Gao and Timbuktu, only 8 unmanned aerial vehicles out
of the 38 deployed to the Mission could be used to provide short - and medium-range
surveillance, owing to the limited number of ground control stations. To address
these shortcomings, the Mission acquired in June one unmanned aerial system with
a range of 600 km, which was subsequently deployed to Timbuktu. Another two,
one of which would be used as a spare, would be operational by October.

14/23

16-16502

S/2016/819

VIII. Conduct and discipline
65. In June, one allegation of sexual exploitation and abuse involving a military
staff member was reported. This case and another allegation of sexual exploitation
and abuse received in January involving a military staff member remain under
investigation by the United Nations. The results of the investigations will be
communicated to the troop-contributing countries for appropriate follow-up actions,
as required. The case that was reported in December 2015 is now closed, and the
individual is barred from participation in future peacekeeping operations.
MINUSMA continued its prevention activities, including outreach activities
informing the public about the expected standard of cond uct for United Nations
personnel, especially the policy on zero tolerance for sexual exploitation and abuse.
Moreover, guidelines from the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights on sexual exploitation and abuse were disseminated.

IX. Observations
66. I commend the signatory parties of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali for continuing to make progress in its implementation. I welcome in that
regard the continued commitment of President Keita and his Government to
supporting the peace process, including through the appointment of Mahamadou
Diagouraga as his High Representative for the implementation of the peace
agreement. I applaud his efforts, together with my Special Representative and the
international mediation team, to de-escalate tensions between the signatory armed
groups.
67. I welcome the signing, on 19 June 2016, by the Government of Mali, CMA
and the Platform, of the agreement that defined the modalities for the establishment
of interim administrations in the five northern regio ns. The long-awaited agreement
was a positive step in addressing the priority demand of the signatory armed groups
and move forward with other provisions of the peace agreement. I also acknowledge
the progress made towards the operationalization of securit y arrangements
contained in the peace agreement, including the Operational Coordination
Mechanism, which paved the way for the launch of the mixed patrols in the Gao,
Kidal and Timbuktu regions. At this critical juncture, I call on the signatory parties
to redouble their efforts to accelerate the implementation of the agreement, and,
more specifically, I call on the armed groups to submit the lists of combatants
expected to join the cantonment process without further delay. The nomination of
Platform representatives to the interim administrations and the designation of CMA
combatants to mixed patrols was a first step towards achieving tangible results on
the ground.
68. The reporting period was marred by the resumption of hostilities between the
signatory armed groups in July, August and September in the Kidal region. I
strongly condemn these ceasefire violations and call on the Security Council to
consider imposing sanctions against the parties violating the peace agreement. The
clashes stalled the implementation of the peace agreement at the critical phase of
establishing the interim administrations, obstructing the parties from implementing
their commitments made in the agreement. The signatory armed groups must
decisively recommit to the peace process and the implementation of the peace
agreement. I urge the concerned parties to resolve their differences through the

16-16502

15/23

S/2016/819

mechanisms envisaged by the peace agreement and agree to a formal cessation of
hostilities.
69. For the peace process to advance in earnest, it is critical that the Malian parties
adhere in good faith to the peace agreement and commit themselves to achieving
key priorities, including the progressive redeployment of the Malian defence and
security forces and re-establishment of State authority throughout the country. The
United Nations, through MINUSMA, will continue to support the parties in their
efforts to restore State authority in the north. In this context, I reiterate the call
made by the Security Council in its resolution 2295 (2016) for the Government to
define, in consultation with the other signatories and with the support of MINUSMA
and regional and international stakeholders, clear benchmarks and timelines for the
implementation of the peace agreement.
70. I welcome the announcement of the upcoming elections in Mali. The elections
have the potential to facilitate the redeployment of State administrative functions to
the north. I call on the Government to achieve consensus on the holding of the
elections and ensure the inclusiveness and transparency thereof. In conjunction, I
urge the Government to accelerate the preparations for the national conference on
understanding, which is expected to facilitate national reconciliation, help to
address the root causes of the conflict in Mali and generate consensus on the way
forward. I call on the Government to ensure a wide consultation process for the
conference, involving all concerned stakeholders, including civil society, women
and youth.
71. Moving forward, a successful cantonment, disarmame nt, demobilization and
reintegration process constitutes a prerequisite for peace in Mali. It is critical that
the signatory armed groups demonstrate their will to pursue such a process by
taking decisive actions, including by designating the participants in the cantonment,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process. I welcome the recent
appointment of CMA representatives to the national commissions on disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and on integration, as well as to the National
Council for Security Sector Reform. I call on the Government to accelerate the
process for the adoption of a national strategy designed to reform the security sector
and to combine the law on military programming and the draft legislation on
national security into a programming law on defence and security.
72. I remain concerned by the human rights situation throughout the country. I
strongly condemn the abuses committed against the civilian population during the
recent clashes in the Kidal region. I impress upon the signatory armed groups that
these human rights violations are unacceptable. I am concerned about the increasing
establishment of checkpoints and military bases by signatory armed groups and their
affiliates, particularly in the Timbuktu region, and human rights violations against
civilians reported around these outposts. I am also concerned about the excessive
use of force by the Malian defence and security forces during counter -terrorism
operations. Such violations play right into the hands of terrorists. I urge all
concerned parties to respect international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, as well as their obligations under the peace agreement. I
denounce the increase in intracommunal and intercommunal violence in the
northern and central regions, which constitute obstacles to national reconciliation
and peaceful cohabitation. In this regard, I urge the Government to accelerate the

16/23

16-16502

S/2016/819

opening of the regional offices of the Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission
in order to begin documenting abuses and violations.
73. I am extremely concerned by the deterioration of the humanitarian situation in
certain regions of Mali and by the great number of schools that remain closed in the
regions affected by crisis. I condemn the attacks and robberies perpetrated against
humanitarian actors, including the pillaging of the World Food Programme
warehouse in Kidal. I call on all Malian parties to help facilitate the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to people in need. I commend the humani tarian actors for
continuing to support the Government in the provision of basic social services to the
people in need in an extremely challenging environment.
74. The attacks against the Malian, French and MINUSMA forces have increased
and become more sophisticated and complex. These attacks are absolutely
unacceptable and constitute serious violations of international law. I express my
heartfelt condolences to the bereaved families and the Governments of all those who
have lost their lives. The ever-growing number of attacks in the central regions is a
source of great concern. I urge the Malian parties to accelerate the implementation
of the provisions of the peace agreement concerning social cohesion in order to
address the grievances of the population and halt the spread of violent extremism.
The scale of the violent extremist and terrorist attacks in Mali require a united
response by the international community — otherwise, there is a risk that the
situation could deteriorate and spread. I urge Member S tates to reinforce
international cooperation, in particular cooperation among the countries of the
region. I fully support the efforts by MINUSMA to engage with the other countries
of the G-5 Sahel, namely Burkina Faso, Chad, Mauritania and the Niger, and with
other neighbouring countries, to deploy the liaison officers requested by the
Security Council in its resolution 2295 (2016). MINUSMA stands ready to integrate
the liaison officers in its headquarters in order to strengthen cooperation on border
security issues and intelligence-sharing.
75. The reinforcement of the posture and capacities of MINUSMA and the
compliance of all parties with their obligations under the peace agreement is
expected to allow MINUSMA to effectively support the Government of Ma li and its
people in the protection of civilians and the promotion of sustainable peace,
stability and development in Mali. In order for MINUSMA to be able to implement
its mandated tasks, it is indispensable that the Mission be provided with the
necessary equipment. If no helicopters are deployed to replace the departing units,
MINUSMA will lack two utility helicopter units (eight medium utility helicopters)
and two armed helicopter units (six attack helicopters) out of the required three
utility helicopter units (12 helicopters) and three armed helicopter units (nine
helicopters) by early 2017. The lack of those helicopters will have a negative impact
on the operational performance of the Mission owing to a diminished mobility and
capacity to conduct casualty and medical evacuations. MINUSMA and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations are identifying mechanisms and modalities
to deploy armoured personnel carriers, the rapid intervention force from the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire, surveillance, reconnaissance and information
companies, and specialized combat battalions for the protection of convoys. I urge
members of the Security Council and the international partners of Mali to increase
their support to ensure that these outstanding needs and capacity gaps are swiftly
addressed, including through bilateral support to the troop -contributing countries of
MINUSMA. Without such urgent support, the Mission will be seriously

16-16502

17/23

S/2016/819

handicapped in carrying out its mandate, and the confidence that the signat ory
parties and the population have in the Mission will suffer.
76. Lastly, I wish to express my appreciation to my Special Representative,
Mahamat Saleh Annadif, for his tireless efforts in advancing the peace process. I
commend the members of the international mediation team for their sustained
support to the Malian parties. I also pay tribute to the men and women of
MINUSMA and to the troop- and police-contributing countries for their dedication
to the Mission. I express my gratitude to the African Union, the Economic
Community for Western African States, the European Union, bilateral partners,
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, non-governmental organizations
and all other partners, who spared no effort to contribute to peace and security in
Mali under very difficult conditions.

18/23

16-16502

S/2016/819

Annex
Military and police strength of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
as at 31 August 2016
Military component

Police component

(staff officers and units)
Country

Men

Women

Individual police officers

Total

Men

Women

Formed police units

Total

Men

Women

Total police
Total

Men

Women

Total

136

136

136

140

176

1

177

140

152

8

160

Albania
Algeria
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Austria

6

6

1 417

1 417

Belgium

7

7

Benin

260

260

Bhutan

3

3

2

2

Bangladesh

36

1

37

140

19

1

20

133

136

Bolivia (Plurinational
State of)
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil
Brunei Darussalam
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso

1 692

29

1 721

Burundi
10

7

14

14

14

14

15

15

15

9

5

Cambodia

291

Cameroon

3

301
3

15

1 443

1 443

5

Canada
Central African Republic
Chad

4

4

9

Chile
China

382

15

397

Colombia
Congo
Côte d'Ivoire

6

6

25

25

Croatia
Cyprus
Czechia

16-16502

19/23

S/2016/819

Military component

Police component

(staff officers and units)
Country

Men

Women

Individual police officers

Total

Democratic Republic of
the Congo
Denmark

46

1

47

Formed police units

Men

Women

Total

5

1

6

Men

Women

Total

6

5

1

6

6

6

6

1

1

Djibouti

Men

Women

Total police
Total

Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt

67

67

El Salvador

88

Estonia

9

9

Ethiopia

1

1

Finland

5

5

France

24

4

5

5

5

5

9

9

9

9

92

Fiji
2

26

Gabon
Gambia

5

5

Germany

251

251

Ghana

217

217

13

2

15

13

2

15

7

3

10

7

3

10

1

1

Greece
Grenada
Guatemala
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau

855

6

1

861
1

Honduras
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia

143

4

147

Ireland
Israel
Italy

1

1

1

1

Jamaica
Japan
Jordan

1

1

Kazakhstan
Kenya

3

4

7

Kyrgyzstan
Latvia

20/23

1

1

16-16502

S/2016/819

Military component

Police component

(staff officers and units)
Country

Individual police officers

Men

Women

Total

43

2

45

Men

Women

Formed police units

Total

Men

Women

Total police
Total

Men

Women

Total

Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Lithuania

1

1

Luxembourg
Madagascar

2

2

2

2

Malawi
Malaysia
Mauritania

4

4

Mongolia
Montenegro
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Nepal

145

4

149

Netherlands

297

18

315

20

2

22

20

2

22

Niger

855

6

861

13

14

27

13

14

27

Nigeria

69

13

82

2

2

110

31

141

Norway

62

9

71

4

New Zealand
108

31

139

Pakistan
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal

2

2

1

1

4

579

14

Qatar
Republic of Korea
Republic of Moldova
Romania

4

4

Russian Federation
Rwanda
Samoa
Senegal

569

10

1

15

269

9

278

283

10

293

Serbia
Sierra Leone

16-16502

7

7

21/23

S/2016/819

Military component

Police component

(staff officers and units)
Country

Individual police officers

Formed police units

Men

Women

Total

Men

Women

Total

193

16

209

5

4

8

2

937

3

3

Men

Women

Total police
Total

Men

Women

Total

9

5

4

9

2

2

Singapore
Slovakia
Slovenia
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sweden
Switzerland

8

2

Tajikistan
Thailand
The former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia
Timor-Leste
Togo

922

15

1

135

5

140

138

5

143

1

47

Tunisia

46

47

46

Turkey

2

2

2

2

9

9

9

Uganda
Ukraine
United Kingdom of
Great Britain and
Northern Ireland

2

2

10

10

6

6

9

10 452

168 10 620

257

United Republic of
Tanzania
United States of America
Uruguay
Vanuatu
Yemen
Zambia
Zimbabwe
Total

22/23

34

291

921

52

973

1 178

86

1 264

16-16502

S/2016/819

16-16502

23/23
