20

General Atisembly-Fourteenth Session
PRINCIPLE 2

The child shall enjoy special protection, and shall be
given opportunities and facilities, by law and by other
means, to enable him to develop physically, mentally,
morally, spiritually and socially in a healthy and normal
manner and in conditions of freedom and dignity. In
the enactment of laws for this purpose, the best interests
of the child shall be the paramount consideration.
PRINCIPLE 3

The child shall be entitled from his birth to a name

and a nationality.
PRINCIPLE 4

The child shall enjoy the benefits of social security.
He shall be entitled to grow and develop in health ; to
this end, special care and protection shall be provided
both to him and to his mother, including adequate
pre-natal and post-natal care. The child shall have the
right to adequate nutrition, housing, recreation and
medical services.
PRINCIPLE 5

The child who is physically, mentally or socially
handicapped shall be given the special treatment, education and care required by his particular condition.
PRINCIPLE 6

The child, for the full and harmonious development
of his personality, needs love and understanding. He
shall, wherever possible, grow up in the care and under
the responsibility of his parents, and, in any case, in
an atmosphere of affection and of moral and material
security; a child of tender years shall not, save in exceptional circumstances, be separated from his mother.
Society and the public authorities shall have the duty
to extend particular care to children without a family
and to those without adequate means of support. Payment of State and other assistance towards the maintenance of children of large families is desirable.
PRINCIPLE 7
The child is entitled to receive education, which shall
be free and compulsory, at least in the elementary
stages. He shall be given an education which will promote his general culture, and enable him, on a basis
of equal opportunity, to develop his abilities, his individual judgement, and his sense of moral and social
responsibility, and to become a useful member of society.
The best interests of the child shall be the guiding
principle of those responsible for his education and
guidance; that responsibility lies in the first place with
his parents.
The child shall have full opportunity for play and
recreation, which should be directed to the same purposes as education; society and the public authorities
shall endeavour to promote the enjoyment of this right.
PRINCIPLE 8
The child shall in all circumstances be among the
first to receive protection and relief.
PRINCIPLE 9
The child shall be protected against all forms of
neglect, cruelty and exploitation. He shall not be the
subject of traffic, in any form.

The child shall not be admitted to employment before
an appropriate minimum age; he shall in no case be
caused or permitted to engage in any occupation or
employment which would prejudice his health or education, or interfere with his physical, mental or moral
development.
PRINCIPLE 10

The child shall be protected from practices which may
foster racial, religious and any other form of discrimination. He shall be brought up in a spirit of understanding, tolerance, friendship among peoples, peace and
universal brotherhood, and in full consciousness that his
energy and talents should be devoted to the service of
his fellow men.
841st plenary meeting,
20 November 1959.

1387 (XIV). Publicity to be given lo the Declaration of the Rights of the Child
The General Assembly,
Considering that the Declaration of the Rights of the
Child 1 calls upon parents, upon men and women as
individuals, and upon voluntary organizations, local
authorities and national Governments to recognize the
rights set forth therein and strive for their observance,
1. Recommends Governments of Member States, the
specialized agencies concerned and the appropriate nongovernmental organizations to publicize as widely as
possible the text of the Declaration of the Rights of
the Child;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to have the Declaration widely disseminated and, to that end, to use
every means at his disposal to publish and distribute
texts in all languages possible.
841st plenary meeting,
20 November 1959.

1388 (XIV). Report of the United Nations High
Commissioner fo,- Refugees
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees,2
Noting wi.th appreciation the progress made in the
implementation of the programmes of international
assistance carried out by the Office of the High
Commissioner,
Noting in particular the progress made, within the
framework of the World Refugee Year, as regards
the admission of additional numbers of refugees, including handicapped cases, to countries of resettlement,
as well as the contribution to the Office of the High
Commissioner of additional funds for international
assistance to refugees,
Expressing the hope that no additional efforts will
be spared for the repatriation of refugees who wish to
return to their country of origin,
Expressing the hope also that every effort will be
made for the resettlement or integration of refugees,
I. Invites States Members of the United Nations
and members of the specialized agencies to devote, on
1 See resolution 1386 (XIV).

2 Official Records of the GeMral Assembly, Fourteenth
Session, Supplement No. 11 (A/4104/Rev.l) and Supplement
No UA (A/4104/Rev.l/Add.n.

Reaolntiona adopted on the reporte of the Third C..ommittee

the occasion of the World Refugee Year, special attention to the problems of refugees coming within the
competence of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, and in particular to consider the possibility of :
(a) Improving the legal status of refugees living
on, or to be admitted to, their territory by, inter alia,
acceding to the Convention relating to the Status of
Refugees;a
( b) Increasing the facilities for permanent refugee

solutions through voluntary repatriation and assimilation
within new national communities, and, for resettlement
of refugees, providing further opportunities through the
liberalization of immigration laws and regulations and
through the inclusion of refugees in resettlement schemes ;
(c) Enabling the High Commissioner, through additional voluntary financial contributions, to implement
the programmes of international assistance to refugees
approved by the Executive Committee of the High
Commissioner's Programme for 1959 and 1960;
2. Authorizes the High Commissioner, in respect of
refugees who do not come within the competence of the
United Nations, to use his good offices in the transmission of contributions designed to provide assistance
to these refugees.
841st plenary meeting,
20 November 1959.

1389 (XIV). Refugees from Algeria in Morocco
and Tunisia
The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees,2
Considering the efforts made by the High Commissioner and the results achieved during the World
Refugee Year,
Noting with appreciation the action of the High Commissioner on behalf of refugees from Algeria in Morocco
and Tunisia,
Recognizing however that the situation of these refugees, and especially of the young children who constitute
the majority of them, remains precarious,
Recommends that the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees should continue his efforts on
behalf of these refugees pending their return to their
homes.
841st plenary meeting,
20 November 1959.

1390 (XIV). World Refugee Year
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1285 (XIII) of 5 December
1958 on the World Refugee Year,
Noting with appreciation the support that has already
been given to the World Refugee Year by Governments,
non-governmental organizations and the general public,
as well as the efforts of the Secretary-General in this
endeavour,
B elieuing that the success of the World Refugee Year
will be largely dependent on concrete responses yet to
be made in many countries,
8 United Nations Conference of Plenipotentiaries on the Status of Refugees and Stateless Persons, Final Act an.d Cowven,'!On .relating to the Status of Refugees (United Nations pubhcation, Sales No.: 1951.IV.4), p. 11.

21

1. Urges States Members of the United Nations and
members of the specialized agencies, in accordance with
the national wishes and needs of each country and in
the humanitarian spirit of the World Refugee Year:
(a) To continue to focus interest on the refugee
problem;
( b) To endeavour to make additional financial contributions for international assistance to refugees and
to encourage in their territory increasing contributions
from non-governmental organizations and the general
public;
( c) To encourage additional opportunities for permanent refugee solutions through voluntary repatriation,
resettlement or integration, on a purely humanitarian
basis and in accordance with the freely expressed wishes
of the refugees themselves ;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
efforts to assist in the promotion of the World Refugee
Year.
841st plenary meeting,
20 November 1959.

1391 (XIV). United Nations Children's Fund
The General Assembly,
Having considered chapter VI, section III, of the
report of the Economic and Social Council,'
Recognizing the value of the United Nations Children's Fund in focusing international and national
attention on the needs of children,
Noting the growing significance of aid given through
the Fund in helping countries to initiate permanent
health, nutrition and welfare services for their children,
and in improving the quality and effectiveness of these
services,
Considering that the aid provided through the Fund
constitutes a practical way of international co-operation
to help countries to carry out the aims proclaimed in
the Declaration of the Rights of the Child,1
Aware of the importance of the Fund as an essential
element in international efforts to help countries, and in
particular under-developed ones, raise their standards
of living and strengthen their capacity for economic
and social progress,
Impressed however with the magnitude of the many
needs as yet unfulfilled, and the opportunities which
exist for the effective use of additional assistance from
the Fund,
Concerned that, despite continued and, in some cases,
increased support from many Governments, the Fund's
income for 1959 will be lower than that of 1958, thus
reversing the trend of recent years,
1. Expresses the hope that all Governments of States
Members of the United Nations and members Gf the
specialized agencies will contribute to the United
Nations Children's Fund as generously as possible;
2. Congratulates the Fund on its outstanding
achievements.
841st plenary meeting,
20 November 1959.
• Official Records of tht General Assembly, Fourtetnth
Session, Supplemtnt No. 3 (A/4143).
