S/2021/696

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
31 July 2021
Original: English

Review of the situation in Darfur and benchmarks to assess
the measures on Darfur
Report of the Secretary-General
I.

Introduction
1.
In paragraph 5 of its resolution 2562 (2021), the Security Council requested the
Secretary-General to conduct a review of the situation in Darfur by 31 July 2021 and
to provide recommendations for clear and well-identified key benchmarks that could
serve in guiding the Council to review the measures on Darfur.
2.
Pursuant to that request, an assessment team from the Secretariat visited the
Sudan (Khartoum; Nyala, South Darfur; and El Fasher, North Darf ur) from 12 to
26 June 2021. During the visit, the assessment team undertook consultations with the
transitional Government of the Sudan and other signatories of the Juba Agreement for
Peace in the Sudan, political parties, representatives of three camps f or internally
displaced persons, 1 civil society, including women’s and youth groups, and members
of the diplomatic community in the Sudan, as well as staff of the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan and members of the Unit ed
Nations country team. In addition, in order to better appreciate the regional
dimensions of the situation in Darfur, the assessment team consulted the Panel of
Experts on the Central African Republic, the Panel of Experts on Libya, the Panel of
Experts on South Sudan and the Panel of Experts on the Sudan. Upon its return to
New York, the assessment team consulted members of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan and
representatives of States in the region. 2

II. Context
3.
The overall situation in Darfur has improved since July 2004, when the Security
Council first adopted measures to address the deteriorating security situation in the
region. The change was largely brought on by the democratic revolution of December
2018 and other positive developments, such as the political agreement on establishing
the structures and institutions of the transitional period between the Transitional
Military Council and the Declaration of Freedom and Change Forces signed on
__________________
1
2

21-09831 (E)

Kass and Kalma camps in South Darfur and Abu Shouk camp in North Darfur.
Of the States and organizations in the region invited for consultations, Egypt and Eritrea attended
in addition to the Sudan.

060821

*2109831*

S/2021/696

17 July 2019; the Constitutional Declaration of 17 August 2019 signed by the Forces
for Freedom and Change alliance and the Transitional Military Council; the national
action plan for the protection of civilians of 21 May 2020; and the Juba Peace
Agreement, signed on 3 October 2020.
4.
The Juba Peace Agreement, which comprises a national framework and separate
tracks to address specific issues of concern to each region in the Sudan, represents
the best opportunity for the country to achieve a comprehensive and sustainable peace
for all its citizens. The Darfur Agreement between the Transitional Government of
the Sudan and Darfur Parties to Peace 3 includes protocols on power-sharing; wealthsharing; justice, accountability and reconciliation; internally displaced persons an d
refugees; development of the nomads and herders sector in the Darfur region; land and
hawakeer; 4 a permanent ceasefire; and final security arrangements. Implementation
of the protocols has the potential to comprehensively address the underlying causes
of conflict in Darfur.
5.
Since the onset of the democratic transition in the Sudan, the transitional
Government has implemented some ambitious political reforms, which have also had
a positive impact on Darfur. They include a Cabinet reshuffle, the expans ion of the
ruling Sovereign Council of the Sudan in February 2021 to include the armed group
signatories of the Agreement, and the appointment of Minni Minawi as the Governor
of the Darfur region on 29 April 2021 and of two of the five Darfur state governo rs
(walis) on 14 June 2021. The recent adoption of legislation establishing the Peace
Commission, the Anti-Corruption Commission and the Transitional Justice
Commission is also an important step.

III. Threats to stability in Darfur
A.

Views of the transitional Government
6.
Representatives of the national and state authorities in Darfur stressed to the
assessment team that the security situation in Darfur had changed dramatically since
the Security Council had first imposed sanctions measures in response to the situation
in Darfur. They noted that the democratic transition at the national level had ushered
in a new era in the history of the Sudan and transformed the security situation in
Darfur. Darfuri armed groups had become partners in the Soverei gn Council and the
Council of Ministers, were represented as state governors in Darfur and would also
be represented in the Transitional Legislative Council. The door for negotiations
remained open to those still outside the peace process. Government force s provided
security in the region, while the signatories of the Juba Peace Agreement worked
towards the deployment of the security-keeping force in the Darfur region. They
further noted that security forces of the transitional Government were ensuring that
there was no flow of arms and armed groups from neighbouring countries into Darfur,
including through its cooperation in the joint Central African Republic -Chad-Sudan
tripartite border force.
7.
Moreover, the transitional Government asserts that it is fu lfilling its
responsibility to protect civilians in accordance with its national action plan for the
protection of civilians, which was shared with the Security Council ( S/2020/429,
annex). In terms of humanitarian access, the transitional Government pointed to its
2019 decision to provide unhindered access to all parts of the Sudan for humanitarian
actors. In addition, pursuant to an agreement signed on 26 September 2019 with the

__________________

A coalition of armed opposition groups under the Sudanese Revolutionary Front and the Sudan
Liberation Army faction led by Minni Minawi.
4
Hawakeer refers to lands traditionally used by a particular tribal community.
3

2/16

21-09831

S/2021/696

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR),
OHCHR had established an office in Khartoum and three subregional offices, one of
which was in El Fasher. 5 In that regard, the transitional Government did not see the
need for the Panel of Experts to undertake any monitoring of the humanitarian and
human rights situation in Darfur, but it felt that the Panel could play a helpful advisory
support role in monitoring weapons collections. In the view of the representatives,
the support of the international community, specifically financial support, was needed
for the implementation of the Juba Peace Agreement.

B.

Implementation of the Juba Peace Agreement
8.
The commitment of the transitional Government to the Juba Peace Agreement
is broadly recognized, but there are concerns that implementation of the Agreement
has been slow. The dire economic situation in the country remains the foremost focus
of attention for the transitional Government, but progress in implementing the key
provisions of the Agreement is critical to stability in Darfur. Many of the mechanisms
and commissions called for in the Agreement have not yet been formed. The
authorities of the Governor of Darfur vis-à-vis the state-level governors have not been
clarified, nor have the administrative structures of the region and states been defined,
which impedes the implementation of the details agreed upon by the signatories.
Armed group signatories of the Agreement have criticized the inaction of the
transitional Government in implementing the security arrangements, while the Sudan
Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid faction (SLA-AW) remains outside the Agreement,
with considerable support in some camps for internally displaced persons. At the same
time, there is serious concern that actors associated with the previous regime are
seeking to undermine the transitional Government and the nascent peace process.
9.
The slow pace of implementing the Juba Peace Agreement means that many of
the underlying sources 6 of insecurity and instability in Darfur have yet to be
addressed. Land, water, climate and environmental issues remain important
underlying conflict drivers that have been addressed in the Agreement but ha ve yet to
be tackled. These issues affect relations between tribal communities; nomads, herders
and farmers along migratory corridors; and internally displaced persons and refugees
seeking to return to their lands. The Darfur conflict has resulted in a bre akdown of
law and order and governance structures, which have yet to be fully restored.
Atrocities and human rights violations committed during the conflict also generated
unfulfilled demands for accountability and reconciliation. 7 These factors, combined
with repeated failures to fully implement prior peace agreements, have generated
considerable distrust between the Darfuri population and government authorities.

C.

Security situation in Darfur
10. In terms of security, while a semblance of stability has been restored to the
region and access for humanitarian actors has improved, the current security situation

__________________

On 1 January 2021, OHCHR was integrated into the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan. OHCHR is currently implementing two mandates in the Sudan:
one under Security Council resolution 2524 (2020) and the other under the Host Country
Agreement signed between OHCHR and the Sudan in September 2019.
6
For a reference on the underlying causes of the conflict in Darfur, see th e October 2009 report of
the African Union High‐level Panel on Darfur, led by the former President of South Africa,
Thabo Mbeki.
7
Consultations with internally displaced persons and members of civil society reflected a strong
desire to see individuals with outstanding arrest warrants handed over to the International
Criminal Court.
5

21-09831

3/16

S/2021/696

in parts of Darfur remains of concern. The withdrawal of the African Union -United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) was largely asse ssed to have left a
security and programmatic vacuum, which has yet to be filled by the transitional
Government or state-level authorities. 8 Although the conflict dynamics are no longer
predominantly characterized by fighting between the various armed gro up signatories
and state security forces, insecurity persists. Of primary concern are the increasing
frequency of intercommunal violence; 9 clashes among nomads, herders and farmers;
clashes between SLA-AW and security forces in Jebel Marra in West Darfur; 10 clashes
between factions within SLA-AW; the presence of armed groups from other countries
that are using Darfur as a rear base of operations; the actions of armed individuals
and militias, some associated with the previous regime; criminality; and the
widespread availability of small arms and light weapons.
11. As a result of these sources of insecurity, civilians are still experiencing violent
attacks, harassment and intimidation by armed groups and some state security entities.
Sexual and gender-based violence, including conflict-related sexual violence, remains
a major concern. In 2020, there were 105 documented cases of conflict -related sexual
violence affecting 65 women, 39 girls and 1 boy. Incidents were attributed to elements
of SLA-AW and armed nomads, with the Sudanese Armed Forces and the Rapid
Support Forces also being implicated. 11 In terms of the impact of insecurity on
children, the United Nations verified that, in 2020, there were 292 grave violations
against 274 children (143 boys, 131 girls), 12 including recruitment of children by
signatories and non-signatories of the Juba Peace Agreement. In the rural areas, as
well as with internally displaced populations, a lack of security prevents the
cultivation of land during the current rainy season and the harvesting of crops between
November and February. Internally displaced persons (mainly women) who return to
their land to cultivate it risk attacks by those who illegally occupy the land.
12. This insecurity has also had an impact on the drawdown of UNAMID. Since
January 2021, 11 of the 14 UNAMID team sites, which have been handed over to
civilian authorities, have been looted. Since June 2021, various forces of the signatory
armed groups have been deployed outside the perimeter fence of the UN AMID
logistics base in El Fasher. On a number of occasions, these armed groups interfered
with the freedom of movement of UNAMID personnel and infringed on their security,
and may have been positioning themselves to take over the assets of the camp upon
the departure of UNAMID. In early July 2021, a joint security force was formed,
through the coordination of the Sudanese Armed Forces, to provide ongoing security
around the liquidation operation at El Fasher. As at 23 July, UNAMID reported that
there had yet to be an improvement in command and control of the joint security
force, but there had been a reduction in the presence of armed groups in the vicinity
of the UNAMID logistics base.

__________________

This is especially the case in places where government forces do not yet have full access,
particularly in the Jebel Marra and surrounding areas (such as the Kalma camp) that are under
the influence of SLA-AW. See S/2020/1115, para. 22, for further information.
9
Intercommunal conflict has increased in frequency and scale over the past year, in particular in
West, North and South Darfur. According to the International Organization for Migration, between
January and July 2021, over 261,000 individuals (compared with 58,000 in 2020) have been
displaced in Darfur, of whom 181,000 remain displaced to date. Of the 2 61,000 displaced
individuals, 99.8 per cent were displaced as a result of conflict.
10
In the Jebel Marra, clashes between SLA-AW and forces of the Sudanese Armed Forces and the
Rapid Support Forces have led to tens of thousands of people being displaced. There have also
been violent confrontations between subfactions of SLA-AW, which remains fragmented owing
to the subfactions’ divergent positions on the peace process.
11
See the report on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2021/312).
12
See the report on children and armed conflict (A/75/873-S/2021/437); see also S/2021/199, para. 28.
8

4/16

21-09831

S/2021/696

13. The regional dimension of the security situation relating to Darfur also remains
of considerable concern. While in Khartoum, the assessment team organized a round table discussion with the relevant Panels of Experts. These Panels stressed the
security challenges posed by the porous borders between the Darfur region in the
Sudan with Libya, the Central African Republic, Chad and South Sudan. They
stressed the continued flow of arms and armed groups to and from Darfur and
countries of the region, which threatened the security and stability of Darfur, as well
as those countries. The Panel of Experts on the Central African Republic has shared
with the Security Council information relating to the flow of fighters 13 and weapons 14
from Darfur to the Central African Republic, as well as the trafficking of natural
resources 15 from the Central African Republic to Darfur. The tripartite cooperation
among the Central African Republic, Chad and the Sudan was acknowledged as
helpful in managing the situation in the border areas and as a good example of
regional cooperation that could be built upon. 16
14. The Panel of Experts on Libya has documented instances of Darfuri armed
groups moving from Libya to the Sudan 17 and the presence of the Rapid Support
Forces in Libya, 18 as well as the recruitment of Sudanese combatants to fight in
Libya, 19 including by Haftar-affiliated forces. 20 It is estimated that approximately
4,000 to 5,000 Darfuri combatants and their equipment remain in Libya; their return
and reintegration could be a destabilizing factor for Darfur if not managed carefully.
Since January, in accordance with the Juba Peace Agreement, significant numbers of
forces of the signatory armed groups have returned to the Sudan. However, delays in
implementing the security arrangements have resulted in growing discontent among
these combatants, who do not receive salaries or logistical support until the
integration process starts. If this situation continues, further fragmentation within the
armed movements is possible, and there is a risk that some combatants will return to
Libya.
15. The Panel of Experts on the Sudan noted that some armed group signatories of
the Juba Peace Agreement, in anticipation of the integration of forces foreseen in the
Agreement, continue to recruit fighters as they prepare to return to Darfur. For
example, the Justice and Equality Movement has a small force in the Raja area of
Western Bahr el-Ghazal State and is recruiting new fighters and repairing its vehicles
in order to prepare for its return to Darfur. The Panel also assessed that, after the
signing of the Agreement, the Sudan Liberation Army-Minni Minawi and the
Gathering of the Sudan Liberation Forces set up small military camps, near Yida in
the Unity State of South Sudan, to recruit new fighters among the Darfuri diaspora,
including veterans who had returned to civilian life. According to their information,
some of these newly recruited Sudan Liberation Army -Minni Minawi forces reached
Darfur in early April with 27 vehicles.
16. Recent developments in Chad also have the potential to affect dynamics in
Darfur. The late President, Idriss Déby Itno, who was from the Zaghawa ethnic group,
was a guarantor of the Juba Peace Agreement and wielded considerable influence over
some Darfuri armed groups. The impact on the Darfur peace process of his absence
from the political scene remains unclear. Nonetheless, it is likely that the
__________________

S/2021/87, paras. 37–41 and annexes 3.7–3.10; S/2020/662, para. 38 and annex 3.5; S/2019/930,
paras. 65–66 and 68; and S/2021/87, paras. 30–31 and annexes 3.1–3.6.
14
S/2021/87, paras. 32–36; and S/2019/930, paras. 72–78.
15
S/2021/87, paras. 30–31 and annex 3.4.
16
Ibid., paras. 43–46.
17
S/2021/229, para. 19 and annex 9, paras. 5–11.
18
S/2019/914, paras. 24–25; and S/2021/229, para. 20.
19
S/2021/229, para. 22 and annex 10.
20
Ibid., annex 9, para. 4.
13

21-09831

5/16

S/2021/696

rapprochement between Chad and the Sudan, initially agreed under a non -aggression
pact with the former regime, will continue.

D.

National action plan for the protection of civilians
17. In anticipation of the withdrawal of UNAMID, the transitional Government
submitted a national action plan for the protection of civilians ( S/2020/429, annex) to
the Security Council 21 and has thus far provided three periodic progress reports to the
Council (see S/2020/901, S/2021/107 and S/2021/263). In the briefing to the
assessment team by the national coordinating mechanism for the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan, the coordinator
of the mechanism noted that the national-level committee for the implementation of
the national action plan was chaired by the Minister of Cabinet Affairs, under the
overall supervision of the Minister of the Interior, and was composed of all relevant
line ministries. The team was also informed that a decree had been issued for the
establishment of committees for the implementation of the action plan at the state
level. A framework of cooperation had been signed with the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and national
standard operating procedures for preventing and responding to gender-based
violence had been developed. The first law against gender-based violence is being
prepared. In addition, among other steps taken, 50 gender desks (10 in each Darfur
state) have been established in police stations, while 200 women (from the Abu Shouk
camp) were being trained as police officers.
18. The assessment team was able to meet with the protection of civilians
committees in both El Fasher and Nyala. In Nyala, the police component of the South
Darfur protection of civilians committee briefed the team and shared that the security
situation was stable and that a joint force composed of the Sudanese Armed Forces,
the Rapid Support Forces, the police and the General Intelligence Service had been
established. 22 The team was informed that this joint force of 1,103 members with
around 104 vehicles was protecting former UNAMID team sites and civilians in the
area, as well as securing the 10 camps for internally displaced persons in South
Darfur. This joint force was also patrolling at night. The committee is aware of the
presence of forces belonging to the armed group signatories in the towns, which are
not part of this joint force.
19. Working closely with the South Darfur Humanitarian Aid Commissioner, the
police are aiming to secure the voluntary return to 229 villages in 21 localities of an
estimated 29,000 refugees in the Central African Republic and South Sudan. The
police have established a police post in the camps for internally displaced persons,
and the South Darfur protection of civilians committee had just launched a community
policing initiative in the camps, which sought to recruit police officers, including
women, from among members of the camps. The police component was tracking

__________________

The plan addresses the issues of displaced persons and refugees; the rule of law and human rights;
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration; combating violence against women and children;
humanitarian action; strengthening conflict avoidance and resolution mechanisms; issues involving
nomads and herders; reconstruction, development and basic services; and water and sanitation.
22
In the special report of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission and the Secretary General of the United Nations on UNAMID and a follow-on presence, the Security Council was
informed of an announcement by the transitional Government to deploy 12,000 security personnel
from the Sudanese Armed Forces, the Rapid Support Forces and the Sudanese police forces t o
Darfur. This was subsequently revised to 6,000 personnel. By 26 August 2020, an undisclosed
number of joint forces in 80 armed vehicles (10 belonging to the Sudanese Armed Forces, 50 to
the Rapid Support Forces and 20 to the reserve police) arrived in No rth Darfur to protect farming
areas in the localities of Kabkabiyah, Saraf Umrah and Sereif ( S/2020/1115, para. 21).
21

6/16

21-09831

S/2021/696

intercommunal, as well as tribal, violence and deployed forces to affected areas as
needed. According to the committee, the biggest challenge to their efforts to maintain
security was the lack of logistical and transport capabilities, especially vehicles for
the police. A representative of the United Nations country team in Nyala confirmed
that it had a good working relationship with the police component of the committee,
which has been proactive and responsive in dealing with security incidents. The
assessment team observed soldiers in various uniforms patrolling the streets of Nyala
in vehicles mounted with heavy-calibre machine guns, as well as a number of police
officers in various parts of the city. The security situation appeared to be calm, and
there appeared to be fewer security incidents in South Darfur.
20. In El Fasher, the team was able to meet with a broader configuration of
ministerial agencies that constitute the North Darfur protection of civilians committee
operating under the leadership of the Director General of the Ministry of Social
Welfare in North Darfur. The committee has conducted more than six coordination
meetings since its establishment in 2021 and has undertaken joint assessments to eight
localities in North Darfur to address sources of conflict. As in South Darfur, the
committee stressed that the security situation was stable; there had been no major
security incidents in the past six months. The committee stated that relations between
farmers and herders were improving. 23 The committee acknowledged that
intercommunal violence, tribal conflict and a lack of trust in Government were
sources of insecurity but that the national action plan brought together the relevant
actors to address the challenges. The team was also informed that the committee had
already identified sites for the arrival of the security-keeping force.
21. The head of the voluntary return and resettlement commission noted that
internally displaced persons and refugees had started to return to North Darfur in
August 2020, even prior to the establishment of the North Darfur protection of
civilians committee. The committee had a plan, but lacked the resources, to address
the 136,276 returnees from the internally displaced camps and 6,300 refugee returnees
from Chad through the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and 18,000 refugee returnees directly from Chad refugee camps. As a result, returnees
were facing poor services to meet their basic needs, which also placed a strain on the
host communities. In other protection initiatives, the committee shared information
on the series of capacity-building training for troops and relevant partners on the
protection of internally displaced persons, as well as training on rule of law issues. It
had established investigation units within the police, as well as recruited and trained
350 women police officers, and opened two offices for women and child protection.
22. In addition to the first-hand observations in North and South Darfur, the team
benefited from feedback from members of the United Nations country team, who also
shared their positive experience of working with the East Darfur protection of
civilians committee.
23. There may be a need to better communicate the work programme and
accomplishments of these committees, as several groups of interlocutors at the state
level were not aware of the establishment of these committees or of their relative
impact on improving the lives of the population.

__________________
23

21-09831

This assessment was confirmed by the Chief Justice of North Darfur, who had recently travelled
to all localities in North Darfur and noted that there was a degree of access to justice by the
population. The State Attorney General shared with the team that there were prosecutors offices
in 11 of the 18 localities. The Head of the North Darfur Human Rights Commission noted that
the improved security situation was also accompanied by improved political rights and freedom
of the press.
7/16

S/2021/696

E.

Weapons collection programme
24. In general, the team was unable to receive comprehensive information,
documents or statistics relating to weapons collection at the federal or state levels. 24
The national coordinating mechanism for the Committee made specific mention of
two previous phases of weapons collection conducted by the Government, while a
third phase is under way. The previous Government had established a High
Committee for the Collection of Weapons in April 2016, and launched in 2017, by
Presidential Decree No. 419 of 2017, the process for the collection of weapons from
the civilian population and the militias. 25 By March 2018, the former Government of
the Sudan had collected over 107,000 weapons nationwide, including 67,000 from
Darfur, and another 200,000 from militias previously affiliated with the former
Government or Popular Defense Forces. The number of weapons collected was
assessed to be relatively small compared with estimates of illicit weapons in Darfur,
which range between 700,000 and 1.7 million. 26
25. As previously reported (S/2020/1115, para. 17), to some extent, the arms collection
campaign carried out by the Government in 2017 and 2018 improved the security
situation in urban areas and led to the voluntary return of internally displaced persons.
However, the return or resettlement was not sustained, as many returnees only visited
farms for crop cultivation and harvesting, rather than staying on a permanent basis.
26. Moreover, the weapons collection process was largely carried out by the Rapid
Support Forces. Feedback received from civil society actors and the internally
displaced population suggests that there remains a high degree of mistrust in having
the Rapid Support Forces collect weapons, given their history in the Darfur conflict.
It may be necessary to distinguish a new weapons collection programme from the
2017 initiative.
27. The disarmament, demobilization and reintegration aspect of the national action
plan for the protection of civilians outlines the regulation s for weapons possession in
accordance with the Weapons and Ammunitions Act, and in the first and second
periodic report the Security Council was informed that a joint force had been
established to collect weapons and unregistered vehicles. The Juba Peace Agreement
also contains commitments of the signatories in dealing with weapons collection and
management within the context of the ceasefire arrangements, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, and security sector reform. While the ceasefire
among the signatories of the Juba Peace Agreement appears to be holding, there does
not appear to have been significant progress on implementing the weapons collection
programme as outlined in the national action plan and the Agreement.

IV. Recommendations for benchmarks
28. The present section outlines four key benchmarks for the Security Council to
assess the measures on Darfur. These benchmarks may contribute to the
implementation of the Juba Peace Agreement, the national action plan for the
__________________

Information, however, was received on case-specific collection of weapons. For example, the
Acting Governor of North Darfur mentioned that in one area the Rapid Support Forces had
collected 86 motorcycles and weapons in the market in one day. In a meeting with the protection
of civilians committee, the representatives of the Rapid Support Forces spoke of collecting 137
pieces of weaponry in one locality.
25
See paragraph 4 of the previous report on this subject ( S/2017/747, annex).
26
See the September 2020 preliminary study of the United Nations Institute for Disarmament
Research on transitional weapons and ammunition management in the Sudan, with a focus on
Darfur, South Kordofan and Blue Nile.
24

8/16

21-09831

S/2021/696

protection of civilians, the weapons collection programme and compliance with the
sanctions measures. Given the interlinkages between the Agreement on N ational
Issues and the implementation of the various protocols in the Darfur Agreement,
attention is also paid to key political reform provisions at the national level. The
benchmarks and related targets set out below should be reviewed to assess progress
against them, as appropriate.

Benchmark 1: progress on political and economic governance issues
29. A benchmark related to progress in the implementation of political and
economic governance issues, notably in the formation of transitional institutio ns and
processes at the national and regional levels, is proposed. These targets and their
related indicators allow the transitional Government to make meaningful progress
towards addressing the exclusion of the Darfur region and its people, including
women, in the political and economic life of the region and country. Such progress is
needed to build trust among the Darfuri people in the commitment of the transitional
Government and the regional authorities to implementing the Juba Peace Agreement.
30. The first target for the achievement of this benchmark is to broaden and deepen
the legitimacy of the transitional Government currently composed of the Sovereign
Council and the Council of Ministers, to enhance the representation of the people of
Darfur in the national administration and to begin the process of dealing with the
economic drivers of conflict in Darfur. This target could be measured by the following:
(a) Establishment of the Transitional Legislative Council, with at least 40 per
cent representation of women in accordance with the Constitutional Declaration. This
40 per cent quota should include women representatives from Darfur;
(b) Establishment by law of the National Commission of Resources and
Financial Revenue Sharing and Allocation (with fair representation from the Darfur
region and chaired by an independent individual appointed by the Prime Minister),
the Darfur Reconstruction and Development Commission and the Darfur Peace
Support and Sustainable Development Fund; 27
(c) Establishment of the Darfur Lands and Hawakeer Commission, and start
of hearing and mediation of claims of property restitution filed by individuals and
communities that lost their lands because of the conflict in Darfur. A first step to be
accomplished is to review and revoke the registration of lands which are proven to
have been expropriated or forcibly taken after June 1989;
(d) Establishment and operationalization of the National Commission for
Herders, Nomads and Farmers. Operationalization of the Co mmission should include
the transfer of all assets of mechanisms working on this sector to the Commission;
making the working procedures of the Commission public; developing the
Commission’s organizational structure; developing a strategy to address the el ements
outlined in chapter 6, paragraph 8, of the protocol; and providing the first year’s
budget of the Commission from the Darfur Peace Support and Sustainable
Development Fund;
__________________
27

21-09831

The parties have agreed to allocate 40 per cent of the nation’s net revenue from mineral and
petroleum resources located in Darfur to the region for a period of 10 years. In addition, the
Darfur region shall allocate 3 per cent of the revenue from natural resourc es for the local
population in areas from which these resources are extracted. The Government of the Sudan also
committed to pay $750 million annually for a period of 10 years to the Darfur Peace Support and
Sustainable Development Fund to fund the impleme ntation of the Peace Agreement in Darfur,
including providing an initial $100 million within a month of signing the Agreement.
9/16

S/2021/696

(e) Establishment of the Internally Displaced Persons and Refugees
Commission and, as a first step to develop the comprehensive resettlement and
repatriation strategy, taking into account the views and intentions of internally
displaced persons and refugees.
31. The second target relates to enhancing the representation and partic ipation of
Darfuri women in the institutions and processes outlined in the Agreement. This target
could be measured by the enhancement of the representation of Darfuri men and
women in the national civil service, the judiciary and the office of the prosecu tor by
20 per cent as outlined in articles 26, 27 and 28 of the Darfur Agreement.
32. The third target relates to the establishment of relevant mechanisms to monitor
and evaluate the implementation of the Agreement, especially as it relates to the
Darfur component of the Agreement. Operationalizing these mechanisms can promote
a better understanding among the Darfuri population of the transitional Government’s
implementation plan and help to mobilize further international support. This target
may be measured by the following:
(a) Operationalization of an independent, capable and credible Mechanism for
Monitoring and Evaluating the Peace Agreement, in consultation with the relevant
stakeholders. In that regard, the first step would be for the transitional G overnment
to secure the agreement of its international partners on terms of reference for the
Mechanism, which should include information on the composition of the Mechanism
(including its Chair), its working methods and its secretariat;
(b) Strengthening of the capacity of the Peace Commission, which is currently
composed of a single commissioner and which has been tasked with implementing
the comprehensive peace agreement;
(c) Establishment of a “fund to care for the affairs of martyrs and the wounded
in Darfur”, 28 as well as the Compensation and Reparations Fund in Darfur (to be
funded by the Darfur Peace Support and Sustainable Development Fund), with at least
40 per cent representation of women in the structure of the Fund.

Benchmark 2: progress on transitional security arrangements
in Darfur
33. The second proposed benchmark focuses on the security arrangement provisions
of the Juba Peace Agreement agreed by the parties, 29 which seeks to address the root
causes of conflict in Darfur. Progress on the transitional security arrangements 30
outlined in the Agreement can meaningfully contribute to the maintenance of the
current ceasefire; enhance the perception of and actual security of civilians in the states
__________________

Name of the fund as specified in chapter 8, article 26.12, of the Darfur Agreement.
The parties to the security arrangements protocol in the Darfur track are the transitional
Government of the Sudan and the armed struggle movements: the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement/Army; the Justice and Equality Movement; the Gathering of the Sudan Liberation
Forces; the Sudan Liberation Movement-Transitional Council; and the Sudanese Alliance. The
military establishment in the Sudan is composed of the Sudanese Armed Forces and the Rapid
Support Forces; the unified Sudanese police forces; and the General Intelligence Service.
30
The Agreement provides for four phases of security arrangements: phase one: continuation of the
cessation of hostilities for humanitarian purposes, leading to a permanent ceasefire agreement;
phase two: implementation of the permanent ceasefire agreement and oth er comprehensive
security arrangements and implementation of the programme of integration in the military
establishment institution and other security services; phase three: implementation of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme; and phase four: implementation of
the reform, development and modernization plan for the military establishment institution and
security services (security sector).
28
29

10/16

21-09831

S/2021/696

of Darfur, including through the deployment of the security-keeping force; start the
process of integration of the forces of the signatories of the Agreement into the military
establishment and security services; and effectively manage those who would not be
integrated through a disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme.
Achievement of these provisions may also directly address concerns relating to the
security situation in Darfur that necessitated the imposition of the arms embargo and
provide opportunities for its adjustment or lifting. These steps can further enhance
public trust in security and rule of law institutions, provided that those steps are taken
with the participation of affected communities and in line with international human
rights standards.
34. A first target related to this benchmark is the establishment and
operationalization of the strategic-level mechanisms 31 and processes provided for in
the Juba Peace Agreement to oversee the implementation and management of issues
concerning security arrangements. Realization of this target would facilitate the
management of the permanent ceasefire, the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and the integration of forces processes. This target may be measured by
the following:
(a) Operationalization of the Joint High Council 32 and the Joint High Military
Committee for Security Arrangements 33 and ensuring their effective and transparent
functioning;
(b) Development and approval of the general plan for the reform, development
and modernization of the military establishment and security services and monitoring
of the implementation, as called for in the Agreement.
35. The second target is the finalization of the permanent ceasefire agreement as
called for in the Agreement. This target may be measured by the following:
(a) Replacement of the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement of 21 October 2019
with a permanent ceasefire agreement as provided in the Agreement;
(b) Establishment of the Ceasefire Committee, for which Decree No. 245 on
the formation of the Committee was issued, with headquarters in El Fasher and sectors
in all the Darfur states/region;
(c) Definition of assembly areas and concentration points of the forces of the
armed movement signatories; definition of the demilitarized zones around thes e
assembly areas and concentration points; commencement of the verification,
classification, monitoring and inventory of their weapons through the Ceasefire
Committee; handover of certain categories of weapons; and handover of their list of
forces to the Ceasefire Committee as provided in the Agreement;
(d) Submission of a comprehensive plan by the transitional Government to the
Ceasefire Committee to disarm other forces or groups (including foreign groups)
active in Darfur in accordance with chapter 8, article 24, of the Darfur Agreement.
__________________

Decrees have been passed formally establishing the Joint High Military Committee (Decree
No. 243) and the Permanent Ceasefire Committee (Decree No. 245) and its sectoral committees
(Decree No. 244).
32
Chaired by the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces, with the membership of the
Commander of the Rapid Support Forces, the Minister of Defence, the Minister of the Interior,
the Chief of Staff, the Director General of the Police, the Director General of the General
Intelligence Service, the head of the Military Intelligence Authority and heads of the armed
struggle movements for supervision, monitoring and evaluation.
33
Composed of a senior military commander from each party; five senior officers from each party;
one legal adviser; the Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Commissioner; the
Humanitarian Affairs Commissioner; a representative of the mediation’s country; a representative
of Chad; a representative of the African Union; and a representative of the United Nations.
31

21-09831

11/16

S/2021/696

36. The third target is the deployment and effective functioning of the security keeping force as foreseen in the Agreement. The timely deployment of the force may
reinforce the implementation of the permanent ceasefire and address existing sources
of tensions and insecurities such as intercommunal clashes. It could lay the basis for
the future process of integrating the forces of the armed movements. This target may
be measured by the following:
(a) Deployment and operationalization of the security-keeping force to all five
states of Darfur; 34
(b) Provision of an initial report to the Security Council on the deployment of
the force. The initial report should include information on the numbers and
composition of the force to be deployed in each state; predeployment training,
including in international humanitarian and human rights law; deployment schedule;
command and control of the force at the state and regional levels; concept of
operations; and weapons and ammunition management of the force to be deployed to
the states;
(c) Provision of subsequent six-monthly progress updates to the Security
Council on the deployment and operations of the force, as well as steps taken to
address any misconduct by force personnel;
(d) Establishment of a communications strategy at the state and regional
levels, together with the respective protection of civilians committees, to explain the
deployment and roles of the force. The strategy should include information on the
mechanisms available to the public to report any abuse and misconduct by the force.
37. The fourth target is the completion of the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme process, as agreed to by parties to the Agreement. This targe t
can usefully build on the structure and experience of the existing Disarmament,
Demobilization and Reintegration Commission in the Sudan, and progress towards
its achievement may be measured by the following:
(a) Restructuring of the Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration
High Council and the National Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration
Commission, with representation of parties to the Agreement, and establishment of
the Darfur Regional Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Comm ission; 35
(b) Completion of a comprehensive assessment of needs and challenges related
to disarmament, demobilization and reintegration in Darfur, including but not limited
to the reintegration of forces of the armed movement signatories and coordination with
the Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration High Council; 36
(c) Immediate and unconditional dismissal and release of all combatant
children, as well as groups with special needs and women former combatants, to the
Joint Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Committee for reintegration;
(d) Establishment and implementation of a disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme, with adequate funding, for the former combatants of the
__________________

The transitional Government should enhance the role of the civilian police, including women, in
this security-keeping force and may also consider the inclusion of a small civilian component to
the force, which could be drawn from the entities represented in the state -level protection of
civilians committees. The civilian police and/or civilian component co uld be a helpful interface
between the force and the communities where the force is deployed.
35
See para. 41 (a) on the need for the rationalization of certain activities within the national action
plan and the Juba Peace Agreement.
36
To facilitate the effective reintegration of former combatants at the community level, the
transitional Government may also wish to consider the importance of community -level violence
reduction initiatives.
34

12/16

21-09831

S/2021/696

signatory armed groups willing to return to civilian life, or those who do not meet the
criteria to join security institutions. As a first step, it would be important to establish
an appropriate and realistic eligibility criteria policy for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme.
38. The fifth target relates to completing the integration of the signatory armed
movements into the military establishment and security services according to the
criteria established in the Agreement. This target may be measured by the following:
(a) Establishment of the Technical Integration Committee to plan, implement,
manage and monitor the integration process of former combatants of the armed
movements;
(b) Establishment of the Joint Police Technical Committee and the Joint
Intelligence Technical Committee to undertake the task of integrating the members of
the armed movements into the police and the General Intelligence Service,
respectively, in accordance with the agreed criteria;
(c) Appointment of a number of senior officers from the armed move ments in
the general command, the ground forces, the police and the General Intelligence
Service based on the size of the integrated forces;
(d) Development of plans and policies for managing the forces for the entirety
of the agreed period during which the integrated forces remain in Darfur.

Benchmark 3: progress on the national action plan for the
protection of civilians
39. The third proposed benchmark focuses on the strengthening of the civilian -led
implementation of the national action plan for the protection of civilians, which could
be a strong complement to the above-mentioned benchmark on security arrangements.
Realization of this benchmark and its indicators could enhance the civilian aspect of
security through the protection of civilians committees, weapons collection, the
delivery of humanitarian assistance and the rule of law and access to justice.
40. The first target for this benchmark is to ensure the full functionality of the
institutional and reporting framework for the execution of the national action plan in
Darfur. This target may be measured by the following:
(a) Implementation of the existing decree to have the Unit for Combating
Violence against Women and Children report directly to the Council of Ministers.
This will ensure that it is able to independently report on progress regarding
protection issues, in particular relating to the conduct of the securi ty forces and armed
movements;
(b) Establishment and operationalization of the interministerial protection of
civilians committees in all five states in Darfur under civilian leadership, with the
active participation of all relevant line ministries, in p articular entities working on the
protection of women and children;
(c) Development and dissemination of state-specific action plans to
implement the national action plan, which would facilitate support from the
international community;
(d) Systematic inclusion of the Chairs of the state-level protection of civilians
committees into the security committee chaired by the governors (walis) to ensure a
comprehensive approach to improving security in the states;

21-09831

13/16

S/2021/696

(e) Regular six-monthly progress reports to the Security Council on the
implementation of the national action plan, which should reflect the progress,
challenges and support needs of each of the Darfuri states. 37
41. The second target for this benchmark is to ensure progress on key programmatic
dimensions of the national action plan. Indicators to measure progress include:
(a) Review and rationalization of the national action plan against the Juba
Peace Agreement, including the need to establish new committees or commissions to
implement similar objectives (such as disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
and issues relating to nomads and herders);
(b) Review and update, as required, of Presidential Decree No. 417 of July
2017 and the related weapons collection programme, taking into account the new
political and security context in Darfur after the signing of the Juba Peace Agreement;
(c) Implementation of the framework of cooperation with the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, with
attention to accountability, prevention measures and the provision of comprehensive
services to survivors;
(d) Development and signature of a new national prevention plan to prevent
all six grave violations against children in the Sudan, including in Da rfur; 38
(e) Provision of the required police escorts to the relevant United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes delivering humanitarian assistance in areas of need.
This will also require United Nations actors to harmonize their requests to minimize
the strain on limited police escort capacities.

Benchmark 4: progress on transitional justice and accountability
42. A final benchmark is proposed on the achievement of transitional justice and
accountability in Darfur. This is in line with the commit ments made by the parties to
the Juba Peace Agreement, which recognize the importance of reconciliation in
addressing the root causes of conflict in Darfur, including the marginalization of the
people of Darfur, and build on the new era of cooperation betw een the International
Criminal Court and the transitional Government. Realization of this benchmark will
not only provide remedies for victims and a sense of accountability for crimes
committed in Darfur during the conflict but may also contribute to the p romotion of
peaceful coexistence, cooperation and social solidarity among the various peoples in
Darfur.
43. The target for this benchmark is the operationalization of the agreed transitional
justice mechanisms contained in the Juba Peace Agreement to pro vide accountability
for crimes and violations committed and to promote reconciliation. This target can be
measured by the following:
(a) Ensuring broad dissemination of the law on the Transitional Justice
Commission to all relevant stakeholders, including victims, women, youth,
communities and civil society;

__________________

This is important, as the security situation across Darfur varies by state. For example, in 2020,
half of the 40 incidents of intercommunal violence recorded in Darfur were in West Darfur alone.
38
The Government’s 2016 action plan was completed in 2018. The six grave violations are killing
and maiming of children; recruitment or use of children as soldiers; sexual violence against
children; abduction of children; attacks against schools or hospitals; and denial of humanitarian
access for children.
37

14/16

21-09831

S/2021/696

(b) Establishment and operationalization of the Truth and Reconciliation
Committee, in which women should also be represented, to identify and assess the
root causes of conflict in Darfur and to address violations, crimes and human rights
abuses, including violations of economic, social, environmental and cultural rights
committed since June 1989, among other tasks;
(c) Establishment and operationalization of a Special Court for Darfur
Crimes, including the appointment of an independent prosecutor to prosecute
genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and gross violations of international
human rights and humanitarian law since 2002.

V. Conclusion
44. The democratic revolution of 2018 in the Sudan has ushered in an important
new chapter in the country’s history. The transitional Government has taken many
difficult but important decisions to address the considerab le challenges confronting
the country, in order to meet the aspirations of the Sudanese people, including in
Darfur. In that regard, the context in which the Security Council imposed and
maintained the sanctions regime has changed. It is therefore timely t hat the Council
is considering possible benchmarks to review the sanctions regime against the Sudan
established pursuant to its resolution 1591 (2005), including lifting the arms
embargo. 39
45. The proposed benchmarks in the present report benefited from consultations
with a broad range of Sudanese interlocutors, as well as their regional and
international partners. Largely anchored in the commitments made in the national
action plan for the protection of civilians and the Juba Peace Agreement, their
implementation can further improve the political, security, humanitarian and human
rights situation in Darfur. I recommend that the Security Council consider and adopt
the benchmarks, as well as request a progress update from the Secretariat on their
implementation within six months of their adoption and prior to the renewal of the
sanctions regime, which is due to take place on or around 12 February 2022. An early
review of the progress achieved against Council-established benchmarks provides the
transitional Government the opportunity to demonstrate that the sanctions, in
particular the arms embargo, on the Darfur region may be adjusted or are no longer
needed.
46. The transitional Government has expressed a strong commitment to
implementing the national action plan, as well as the Juba Peace Agreement, but it
will require the support of the international community and the cooperation of
neighbouring States to do so. The benchmarks set out above also articul ate the priority
actions required by the transitional Government to implement the plan and the
Agreement, so that its partners may be better able to support the transitional
Government’s plans and programmes in Darfur. I encourage the international partner s
of the Sudan to coordinate their collective and bilateral support to ensure
programmatic coherence and efficiency. I note that the transitional Government is
continuing its efforts to engage with the non-signatories of the Juba Peace Agreement.
I reiterate my call to Abdul Wahid al-Nur to engage in peace negotiations and
contribute to the building of peace, security and development in Darfur and the rest
of the country.
47. Given the transformed political context in the Sudan, it is appropriate that the
transitional Government engages proactively and directly with the Security Council
__________________
39

21-09831

See also S/2019/816, para. 49, in which the Security Council was called upon to consider
reviewing the sanctions regime, including lifting the arms embargo.
15/16

S/2021/696

Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan.
Building on the well-received submission of the national action plan for the protection
of civilians and its periodic updates to the Security Council, closer and regular
engagement between the transitional Government and the Committee can enhance
mutual understanding regarding the situation in Darfur. Regular briefings to the
Committee by representatives of the transitional Government could be of mutual
benefit. 40 Given the stigma often associated with sanctions, I encourage the Council
and its Committee to intensify their communications strateg y to make clear that the
sanctions regime is not targeted towards the transitional Government but remains in
place to support government efforts to fully restore peace and stability in Darfur.

__________________
40

16/16

Possible briefers from the transitional Government include the coordinator of the national
coordinating mechanism for the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005)
concerning the Sudan and the Director General of the Unit for Combating Violence against
Women and Children.
21-09831
