A/73/374–S/2018/824

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

General Assembly
Seventy-third session
Agenda item 40
The situation in Afghanistan

Distr.: General
10 September 2018
Original: English

Security Council
Seventy-third year

The situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 68/11
and Security Council resolution 2405 (2018), in which the Secretary-General was
requested to report every three months on developments in Afghanistan.
2.
The report provides an update on the activities of the United Nations in
Afghanistan, including political, humanitarian, development and human rights
efforts, since the issuance of the previous report, on 6 June 2018 (A/72/888S/2018/539).

II. Relevant developments
3.
Political mobilization intensified as opposition groups formed coalitions ahead
of parliamentary elections, scheduled for 20 October. A diverse group of political
parties continued to demand electoral reforms, with some threatening an electoral
boycott if their demands were not met. Following a long series of negotiations with
the Government, the First Vice-President, Abdul Rashid Dostum, returned to
Afghanistan after having resided in Turkey for over a year. The electoral management
bodies continued preparations for parliamentary elections, although it was proposed
that district council elections, initially scheduled for the same date, be postponed
because of low numbers of candidate nominations. The Government and the Taliban
implemented overlapping ceasefires over the Eid al-Fitr holiday, resulting in a threeday drop in violence and public meetings between government and Taliban loyalists.
However, the Taliban rejected calls for an extension of the ceasefire, and both sides
resumed offensive operations. The Government declared a second ceasefire for the
Eid al-Adha holiday, on the condition that the Taliban reciprocate, but it did not.
Security remained volatile, with attacks in Ghazni Province and across northern areas,
and civilian casualties continued at very high levels. The Government continued its

18-14440 (E)

110918

*1814440*

A/73/374
S/2018/824

reform efforts in preparation for the Geneva Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan,
to be held on 28 November, finalized its subnational governance policy and completed
a mass, merit-based recruitment exercise for the civil service. Drought conditions
continued to destroy livelihoods and caused additional population displacement in
western Afghanistan. A record number of returnees from the Islamic Republic of Iran
had so far been recorded in 2018, while returns from Pakistan remained relatively
low.

A.

Political developments
4.
The mobilization of the political opposition described in my previous report
intensified as parliamentary elections drew near and difficulties in the process became
clearer. Where previously it appeared that the mobilization had been for the purpose
of participating in the election, opposition parties increasingly began to criticize the
process itself. Parties were particularly sceptical of the announcement by the
Independent Election Commission that more than 9 million voters had been
registered. Calls for an interim administration to replace the National Unity
Government, previously a fringe position, began to emerge within the political
mainstream.
5.
Discontent over electoral preparations was largely focused in the North, where
security conditions continued to deteriorate, and some opposition figures accused the
Government of a deliberate plot to disenfranchise northern communities. That
perception was exacerbated following the arrest by Government forces on 2 July of
Nezamuddin Qaysari, a district chief of police and close associate of Mr. Dostum in
Faryab Province. The arrest triggered protests in the Uzbek-majority Faryab Province
that quickly spread to other northern provinces, including Balkh, Jowzjan, Kunduz,
Samangan, Sari Pul and Takhar. Protestors demanded the release of Mr. Qaysari and
the return of Mr. Dostum, who had resided in Turkey since May 2017, with some
warning that they would boycott elections and form an autonomous government if
their demands were not met. When the Government refused to address the demands,
protestors began to block the Kabul to Mazar-e Sharif Highway in Samangan
Province, forced the closure of the provincial offices of the Independent Election
Commission in six provinces and blocked the road leading from the important land
port at Maymana. After two weeks of mounting instability, the Government began
negotiations with the Junbesh-i Milli political party over the return of the First Vice President. As part of the negotiations, Mr. Qaysari was released from prison on
21 July and returned to a mutually agreed location, accompanied by guards from the
National Directorate of Security and from Junbesh-i Milli.
6.
Following negotiations with representatives of the Presidential Palace,
Mr. Dostum returned to Kabul on 22 July. He was greeted by a large gathering of
political figures, including the former governor of Balkh Province, Atta Noor, and
Second Chief Executive Officer, Mohammad Mohaqeq. Speaking at the gathering,
Mr. Dostum announced his intention to work with the Government on peace and
elections. Following Mr. Dostum’s return, the protests in the North immediately
subsided, allowing the reopening of borders, highways and Government offices in six
provinces. There were no developments in the legal proceedings against Mr. Dostum,
who remained under indictment for the alleged sexual assault of a political rival in
2016.
7.
Following months of negotiations between opposition groups, the Gra nd
National Coalition of Afghanistan was launched in Kabul on 26 July. The new
Coalition brought together members of the former Coalition for the Salvation of
Afghanistan, also known as the Ankara Alliance, including Mr. Dostum, Mr. Noor
and Mr. Mohaqeq, as well as representatives of other political parties and formerly

2/16

18-14440

A/73/374
S/2018/824

unaligned opponents of the Government. This demonstrated a further expansion of
the original base of the Ankara Alliance, which had originally been conceived as a
largely northern, non-Pashtun and former jihadi grouping. The former President,
Hamid Karzai, endorsed the objectives of the Coalition, although he did not formally
join the group.
8.
A separate but overlapping coalition of 27 political parties, first established in
March, continued to demand changes to the electoral system and to cast doubt on the
independence of the Independent Election Commission. As the voter registration
process ended, the group demanded that the voter list be invalidated and that
biometric voter registration take place. However, the Commission responded that
those demands were impossible to implement before the October elections. A series
of discussions convened by the Second Vice-President, Sarwar Danesh, with the
Commission and the group towards the end of July and beginning of August were
inconclusive. As negotiations faltered, the parties threatened to boycott or obstruct
the holding of elections if their demands were not met. Some members joined former
President Karzai in calling for the establishment of an interim administration.
9.
The appointment on 19 July of the Chief Electoral Officer to the Independent
Election Commission aided preparations for the parliamentary elections scheduled
for 20 October, as the crucial post had been vacant since late in 201 7. Voter
registration, which had begun in provincial centres on 14 April, was subsequently
extended to districts and rural areas, and ended on 27 July. The Commission
announced that around 9.5 million voters had been registered, of which 34 per cent
were women. Once registration was complete, the Commission began digitizing the
records to create a single list of voters that could be checked for duplication and
disaggregated by polling station. Opposition parties and many political figures have
cast doubt on the credibility of the number of voters registered, citing poor security
conditions and alleging fraud.
10. Protests over the past and likely future disenfranchisement due to insecurity in
Ghazni Province prevented electoral preparations, as representativ es of the Pashtun
and Tajik communities held protests demanding the Province be divided into smaller
electoral constituencies. Protesters blocked the provincial election commission ’s
office throughout the registration period, preventing both voter registra tion and
candidate nomination. On 25 June, the Independent Election Commission decided to
divide Ghazni into three electoral constituencies as a possible solution to the
disenfranchisement concerns. However, the decision failed to appease the protestors
and triggered counter-protests by the Hazara community, resulting in the continued
closure of the provincial office of the Commission.
11. The registration of candidates for parliamentary and district council elections
ended on 12 and 14 June, respectively, with a preliminary list of parliamentary
candidates for 33 provinces published on 2 July. However, candidate numbers for
district council elections were low, with only 40 out of 387 districts presenting a
sufficient number of candidates to hold competitive elections. The lack of candidates
was mostly due to insecurity, restrictive educational requirements (high school
diploma) and a lack of clarity regarding the functions of district councils. On 29 July,
the Independent Election Commission formally proposed that district council
elections and parliamentary elections for Ghazni Province be postponed under
article 104 of the Election Law, which allows for the postponement of elections for
reasons of insecurity or other conditions that make holding fair electi ons impossible.
The case was referred to a special committee made up of the National Security
Council, the speakers of the two houses of parliament, the Chief Justice and the Chair
of the Independent Commission for Oversight of the Implementation of the
Constitution, for a final decision.

18-14440

3/16

A/73/374
S/2018/824

12. On 27 July, the President appointed 102 commissioners of the provincial offices
of the Electoral Complaints Commission, three months after the legally established
deadline. As a result of the delayed appointment of com missioners, out of 680
complaints received, only 240 had been adjudicated as at 20 August. In the meantime,
according to the provisions of the 2016 Electoral Law, a vetting commission was
established, composed of representatives from the Electoral Complain ts Commission,
the Independent Directorate of Local Governance, the Ministry of the Interior and the
National Directorate of Security, to identify and remove candidates with links to
illegal armed groups. On 4 August, the vetting commission informed 25 can didates
that they had been excluded from contesting the election owing to their links with
illegal armed groups. Following a review period for those candidates recommended
for disqualification, the Electoral Complaints Commission announced on 10 August
that a total of 35 candidates had been disqualified. Following the announcement of
the final list of candidates, a number of supporters of disqualified candidates began
to stage protests in Kabul and around the country. Those protests led to the closure of
the Independent Election Commission headquarters compound in Kabul and, as at
21 August, nine provincial offices of the Independent Election Commission, in
Badakhshan, Gardez, Kabul, Kunduz, Logar, Parwan, Pul-i-Khumri, Samangan and
Takhar. The closure of the Independent Election Commission headquarters effectively
halted the process of entering data in the voter registry and the retrieval of voter
registration books from a number of provinces, among other electoral preparations.
On 8 August, President Ghani issued a decree on ensuring the impartiality of
government officials and institutions in elections and the security of the electoral
process.
13. The Independent Election Commission approved its gender policy to enhance
the participation of women in elections and accredited 17 civil society organizations,
15 media organizations and 20 political parties to monitor and observe all parts of the
electoral process. Of the 2,564 candidates for the lower house, the Wolesi Jirga, 391
were women.
14. To support preparations for the 2018 elections, the United Nations and the
electoral management bodies signed on 25 July a revised Electoral Support Project
document, with the donors pledging an additional $57 million in financial support.
15. The momentum in support of a peace process with the Taliban continued, aided
by the increasingly active engagement of civil society and religious leaders calling
for peace between the Government and the Taliban. Representatives of the People ’s
Peace Movement, which began as a series of sit-ins in southern Afghanistan, marched
from Lashkar Gah in Helmand Province, passing through Kandahar, Zabul, Ghazni
and Wardak Provinces before reaching Kabul on 18 June. In Kabul, the group staged
a series of sit-ins in front of the embassies of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Pakistan,
the Russian Federation, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America, as well as a compound of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), before undertaking a march to Balkh
Province. Religious leaders also took on a more public role in advocating for a peace
process. In a gathering on 4 June in Kabul, more than 3,000 religious scholars issued
a fatwa declaring the insurgency against the Government of Afgh anistan to be
illegitimate, and calling on the Taliban to join peace negotiations. That was followed
on 10 and 11 July by a gathering in Saudi Arabia of religious leaders from more than
30 countries, in which participants again expressed their support for peace in
Afghanistan.
16. Bolstered by pro-peace developments in the civic sphere, signs of flexibility
emerged among the main parties to the conflict. On 7 June, President Ghani
announced a unilateral eight-day cessation of hostilities with the Taliban beginning
on 12 June, to mark the Eid al-Fitr holiday. Two days later, the Taliban issued its own
4/16

18-14440

A/73/374
S/2018/824

declaration of a three-day ceasefire over the holiday period from 15 to 17 June. The
ensuing three days of overlapping ceasefires witnessed a significant drop i n violent
incidents, with the only major exceptions being two suicide attacks in Jalalabad on
16 and 17 June, both claimed by Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant -Khorasan
Province (ISIL-KP). Taliban fighters entered government-controlled areas throughout
the country, and unprecedented public meetings took place in many provinces
between Government officials and Taliban leaders. On 16 June, the Government
announced that the ceasefire would be extended for a further 10 days following the
holiday. The Taliban rejected an extension of its ceasefire and, on 18 June, relaunched
offensive operations. While the ceasefires were largely greeted with enthusiasm on
social media, some political figures and civil society organizations criticized the
Government for the unilateral extension of the ceasefire. On 30 June, President Ghani
announced the official end of the Government’s ceasefire and stated that the
Government would like to begin an intra-Afghan dialogue as soon as possible,
followed by a second phase involving regional countries, the United States and the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO).
17. In the following weeks, media reports emerged of direct talks between the
United States and the Taliban. Despite that reported development, and further
accounts of increasing informal contact between all parties, direct peace negotiations
between the Government and the Taliban did not materialize during the reporting
period.
18. On 19 August, President Ghani announced a second ceasefire, beginning on the
eve of the Eid al-Adha holiday on 20 August through the holiday of Milad ul -Nabi on
19 November. However, the ceasefire was conditional on the announcement of a
similar ceasefire by the Taliban, which did not formally respond. The Government ’s
announcement was welcomed by members of the international community, including
Pakistan, the United States and NATO, but generated controversy on social media and
sparked a small demonstration in Kabul.
19. The Government made limited progress on the implementation of its Septe mber
2016 peace agreement with Hizb-i Islami Gulbuddin. On 25 July, representatives of
the group met with representatives of the NATO Resolute Support Mission to discuss
a list of 59 outstanding prisoners proposed for release by Hizb -i Islami Gulbuddin.
However, repeated requests for their release were rejected, largely owing to
insufficient guarantees that the released prisoners would not rejoin the insurgency. On
28 July, members of the joint executive secretariat for the implementation of the
agreement met with representatives of the National Directorate for Security, the
Ministry of the Interior and the Ministry of Defence to discuss implementation of the
agreement, including future prisoner releases and land allocation, as well as the
possible effect of a recent wave of security sector retirements on security personnel
affiliated with Hizb-i Islami Gulbuddin.

B.

Security
20. The security situation remained volatile, with continuing high numbers of
incidents briefly interrupted by the reduction in violence during the Eid al-Fitr
ceasefires. Between 15 May and 15 August, UNAMA recorded a total of 5,800
security incidents, a 10 per cent decrease compared with the same period in 2017. The
southern region saw the highest number of incidents followed by th e eastern and
south-eastern regions, with those three regions accounting for 67 per cent of all
incidents. Although armed clashes continued to make up the largest number of
security incidents (61 per cent of all incidents), the number of armed clashes fell by
14 per cent compared with the same period in 2017. In terms of other incident
categories, suicide attacks increased by 38 per cent and air strikes by the Afghan Air

18-14440

5/16

A/73/374
S/2018/824

Force and international military forces increased by 46 per cent compared with the
same period in 2017.
21. Concerns remained over deteriorating security conditions in the north. The
Government’s control over territory decreased in Faryab Province, as the Taliban
captured three district administrative centres and overran the Afghan National Army
base in Ghormach over a one-week period in August. High levels of ground
engagements were recorded in Balkh, Faryab and Jowzjan Provinces, while incidents
along the main ring road had a negative impact on movement between the capitals of
the three provinces. In total, the northern region recorded 17 per cent more security
incidents over the first half of 2018 than in the same period in 2017.
22. The overall level of violence decreased significantly during the Eid al -Fitr
ceasefires, bookended by spikes in armed clashes in the preceding and following
weeks. Over the week incorporating the holiday, UNAMA recorded a total of 285
incidents, the lowest level of violence in a one-week period since the 2014 security
transition. However, the weeks following the ceasefire again saw a rise in Talibaninitiated armed clashes, as the movement sought to regain the offensive following the
unprecedented events of Eid.
23. There were no sustained changes in territorial control between the Government
and the Taliban during the reporting period. The Taliban mounted a number of attacks
against district administrative centres, temporarily taking control of Jaghatu and Deh
Yak in Ghazni Province, Tala Wa Barfak and Burkah in Baghlan Province and Atghar
in Zabul Province, before withdrawing following counter-attacks by Afghan national
security forces, often supported by international military airstrikes. On 10 August, the
Taliban launched a large-scale attack against the capital of Ghazni Province, Ghazni
City. Fighting lasted five days before the Afghan National Defence and Security
Forces pushed Taliban fighters to the edge of the city. Additional reports were
received of attacks against the Deh Yak, Khwajah Omari and Ajrestan district
administrative centres in Ghazni Province, and of Taliban ambushes against
reinforcements travelling to Ghazni in Zabul, Wardak and Logar Provinces. The main
highway from Kabul to Kandahar cities continued to see high levels of insecurity.
24. ISIL-KP remained a significant presence in the eastern region, claiming
responsibility for eight suicide and complex attacks in Nangarhar Province during the
reporting period, two attacks in Kabul and one in Gardez City. ISIL -KP continued to
fight against the Taliban in the East, with armed clashes reporte d in Nangarhar and
Kunar Provinces. International military forces continued to target ISIL -KP in
Nangarhar Province, conducting a series of air strikes against ISIL -KP targets in Deh
Bala, Achin, Khugyani, Naziyan and Chaparhar districts of Nangarhar Provi nce. On
1 August, a large group of fighters proclaiming affiliation with ISIL -KP surrendered
to the Government in Jowzjan Province, following a series of fierce battles against
Taliban forces. The incident allowed the Taliban to consolidate its position as the
pre-eminent insurgent force in Jowzjan and represented a blow to the attempt by ISIL KP to gain a foothold in the country’s north.
25. The Government continued its efforts to implement security sector reform in
accordance with its four-year road map. Under the Inherent Law of 2017, 656 generals
have been retired from the Afghan National Army in an attempt to promote
generational change, rebalance the distribution of ranks and foster stronger
leadership. The reforms were expanded to the Ministry of the Interior, with the first
of two planned tranches of retirements initiated in July. The Afghan National Police
also continued to roll out the verification of personnel, which began on 15 April. The
process, which includes biometric registration and proof of vetting of Police
personnel, remained ongoing as at August 2018.

6/16

18-14440

A/73/374
S/2018/824

26. Contributor countries to the NATO Resolute Support Mission met on 11 and
12 July in Brussels. Reaffirming their commitment to lasting security in Afghanistan,
NATO allies and partners announced their commitment to sustain the non-combat
mission until conditions indicate that a change in the mission is appropriate. They
also agreed to extend financial support for Afghan forces through 2024. NATO
emphasized the stability of Afghanistan in the context of the Central Asian region and
the role of regional actors in achieving peace and stability in Afghanistan by fully
supporting a negotiated political solution.
27. In total, 12 incidents involving United Nations personnel were reported,
including 5 cases of intimidation, 1 assassination and 1 improvised explosive device related incident. A contractor working with the International Organization for
Migration (IOM) was killed during a complex attack on 31 July on a government
facility in Jalalabad City.

C.

Regional cooperation
28. The momentum towards a consolidated regional approach to peace in
Afghanistan, generated by the second meeting of the Kabul Process for Peace and
Security Cooperation, held on 28 February, and the conference h eld in Tashkent on
26 and 27 March, continued during the reporting period. On 17 July, a delegation
from Qatar visited Uzbekistan, where representatives of the two countries discussed
implementing the provisions of the Tashkent Declaration on Fundamental P rinciples
for a Peaceful Settlement of the Conflict in Afghanistan. Uzbekistan reiterated its
offer to host direct talks between the Government of Afghanistan and the Taliban. On
23 July, Qatar hosted a quadrilateral meeting of national security advisers f rom
Afghanistan, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and the United States to discuss
the Afghan peace process, countering the financing of terrorism and other aspects of
regional cooperation. From 7 to 10 August, a delegation from the Qatar-based Taliban
Political Commission visited Uzbekistan, where they met with the Foreign Minister
of Uzbekistan, Abdulaziz Kamilov.
29. Progress was made on the implementation of the Afghanistan -Pakistan Action
Plan for Peace and Solidarity, which was finalized in May 2018. Meeting in Pakistan
on 11 June, Afghan and Pakistani directors-general of military operations agreed to
deploy liaison officers in each other’s capitals and establish coordination centres to
share intelligence. High-level visits between the countries’ security institutions
continued, for the purpose of increasing cooperation on peace in Afghanistan and
bilateral security issues. On 22 July, the Foreign Secretary of Pakistan visited Kabul.
Following the election of Imran Khan as Prime Minister of Pakistan, the Prime
Minister-elect gave a public address indicating that Pakistan would prioritize peace
in Afghanistan. Cross-border shelling continues to be a concerning bilateral issue.
30. Multilateral efforts to improve regional cooperation continued. Duri ng the
18th Shanghai Cooperation Organization Summit, held from 9 to 10 June in Qingdao,
China, the importance was underlined of the contact group between the Organization
and Afghanistan. Participants reiterated the need for socioeconomic development
based on priorities of the Afghan people and greater connectivity and regional
integration for Afghanistan. In the press communiqué of the Summit, members of the
Organization expressed their support for the mediation of the conflict in Afghanistan
and cooperation in combating terrorism, separatism and extremism. On 2 July,
Afghanistan hosted an ambassadorial meeting of the Heart of Asia -Istanbul Process.
Participating countries assessed the progress made towards achieving the
recommendations agreed upon on 19 April at the senior officials meeting, including
the expansion of economic cooperation and the reinvigoration of confidence -building
measures.

18-14440

7/16

A/73/374
S/2018/824

III. Human rights
31. On 15 July, UNAMA released its 2018 midyear update on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. 1 The Mission documented 5,122 civilian casualties (1,692
people killed and 3,430 injured) between 1 January and 30 June 2018, the highest
number of civilian deaths recorded in a six-month period since UNAMA began
systematic documentation in 2009. Overall levels of civilian harm were similar to the
same period in 2017. UNAMA attributed 67 per cent of all civilian casualties to
anti-government elements (42 per cent to the Taliban, 18 per cent to ISIL -KP, 7 per
cent to unidentified anti-government elements, including self-proclaimed ISIL-KP),
20 per cent to pro-government forces, 10 per cent to unattributed crossfire during
ground engagements between anti-government elements and pro-government forces,
and 3 per cent to other incidents, including explosive remnants of war and crossborder shelling.
32. The use of improvised explosive device tactics (including suicide and
non-suicide attacks) caused 2,290 civilian casualties (659 people killed and 1,631
injured) and was the leading cause of such casualties during the first half of 2018,
accounting for 45 per cent of civilian casualties. Ground engagements, the second
leading cause, accounted for 1,494 civilian casualties (360 people killed and 1,134
injured), amounting to 29 per cent of all civilian casualties. UNAMA continued to
document high levels of civilian casualties from aerial strikes by pro -government
forces, recording 353 civilian casualties (149 people killed and 204 injured), with
women and children comprising more than half of those casualti es. UNAMA
documented 1,355 child casualties (363 children killed and 992 injured), accounting
for 24 per cent of all civilian casualties. Women casualties decreased by 15 per cent,
with a total of 157 women killed and 387 injured. More than half of the wom en
casualties were caused by ground engagements.
33. Attacks targeting election-related sites from April to June resulted in 341
civilian casualties (117 people killed and 224 injured), most of which (over 250
casualties) resulted from two attacks, in Kabul City on 22 April and in Khost Province
on 6 May. UNAMA documented attacks on tazkira (national identification card)
distribution centres and voter registration sites, as well as attacks against election related personnel. It also recorded threats, abductions and killings of candidates and
their supporters.
34. From 1 April to 30 June, the country task force on monitoring and reporting
verified 79 attacks against schools and education-related personnel, including 44
election-related incidents affecting schools, 24 direct attacks on schools, 7 threats
against schools and related personnel and 4 attacks against education -related
personnel. The task force attributed 73 incidents to anti -government elements (47 to
the Taliban, 18 to ISIL-KP, including 1 to self-proclaimed ISIL-KP, and 7 to
undetermined anti-government elements), 4 to Afghan National Defence and Security
Forces and 2 jointly to Afghan National Defence and Security Forces and the Taliban
during crossfire. The sharp increase in attacks against schools and education-related
personnel, up from 11 such incidents in the previous reporting period, is due to the
use of schools as voter registration centres and the targeting of education facilities by
anti-government elements, apparently in reaction to military operations by
pro-government forces. In addition, the task force verified the military use of one
school by the Afghan National Army.
35. The task force verified 12 attacks against health facilities and health -care
personnel, including 9 attacks against health-care facilities and 3 against health-care
__________________
1

8/16

UNAMA, “Midyear update on the protection of civilians in armed conflict: 1 January to 30 June
2018” (Kabul, 2018).
18-14440

A/73/374
S/2018/824

workers, compared with 16 incidents in the previous reporting period. The task force
attributed 7 incidents to armed groups (4 to the Taliban, 2 to undetermined
anti-government elements and 1 to self-proclaimed ISIL-KP), 2 jointly to
international military forces and Afghan National Defence and Security Forces,
1 each to pro-government militia and the Afghan National Police, and 1 jointly to the
Afghan National Army and Taliban during crossfire. The task force verified the
recruitment and use of two boys by parties to the conflict and documented credible
allegations of the recruitment and use of four boys by the Taliban and one boy by the
National Directorate of Security and the Taliban. In addition, t he task force
documented credible allegations of three cases of sexual abuse involving three boys,
including for the purpose of bacha bazi, attributed to the Afghan National Police and
Afghan Local Police.
36. In late May, UNAMA submitted to the Government and selected stakeholders a
confidential report in which it documented Afghan communities ’ awareness of and
observations on the prevalence of the recruitment and use of children by parties to the
conflict, and the root causes and enabling factors driving such practices in
Afghanistan. The report was based on almost 700 interviews as well as monitoring
conducted by UNAMA human rights teams between 15 October 2016 and
31 December 2017. The report highlighted the fact that the practice of child
recruitment and use is perceived as common in Afghanistan, with the Taliban reported
to be the main perpetrators. Communities in all regions of Afghanistan further alleged
the use of boys for the purpose of sexual abuse, including bacha bazi, by armed
forces, in particular the Afghan Local Police and Afghan National Police, and
identified poverty and unemployment as underlying causes.
37. Following the criminalization of bacha bazi in the new Penal Code, UNAMA
hosted an event on 6 August aimed at developing strategies on accountability for that
crime and to strengthen responses for victims. Participants included representatives
from the Government, the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces, and
international military forces. While not all participants agreed on th e extent of the
problem and ways in which to address it, all acknowledged the need for sensitization
and awareness-raising among the Afghan population and within the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces concerning the criminalization of bacha bazi.
Suggestions for follow-up included the adoption of a strategy and action plan to look
more comprehensively into the issue.
38. The Government, with the support of UNAMA, continued efforts to address
violence against women. On 29 May, the Mission and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) launched a report 2 that highlighted
the human rights concerns arising from the use of mediation in cases of violence
against women. In June, the Government established the High Commissio n on the
Elimination of Harassment against Women and Children to improve implementation
of the 2017 Anti-Harassment of Women and Children Law. The Government also took
steps to increase the role of women in promoting peace and security. On 17 July,
UNAMA facilitated a national conference to build consensus around taking action to
ensure accountability for acts of violence against women. On 29 July, the President
nominated a female judge to the Afghanistan Supreme Court High Council. If
appointed, she will be the first woman to hold that post. On 31 July, the Government
launched its second status report on the implementation of the National Action Plan
for the implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), noting an overall
increase in the recruitment of women in the security sector. However, the report also
__________________
2

18-14440

UNAMA and OHCHR, “Injustice and Impunity: Mediation of Criminal Offences of Violence
against Women” (May 2018), available from www.ohchr.org/Documents/Countries/AF/
UNAMA_OHCHR_EVAW_Report2018_InjusticeImpunity29May2018.pdf .
9/16

A/73/374
S/2018/824

noted some negative trends, including a decrease in the number of women officers in
the Afghan National Army and fewer female members of the High Peace Council.
39. On 26 June, the Government submitted its one-year follow-up report on action
taken on three specific recommendations made by the Committee against Torture in
its concluding observations on the second periodic review of Afghanistan
(CAT/C/AFG/CO/2). The Law on the Prohibition of Torture was reviewed and
approved by the National Assembly and awaits final endorsement by the President.
40. As of 30 June, the terms of office of the Commissioners of the Afghanistan
Independent Human Rights Commission had expired. On 9 July, an earlier
presidential order of 26 May 2018 setting out the procedure for the identification and
selection of new Commissioners was amended by the President, establishi ng a twotier vetting system to ensure diversity among a final pool of 27 applicants. The United
Nations no longer observes proceedings under the revised order, and the appointment
of the nine Commissioners remains the prerogative of the President alone. T he
vacancies for the nine Commissioners were published on 15 August and were set to
close on 3 September. Journalists and media workers continued to face intimidation
and harassment by anti-government elements and pro-government forces. UNAMA
documented four incidents of harassment and intimidation in Ghazni, Helmand and
Kandahar Provinces.

IV. Coordination of development assistance
41. The Government made some progress towards implementing its reform
commitments. On 2 June, the Independent Directorate of Local Governance finalized
its implementation plan of the citizen-centred policy for subnational governance,
which had been approved on 14 May by the High Council for Rule of Law and
Anti-Corruption. The plan provides much-needed clarification of the roles of central
and provincial authorities and gives details on the new reforms on subnational
planning, financing and natural resources management. The Government also made
some progress towards improving the capacity of the civil service at the provincia l
level. On 25 July, the Independent Administrative Reform and Civil Service
Commission reported the completion of the mass-recruitment process for civil servant
positions, including teachers in the provinces, which had been initiated in January
2018. As a result, 11,176 civil servants were recruited to fill vacant positions in
33 provinces. Those reforms have begun to address the longstanding gaps between
the central and the subnational governance units that have undermined the legitimacy
of the Government at the local level.
42. The Government also continued its efforts to improve the institutional
framework that guides its anti-corruption efforts. On 4 June, the President appointed
a new Deputy Attorney General for Anti-Corruption. The draft anti-corruption law
was finalized and sent to the Office of the Second Vice -President for review. Since
the previous report, the Anti-Corruption Justice Centre has tried an additional four
cases, bringing the overall caseload of the Centre since it was established in 2 016 to
38 cases involving 152 accused persons. As a product of the 24 completed cases,
71 people have been convicted and imprisoned after a final decision by the Supreme
Court. However, international partners have expressed their concern about the
declining performance of the Centre, including its stagnating caseload, the low level
of cases tried by the Centre and the frequent non-enforcement of arrest warrants by
the Ministry of the Interior, which means that a high number of cases continue to be
tried in absentia without consequences for those who are convicted.
43. On 30 June, UNAMA completed a three-month survey on the implementation
of the new Penal Code, which came into force on 14 February 2018. The survey report
10/16

18-14440

A/73/374
S/2018/824

will be shared with the international community as well as training institutes of the
Supreme Court, the Attorney General and the Ministry of Justice to identify gaps and
adjust an ongoing training programme on the Code. The regional courts and
prosecution offices were given 1,219 additional copies of the new Penal Code, with
the support of UNAMA. An additional 484 copies were printed by the Ministry of
Justice and delivered to 22 of the 34 provinces.
44. The Government continued to prioritize private sector reform in an effort to
stimulate economic growth and rebalance the private and public sectors. However,
growth remained slow, placing at risk the country’s gradual economic recovery from
the shock caused by the large reduction in the international presence as part of the
2014 security transition. In its biannual Afghanistan Development Update, issued on
7 August, the World Bank projected real gross domestic product growth of 2.4 per
cent in 2018, down from 2.7 per cent in 2017, citing security challenges, ongoing
drought, declining business confidence and political instability as key constraints on
growth. The World Bank further expressed concern that on current projections,
economic growth will be unable to meet the demand for employment. Figures from
the National Risk and Vulnerability Assessment and International Labour
Organization suggest 25 per cent of the labour force in the country is not gainfully
employed. Furthermore, projections estimate that 480,000 to 600,000 new entrants to
the job market are expected annually until 2025, of whi ch an average of 400,000 are
estimated to be young people. With approximately 63.7 per cent of Afghans being
under the age of 25 years, the post-2001 “youth bulge” requires significantly more
efforts to realize the demographic dividend of that age bracket and thus lift the strain
on the labour market.
45. On 18 July, the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board convened in Kabul.
Discussions focused on six key deliverables agreed with the Government ahead of the
Geneva Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan, to be held on 28 November. They
included: (a) the holding of free, fair and credible parliamentary and district elections;
(b) the finalization of all national priority programmes with the cross -cutting issue of
women’s empowerment and providing basic services, especially education and
health; (c) achieving International Monetary Fund benchmarks; (d) creating an
enabling environment for private sector-led growth, including enacting the Mining
Law and a new Land Allocation Law; (e) making clear progress aga inst corruption,
such as serving all outstanding warrants on allegedly corrupt public officials; and (f)
making advances on security sector reforms. The Ministry of Finance established a
special task force to monitor results.
46. On 12 August in Kabul, the Government and UNAMA officially launched
preparations for the Geneva Ministerial Conference. The event, which will focus on
development, growth, poverty reduction and reforms, will see the introduction of a
new set of accountability parameters, the Geneva Mutual Accountability Framework.

V. Humanitarian assistance and returnees
47. In 2018, 178,002 people were newly displaced by conflict. Between 15 May and
15 August, 31,825 people were displaced. Although conflict -related displacement is
down by more than one third compared with the same period in 2017, many displaced
families have been forced to move multiple times and have no immediate prospect of
returning to their areas of origin in safety and dignity. During the reporting period,
humanitarian partners provided food and other life-saving assistance to 157,684
people displaced by conflict.
48. The demand for trauma care for victims of war increased to 24,687 cases in
2018, an increase of 14 per cent compared with 2017. Needs are particularly high in
18-14440

11/16

A/73/374
S/2018/824

Helmand, Kunar, Kunduz and Takhar Provinces, where clashes have taken heavy tolls
and access has been reduced. During the reporting period, the 15 partners of the health
cluster provided consultations to 584,934 people, of whom 61 per cent were women
and girls.
49. Explosive remnants of war and victim-operated improvised explosive devices
remain the leading causes of civilian casualties in Afghanistan, with 553 civilian
casualties in the first six months of 2018. Currently, 89 per cent of all victims ar e
children. In response, the United Nations and its partners have developed child friendly materials on explosive remnants of war for initial use in 12 villages, as well
as three child-friendly spaces. From January to June 2018, mine action partners
removed or destroyed 6,878 explosive remnants of war from battlefields and
communities across the country, although the ongoing nature of the conflict continues
to increase significantly the contamination and threat levels.
50. Three cases of polio were confirmed during the reporting period, bringing the
total number of cases in 2018 to 11. The latest transmissions were reported from two
districts (Nad-e-Ali in Helmand Province and Tsowkey in Kunar Province). In total,
four provinces have been affected in 2018 (Helmand, Kandahar, Kunar and
Nangarhar). In July, the first polio vaccination campaign was carried out during the
high-transmission season, and 6,003,849 children aged under 5 years living in highrisk areas were vaccinated.
51. As at 4 August, drought affected 229 out of 401 districts across the country. In
Badghis Province, more than 100,000 people have been forced from rural areas to
urban centres in Badghis, Ghor and Herat Provinces since early in May. Most of the
newly displaced people live in informal settlements with few, if any, basic social
services. Rural communities have depleted their assets, selling off livestock to buy
food and consuming the coming planting season’s seeds. A nationwide emergency
assessment is planned to review the chronic food security situation, which is expected
to worsen as much of the country enters an early lean season in September. An
estimated 1.4 million people are expected to need life -saving emergency assistance
in the coming months.
52. Families displaced to urban centres by drought received the same emergency
assistance from the United Nations and partners as people displaced by conflict. Food
was also provided to families in rural areas to prevent further drought -related
displacement. From July to September 2018, the United Nations and its partners were
expected to provide food assistance to 441,000 people in Badghis, Faryab, Ghor,
Herat and Jowzjan Provinces, which were the worst affected. Beginning late in
September 2018, United Nations and its partners will expand the support for at least
six months to all of the estimated 1.4 million people in need in 20 provinces due to
drought.
53. In order to meet those emergency demands, the Government has mobilized
60,000 tons of wheat grain from its own strategic grain reser ves, while the United
Nations is procuring complementary commodities from international markets. Based
on United Nations estimates, half a million people are in dire need of agriculture - and
livestock-based livelihoods support, through the distribution of seeds, fertilizers and
fodder. To complement the humanitarian response, development actors are mobilizing
their resources and operations under ongoing projects in six provinces relating to
climate change adaptation, agricultural value chains and rural deve lopment so that
they also support community recovery and long-term resilience to drought. The
United Nations also plans to carry out clearance activities in Farah Province to
increase land availability and lessen the burden of drought -induced displacement on
host communities and critical resources. Clearance operations in Kandahar have

12/16

18-14440

A/73/374
S/2018/824

enabled the construction of new residential areas, assisting with land access for
returnees from Pakistan.
54. A total of 210,724 Afghan citizens, including spontaneous retur nees, deportees
and refugees, returned to Afghanistan during the reporting period. According to IOM,
from 14 May to 18 August 2018, 7,433 undocumented returnees arrived from Pakistan
and 198,954 from the Islamic Republic of Iran. In the same period, the Of fice of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees assisted the return of 3,859 refugees
from Pakistan, 446 from the Islamic Republic of Iran and 32 from other countries.
The number of registered refugees returning to Afghanistan is significantly lo wer than
the 43,208 who had returned by the same time in 2017. The number of undocumented
returns from the Islamic Republic of Iran has soared, with more than 480,000
returnees and deportees in 2018 compared with 215,000 in 2017, in an apparent
response to the worsening economic situation there. Humanitarian agencies are trying
to reach returnees and provide them with a package of food, cash and other basic
necessities to facilitate their reintegration.
55. There continues to be constraints on humanitarian access, with a total of
130 incidents affecting the United Nations and its humanitarian partners from 15 May
to 15 August. Since the beginning of the year, a total of 253 incidents have been
recorded, including the killings of 23 aid workers. Moreover, 37 have been injured,
74 abducted and 38 detained. The trend of more violent and deliberate attacks on
health facilities and health workers has continued. During the reporting period, the
task force on monitoring and reporting humanitarian access reported nin e incidents
where such access was denied, including seven by the Taliban, one by ISIL -KP and
one by pro-government militia, compared with 18 such incidents in the previous
quarter. Deminers face an increasing risk of kidnapping and armed violence. During
the reporting period, two significant incidents occurred, including the first prolonged
kidnapping by ISIL-KP. Humanitarian access in contested areas and areas under the
control of anti-government elements remained a persistent challenge.
56. The 2018 Humanitarian Response Plan was revised in May to include an
additional $117 million to provide assistance to 1.4 million people affected by the
drought. Altogether, the revised Plan calls for nearly $547 million and plans to reach
4. 2 million people in 2018. As at 20 August, humanitarian activities in Afghanistan
had received $231.1 million in funding, including $175.8 million for activities
included in the Plan.

VI. Counter-narcotics
57. During the reporting period, the Government started working on a new national
drugs strategy in response to recent increases in opium cultivation and production.
Regionally, the new strategy is backed by the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) and its partners under the strategic actions to respond to the glob al
threats of opiates. Aimed at addressing the related threats of crime, terrorism and
corruption, the strategic actions encompass a more effective methodology building
on the concerted “One UNODC” approach in Europe and Western and Central Asia.
58. The Government, supported by international partners, continued its counternarcotics operations. During the period from 1 January to 30 June 2018, the Afghan
law enforcement authorities conducted a total of 1,804 counter-narcotics operations,
leading to seizures of 1,584 kilograms of heroin, 6,767 kilograms of morphine, 12,030
kilograms of opium, 61 kilograms of methamphetamine, 15,426 kilograms of hashish,
10,176 tablets of 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA), 15,537 kilograms
of solid precursor chemicals and 7,774 litres of liquid precursor chemicals. In total,
22 heroin manufacturing laboratories were dismantled; 2,039 suspects were arrested;
18-14440

13/16

A/73/374
S/2018/824

and 311 vehicles, 134 weapons and 598 mobile telephones were seized. Three officers
of the Afghan Counter-Narcotics Police were killed while carrying out counternarcotics operations.

VII. Mission support
59. As at 31 July, the Mission’s vacancy rates were 10 per cent for international
staff, 11 per cent for National Professional Officers and 3 per cent for local-level staff,
compared with the approved rates of 11.1 per cent, 8.5 per cent and 3 per cent,
respectively. The proportion of female staff remained very low. As at 31 July, the
percentage of women in each category of staff stood at 34 per cent for int ernational
staff, 38 per cent for United Nations Volunteers, 12 per cent for National Professional
Officers and 7 per cent for local-level staff. Between 1 May and 31 July 2018,
UNAMA conducted 160 road and 23 air missions, as well as 970 reverse outreach
missions, during which district representatives visited UNAMA field offices.

VIII. Observations
60. Afghanistan is nearly in the fifth year its Transformation Decade (2015–2024),
which began with the drawdown of international forces in 2014. As it app roaches the
midpoint, the political, economic and security challenges the country faces remain
significant and complex. In addition to low rates of economic growth, high
unemployment and rising levels of conflict-related displacement, more immediate
problems, such as the ongoing drought, have pushed vulnerable communities to the
brink. The conflict continues its unrelenting toll on the civilian population, whose
daily struggle amid insecurity is compounded by the inhumanity of terror attacks. As
parliamentary and presidential elections near, there is an urgent need for political
leaders to demonstrate a unity of purpose and guide Afghanistan towards greater
stability and self-reliance.
61. The Eid al-Fitr ceasefire period was a vivid expression of the widespread desire
for peace among Afghans. The first ceasefire since 2001, it brought scenes of
celebration among Afghan civilians, Afghan national security forces and Taliban
fighters alike, proving that Afghans from diverse religious, tribal and civil society
groups strongly desire peace. The brevity of the ceasefire period does not undermine
its significance, nor do the subsequent attacks that have tested efforts to reach a
peaceful settlement. The United Nations emphasizes the need for a peaceful
resolution to the conflict in Afghanistan and invites all efforts toward s that most
urgent objective.
62. I regret that the Taliban did not accept the call by the President in his statement
on Eid al-Adha to engage in direct negotiations to end the conflict, and tha t it did not
join the Government in the proposed ceasefire. I encourage Member States to
cooperate towards achieving peace and stability in Afghanistan, with the aim of direct
talks between the Government of Afghanistan and the Taliban. The United Nations
continues to engage with all parties and stands ready to provide all support necessary.
63. I am deeply concerned about the worsening effect of the conflict on the civilian
population. In the first half of 2018, the conflict caused the death of 1,692 civi lians,
the highest number of civilian deaths recorded in a six-month period since UNAMA
began its systematic documentation in 2009. The targeting of civilian
infrastructure — from schools and hospitals to media offices and aid providers —
underscores the violence directed at the fabric of Afghan society. I urge all parties to
respect their obligations under international human rights law and international
humanitarian law to prevent attacks against civilians and civilian infrastructure.
14/16

18-14440

A/73/374
S/2018/824

64. Insecurity, violence, poverty and unemployment continue to have a heavy
impact on the young people of Afghanistan. I condemn the recent spate of horrific
attacks against education facilities, in particular a girls ’ schools in Nangarhar
Province and an education center in Kabul. Such violence, along with the reported
closure of schools by anti-Government elements, represents an assault on the
fundamental and constitutional right of all Afghans to an education. The
criminalization of child-related offences in the new Penal Code is a much-needed step
towards protecting the most vulnerable members of society, including from
recruitment and use by armed groups, and must be enforced. I applaud the readiness
of the Government of Afghanistan to engage on those sensitive topics and all youthrelated matters, recognizing the needs of that most sizable age group of the Afghan
population. I welcome the selection in June 2018 of the Afghanistan Youth
Representative to the United Nations as an opportunity for further engagement,
including on the role of the United Nations.
65. I commend the Government on its efforts to improve the capacity of the formal
justice system to prosecute and adjudicate cases of violence against women. However,
the severe constraints in obtaining redress for sexual and gender-based violence, as
well as high levels of de facto impunity affecting all citizens of Afghanistan, highlight
the need for continued efforts in the promotion and protection of human rights. I
encourage the Afghan authorities to take all measures necessary to support the
Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission in fulfilling its critical role as
an effective and independent institution.
66. I am encouraged by the efforts of the electoral management bodies in
Afghanistan in preparing under challenging circumstances for the elections scheduled
for 20 October 2018. The preparation for the first time of a voter list that links each
voter to a polling station is a truly significant step forward in strengthening the
integrity of the elections. At the same time, I am concerned about the blockade of the
premises of the Independent Election Commission, both at its headquarters and in
some provinces, by protestors contesting the exclusion of certain candidates by the
Electoral Complaints Commission. Those actions delay the legitimate activities of the
Independent Election Commission and do not advance any democratic cause. I call
upon the protestors to cease immediately any hindrance to the work of the
Independent Election Commission.
67. While timely and credible technical preparations are essential, they cannot, by
themselves, solve political concerns. The primary responsibility for a successful
election lies with the political leaders from across the political spectrum. That
includes the responsibility to engage constructively and peacefully in the process, to
prevent and discourage fraud and to refrain from declaring instances of irregularity —
or simply unfavourable outcomes — as proof of a fraudulent election. Therefore, I
am deeply concerned about the threat of a boycott of the elections.
68. Something valuable is lost when political actors decide to withdraw from an
electoral process. It results in fewer options for citizens to participate and have their
voice heard, in favour of more narrow expressions of protest or abstention. I therefore
urge all political leaders to remain engaged in the electoral process and to pursue
concerns and any founded complaints with the national electoral authorities. I
encourage the national authorities to continue actively to prevent and detect possible
irregularities and to consider evidence of potential malfeasance when presented to
them. The United Nations will continue to stand by and assist the electoral authorities
of Afghanistan with technical knowledge and other support, in recognition of Afghan
leadership and ownership in conducting this sovereign process.
69. This year, Afghanistan is on track to collect enough revenue to cover 50 per cent
of its operating budget. While this trend points to the potential for further
18-14440

15/16

A/73/374
S/2018/824

development financing and the possibility of generating growth, acute emergency
needs are rising, particularly given the levels of internal displacement and the fact
that the country is facing its worst drought in 10 years. As discussed at the meeting
of the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board, held in Kabul on 18 July, the
complexity of the humanitarian and development issues simultaneously confronting
Afghanistan makes the planned discussions at the Geneva Ministerial Conference
especially timely.
70. The Geneva Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan will provide a valuable
opportunity for the international community to renew its political commitment to
Afghanistan and for the Government to demonstrate progress on key commitments.
The Conference takes place at a critical juncture, halfway between the Brussels
Conference on Afghanistan in 2016 and the next pledging conference, expected to be
held in 2020. As preparations accelerate, I call upon the Government to direct its
unified efforts to delivering on key commitments prior to the Geneva Conference.
71. I thank all of the United Nations personnel in Afghanistan and my Special
Representative, Tadamichi Yamamoto, for their continued dedication under
challenging conditions to fulfilling our commitments in support of the people of
Afghanistan.

16/16

18-14440
