UNITED NATIONS / NATIONS UNffiS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OfFICIAL RECORDS.
FOURTH YEAR

433rd and 434th lvIEETlNGS: 4 AUGUST 1949
433cme et 434~me SEANCES: 4 AOUT 1949

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
PROCES·VERBAUX OFFlCIELS
QUATRIEME ANNEE

LAKE SUCCESS. NEW YORK

44 P.)

No. 36

TABLE OF CONTENTS

TABLE DES MATIERES

Four hundred and thirty.third mooting

Quatre cent trente-troisieme IWAlnce
Pages

Page

1. Provis;<linal agcmda

°

0

••• 0

••••••••••••

2. Stat;ement by the President •..........
3. Adoption of the agenda
, .
4. The Palestine question (continued) •.•.

1 1. Ordre du jour provisoire ...•.•••...•
1 2. Allocution du President •
1 3. Adoption de l'ordre du jour ..•.......
1 4. La question palestinienne (suite) ....
0

00,0

•

0

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

00

Four hundred and thirty-fourth meeting
5. The Palestine question (ccntiIlued) •

0

19

1
1
1
1

Quatre eent trente-quatrieme seance
5. La question palestinienne (suite) "..

Relevant documents not reproduced in full in the texts of the meetings of the
Security Council are published in monthly supplements to the Official Records.
All United Nations documents are designated by symbols, i.e., capital letters
combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations tlocument.

"
Les documents pertinents qui ne sont ~as reproduits in eitenso dans le texte
des seances du Conseil de securite sont publies dans des supplements mensuels aux
Proces-verbauz officiels.
Les documents des NaiWns Unies portent tous 1me cote, qui se compose de
lettres majuscules et de'chiffr:es. La simple mention d'une cote dans un tezte signifie
qu'il s'agit d'un document des Nations Unies.

00 •

19

$SS

NATIONS UN'IES

UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
COUNCIL

CONSEIL
DE SECURITE

OFFICIAL RECORDS

PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS

FOURTH YEAR

No. 36

QUATRIEME ANNEE

No 36

FOUR HUNDRED AND THIRTY·THIRD
MEETING

QUATRE CENT TRENTE·TROISIEME
. SEAi~CE

Held at Lake Success, New York"
on Thursday, 4 A1tgU.st 1949, at 10.30 a.m.

Tenue a Lake Success, New-York,
le fcltdi 4 aout 1949, a 10 h. 30.

President.' Mr. S. TSARAPKIN
(Union of Soviet Socialist Rep~lblics)

. President: M. S. TSARA,PKINE
(Union des Republiques socialistcs sovi6tiques)

Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Argentina, Canuda, China, Cuba,
Egypt, France, Norway, Ukrainian Soviet
Soc~alisf Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
America.
Northern
Ireland, United States of
,
.

Present: Les representants des pays suivants:
Argentine, Canada, Chine, Cuba, Egypte, France,
Norvege,
Republique
socialiste
sovietique
d'Ukraine, Union des Republique!! soCialistes
sovietiques, Royaume-Uni de Grande-Bretagne et
d'Irlande du Nord, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

1. Provisional agenda (S/ Agenda 433)

1. Ordre du jour provisoire

.

,

(SjAgenda 433)

.

1. Adoption of the agenda.

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.

2. The Palestine question:
(a) Letter dated 21 July 1949 from the
United Nations Acting Mediator on
Palestine to the Secretary-General transmitting a report on the present status of
the armistice negotiations and the Truce
in Palestine (5/1357).

2. La question palestinienne:
a) Lettre adressee le 21· juillet 1949 au.Secretaire·general par le Mediateur par interim
des Nations Unies:p,01.1t' laPalestin~oPQgr
lui transmettre un rapport sui l'etat aduel
des negociations d'armistice et de la treve
en Palestine {S/1357).

2. Statement by the President

2. Allocution dn President

The PRESIDENT (translated from Russitm):
Before assuming the duties of President of the
Security Council, I should like to thank my predecessor, the representative of the Ukrainian SSR
and that country's Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Manuilsky, who presided during .July, for
the energetic and skilled way in which he conducted our meetings.·

Le PRESIDENT (traduit du russe) : Au moment·
ou .je vaisassumer les fonctions de President du
Conseil de securite, je voudrais remerder mon
predecesseur, M. Manouilsky, representant de la
Republique socialiste sovietique d'Ukraineet
Ministre des affaires etrangeres de ce pays, de la
fa<;on energique et habile dont i1 a dirige les
debats du Conseil durant le mois de. juiUet.

Mr. MANUILSKY (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist'
M. MANOUILSKY (Republique socialiste sovieRepublic) . (translated from Russian): Thank tique d'Ukraine) ( traduit du nvsse) : Je remercie
you, Mr. President.
.
le President de ses varoles: .

3. AdQption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

4. The Palestme qnesnon

3. Adol-vtion de l'ord~e du jour
L'ordre du jour· estadopte.

4. La question palestiJUenne

The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian):;
Le .PRESIDENT (traduit flu russe) ; Le Conseil
The Security. Council has before it the'report ,of" de securire est saisi .du rapport presente par
.

.

the United Nations Acting Mediator, Mr. Bunche.
In accordance with our established custom, I
invite Mr. Bunche i:o take a place at the Council
table.
At the invitat'ion of the P1'esident, Mr. Bunche,
United Nations Acting Mediator on Pale..stine
took a seat at the Council table.

M. Bunche, Mediateur par interiin des Nations
Unies pour la Palestine. Conformement cl l'usage
etabli, j'ir..vite M. Bundle a prendre place a la
t&ble du Conseil.
A l'invitation dzt P1'esident M. Bumche, Med£atezt?" par interil1~ des Nat;C1lS Unies pour la Palestine, prend place a la table du Conseil.

The PRESIDENT (translated from Rztssian):
Le PRESID~NT (tradllit du russe): Le PresiThe President of the Security Council has dent du Conseil de securite a rec;u de M. Eban,
received a letter from the permanent representa- representant permanent d'Israel aupres de 1'Ortive of the State of Israel to the United Nation'3, ganisatiorl des Nations Unies, ~ne lettre en date
Mr. Eban. This letter dated 28 July 1949 appears du 28 juillet 1949, qui figure au document S/1360
in document S/1360 and has been circulated to et qui a ete distribuee aux membres du Conseil
members of the Security Council. In it M~. Eban de sc§curite. M. Eban demande 1'autorisation de
requc~ts fl,=rmission to take part in the discussion
participer a la discussion des questions qui
of t 1 e questions on the Security Council's agenda figurent a 1'ordre du jour de 'cette seance du
Conseil de securite.
for today.
As representative of the 'UNION OF SOVIET I En ma qualite de representant de 1'UNION DES,
SOCIALIST REpUBLICS, I support this request from RET>UBLIQUES SOCIALISTES sovnhIQUES, j'appuie
the .representative of the State of Israel.
cette demande du representant d'Israel.
If there are no furtllf'l:' observations on the
Si personne n'a d'autre observation a presenter
matter, as President of the Security Council, .1 a ce sujet, j'inviterai, en tant que President, M.
shall invite Mr. Eban to take a seat at the CounCIl Eban a prend:-e place a la table du Conseil.
table..

j

Mr. Eba,n, representative of Israel, took a seat
at the Security Council table.

u. Eban, representant d'Israel, prend place cl
la table du Coitseil.

Mr.CHAUVEL (France) (translated from
French) : This discussion opens in most auspiciops
circumstances, for the Council· is to'-day called
upon to note the success of one of the activities of
the United Nations, the accomplishment of a particularly difficult . an~· strenuous task ~vhich
directly affected the exIstence and the secunty of
individuals and nations and consequently the
security of the world.
The result achieved is very important in itself.
No less important, because of the consequences, it
will have in the near or distant future is the effectiveness shown by the United Nations itself,
in spite of the numerous obstacles which were
encountered.. No doubt the existence of the United Nations is not in itself enough to make
everything right with the world all at once; but
the a'{ample we have before us· shows clearly
that some things, and not the ·least important
ones either, would go extremely badly if the United Nations did not exist.
We must, I· feel, acknowledge the efforts towards understanding and agreement made by the
parties concerned in reaching t.his settlement.
But we cannot pass over in silence the decisive
part played by the United Nations Acting Med~­
ator on Palestine in the success of this enterprise.
Mr. Bunche has already been praised for his
wor]< in various places and on sundry oct:asions
more eloquently than I could do it.Nevertheless
I should, like to recall his personal courage, his
devotion to his duty,his tireless toil, his common
sense, his good faith, his good-will, all those very
human qualities :which have enabled him to win
the confidence of the people with whom hehad to
deal and to have so much authority over them.

M. CHAUVEL (France) : L'ciccasion du present
debat est heureuse. Le Conseil est en dIet appele
cl constater aujourd'hui le succes d'une action
entreprise par 1'Organisation des Nations Unies,
l'accomplissement d'une tache particulierement
lourde et difficile, interessant directement 1'existence et la securite de personnes et de peuples,
et'par voie de cons~quence, la securite tout court.

Now at the dose of a chapter hi a story, which
will of 'course continue, I should also like to call
to mind the memory. of the man who began the
work. .Mr. Bunche's predecessor and former
chief, Count Folke Betnadotte, who fell in the

Le resultat obtenu est en lui-meme de la plus
grande importance. Non moins importante dans
ses consequences, proches ou lointaines, est 1'effic'acite, dont a' fait. preuve, malgre bien des
obstacles, 1'Organisation des Nations Unies ellememe. Certes, 1'existence de 1'Organisation ne
suffit pas pour que, des maintenant, tout· aille bien
dans le monde; mais, d'apres 1'exempleque nons
a~ons devant nous, il apparait clairement que
certaines choses, et non des moindres, iraient tout
a fait mal si l'Qrganisation n'existait pas.
Nous devons, me semble-t-il, reconnaitre l'effort
de comprehension et d'entente accompli, dans le
reglement intervenu, par les parties en cause.
Mais nous ne pou,vons ignorer la part .decisive
qui, dans le su,cces de cette entreprise, revient au
Mediateur par interim des Nations Unies pour
la Palestine. L'eloge deMo Bunche n'est plus a
faire. Je veux dire qu'il a ete fait en divers lieux
et en diverses circonstances par des .voL'{ .plus
eloquentes que la mienne. Qu'il me soit permis
cependant de rappeler son courage personnel, son
deyouement a sa tache, son labeur infatigable,' son
bon sens, sa. bonne foi, sa bonne volonte, toutes
ces qualites si. humaines qui lui ont vaIu de gagner
la confiance de ses interlocuteurs et de prendre
sur eux tant. d'ascendant.
Je youdrais aussi,en ce moment ou s'acbeve
'Uil chapitre d'une histoire qui, par ailleursJ va se
poursuivre, evoquer la memoire de celui qui l'a
commence, du: predecesseur et. ancien chef. de
M. Bunche, le comte Folke'Bernadotte,tombe en

.

very midst of his· hig~ .e~deva~or.... ~,_~~~~l~~~ls_~,_~=~i~ . . ~~~r.~_ ~~~_s.l'.~~,e~.~i~~~~~:~~:. ::s:u.~:.

..

•

3

like to recall the memory of the other victims
who gave their lives along the way, and permit
me also to recall that there were four Frenchmen among them.

mission. J'evoquerai aussi le souvenir des autres
victimes qui ont surcombe en cours de route,
parmi lesquelles, qu'il me soit permis de le rappeler, sont quatre Franc;ais.

Mr. Bunche's task on which he is reporting
to-day was to put an end to the hostilities in Pa'·
estine. The signing of the various armistices
has consolidated in a tangible form the result
achieved in the nrst place by the truce. In his
report, the Acting Mediator gives his opi.nion on
the probable result of that state of affairs and
suggests that the Council should draw certain
practical conclusions.
The French delegation - has examined Mr.
.Bunche's report very carefully and we have no
differences of opinion or criticisms to offer with
regard. to the substance of that report I can say
that 'in full confidence since, in order to avoid.
any mistakes of interpretation, I took the precaution of going back to the sources. The report
has, on the other hand, shown th~ need for clarity
and extremely dear-cut ideas and purposes in
this very delicate matter.
In the first place the Council is c<j.lled upon to
take note of a state of affairs. What is that state
o~ affairs? Two organs have been set up by the
United Nations to deal simultaneously with two
different aspects or a single question. One of
those organs was personified 'hy he Mediator
who had the assistance of a large '>L<l.ff. The other
is the Conciliation Commission.

La tache dont M. Bunche etait charge, et dont
it rend compte auj ourd'hui, consistait a mettre
fin aux hostilites en Palestine. La signature des
divers armistices relld concret et consolide un
resultat obteuu, en un premier temps, par la treve.
Le Mediateur par interim, dansson rapport, indique les consequences que cet etat de choses lui
parait comporter et suggere au Conseil d'en tirer
. quelques conclusions pratique::;.
Le rapport de M. Buuche a fait l'objet d'un
examen tres attentif de la part de la delegation
franc;aise. Cet examen n'a fait naitre quant au
fond, ni divergences de vues ni critiques. Je puis
le dire en toute surete, ayant pris soin, pour
eviter les erreurs d'interpretation, de remonter
aux sources. Ce rapport a par contre fait apparaitre la necessite, en cette matie-re si delicate,
d'une grande c1arte et d'une grande precision de
vues et d'intentions.
Le Conseil est tout d'abord appele a prendre
acte d'une situation. Quelle est cette situation?
Deux organes des Nations U nies se sont trouvees
chargees de traiter concurremment deux aspects
differents d'un~ meme affaire. L'un de ces organes
etait personnifie par le Mediateur, assiste de
nombreux collaborateurs. L'autre est la Commission de conciliation.

Le champ d'action du Mediateur etait defini'
par la resolution du Conseil de securite [5/9021
en date du 15 juillet 1948, qui ordonnait aux
parties de renoncera toute action militaire et
stipulait une treve. Le Secretaire gen#al etait
requis de lui fournir le- personnel et les facilites
necessaires p'our lui permettre de faire prevaloir
.
les volontesdu .Conseil.
The Council further decided in the resolutio'.l
La resolution adoptee le 16 novembre 1948
adopted on 16 November 1948 at its 381st me..:t- [5/1080] lors de la 381eme seance du Coilseil
ing [5/1080] that an armistice should be con- decidai'i: en outre la conclusion d'ull armistice dans
cluded in all the sectors of Palestine and it called tous les secteurs de Palestine etinvitait les parties
upon the parties concerned to negotiate agree- a rechercher immediatement un accord a cette fin
ments to, that end forthwith either directly or I soit directement, soitpar l'intermediaire du
through the Mediator.
Mediateur.
La Commission, issue de la resolution de l'As~
The function of the Commission, which was
set up by General. Assembly resolutiQn 194 (Ill) semblee generale 194 (Ill) en date du 11 decemdated 11 December 1948, is one of conciliation bre i948, est investie d'une tache de conciliation
and mediation with a view to the establishment et de mediation tendant a l'etablissement en
.of lasting peace in J'alestine.
Palestine d'un etat permanent de paix.
Les armistices recernment conclus creent un
The armisticesrtflcently concluded create a
legal situation which. takes the place of the truce etat de droit qui se substitue a la treve imposee'
imposed by the reso,lutionof 15 July 1948. At par la resolution du 15 juillet 1948. Ils donnent en
the same time t1).ey are in implementation of the meme temps effet a l'iIljonction du Consei! portant
Council's injuilctipn to the parties to desist from obligation pour les parties de renoncer a totite
further military aCtion.
,
action militaire.
The agreements signed by the parties fulfil the
Les accords signes par les. parties constituent
Council's wishes asexpresseain the resolution l'accomplissement des volontes du Conseil, expriI have just mentioned. Our objective is achieved meespar la :resolution precitee. L'objet poursuivi
and that is why the mission of the Mediator, who est atteint. C'est ell ce1a que la mission dtl Mediawas instructed to seek that objective, has also teUT. charge de poursuivre cet .objet, est achevee.
come to an end. That is why Mr: Bunche can say C'est pourquoi M. Bunche peut dire qu'il ne hii
that there is no longer any useful function for reste plus aucune. tache utile a accomplir.
him to perform.
'
The ]Y,[ediator's functions were defined by the
Security Council's resolution of 15 July 1948
[S/902], which ordered the parties to desist
from furthel; military action and provided for a
truce. The Secretary-General was requested to
provide the. Mediator with the necessary staff
and facilities to enable him to carry out the
Council's y,rishes.
.
. -

In the conclusions of his report, the Acting
Me9,iator raises the question of the prolongation
'of the truce' and of a renewal of the iniunctiop
to desist from further military action.
..

... 0 , - ,

Daus les conclusions de son rapport, le MMiateur par interim pose la question du. maintien. de
la treve etceUe d'uil renouvellement de l'injonction a renoncer· a toute action milit~ire .

4

~

The French del~gation considers that those
two aspects are both covered by the very fact
that the armistices ha:ve been signed. We consider that, in order to regularize the position, it
will be sufficient for the Council, in taking note
of the signatures, to record the faCt that its
wishes on those two points h~ve, in p-::actice, been
fnlfilled. We would hardly consider it suitable
for the Council again to impress upon the parties
injunctions with which they have in fact just
complied.
For that same reason we doubt whether it
would be appropriate to transfer the respQnsi-.
bility of supervising the cease-fire to the Conciliation Commission. The Commission has a clearcut and highly difficult task. It is preparing for
the future. .Its work can only be carried out in
a peaceful atmosphere. We would be complicating that work if we were to expose the Lausanne
talks to the repercussions of local incidents which
may still occur.
.
The cease~fire, moreover, is now nothing more
than the implementation of the A~mistice Agreements. And th9se Agreements provide for their
l)wn machinery of implementation, which is different from- that supplied to. the Mediator and
which contains no reference to the Conciliation
Commission. They doubtless do refe.r to action
by the United Nations' Chief of Staff of the
Truce Supervision Organization, but that simply
rei:lects the situation at the time when the Agreements were drafted, a situation which logically
ceases to exist by the fact that those Agreements
hav~ been signed, unless the Council decides
otherwise.
I doubt whether the .Council, upon reflection,
would· wish. to prolong the existence of the organization which. was previously intended to help
the Mediator carry out his mission, if we admit
that. the mission itself is· now concluded. The
organization would have to be given a new
mission. What would that mission 'be? When the
parties concerned have taken a step, which we
hope is a decisive one, towflIds. regularizing the
situation, does the Council· wish. to .retain, or
rather to re-establish on a new basis, such a complicated supervisory organ? When, after so
many efforts by the Mediator, the parties themselves have finally consented to come to an agreement, would the Council insist on retaining
machinery 'which WOUld; seem to imply that the
irresponsible a.ctions of the past are still to be
expected?
..

La delegation franc;aise estime queces l1eux
aspects des choses se trouvent COllverts par le fait
meme de la signature des armistices. Elle COllsidere qu'il suffit, pour mettre toutes ehoses au
clair, que le Conseil, en prenant acte des signa.tuTes, constate que ses volontes sur les deux
points precites sont accomplies en effet. RUe
considererait comme peu seant de confirmer aux
parties, sous. forme d'interdictions renouvelees,
des obligations auxquelle~ ciles viennent precisement de souscrire.
Pour cette meme raison, eBe met en doute
l'opportunite de reporter sur la Commission de
conciliation une responsabilite en ce qui concerne
la suspension d'am1es. La Commission a une
tache bien definie et fort difficile. Elle prepare
l'avenir.· Cette tache ne peut se poursuivre que
dans uneatmosphere apaisee. Ce serait la compliquer que d'exposer les entretiens de Lausanne
aux eontl"e-coups d'incidents locaux toujours
possibles.
La suspension d'armes, au demeurant, n'est plus
autre chose desormais que l'application des conventions d'armistice. Et ces conventions stipulent
des mecanismes qui leur sont propres, qui ne sont
plus ceux dont disposait le Mediateur et qui ne
comportent aucune reference it la Commission ge
conciliation. Sans doute prevoient-ils l'intervention du Chef d'Etat-major de l'Organisation des
Nations Unies charge de la surveillance de la
treve, mais cette fac;on de dire se rapporte it un
etat de choses qui existait lors de la r-edaction des
accords et qui, 10gi<it1ement, cesse d'etre du fait
de leursignatute, it moins que le Conseil n'en
dispose autrement.
Je doute que la volonte reflechie du Conseil
soit de maintenir f'n fonction l'organisme anterieurement destine it aide,: le Mediateur dans
l'accomplissement de .sa mission, s'il admet que
cette mission elle-meme a atteint son terme. I1
faudrait attribuer it l'organisme une mission nouvelle. Enquoi consisterait-elle ?.LeConseil veut-it
alors que, lesparties en cause ont fait un pas que
1'0n espere deci;;i~ vers la normalisation de la
situation, niaintenir, ou plutot, retablir sur des
bases nouveUes- un contrOleatlssi lourd? Quand
les parties, apres tant d'efforts du Mediateur, ont
enfin consenti it s'engager elles-memes, tiendrait-il
it maintenir un cappareil qui semblerait perpetuer
les irresponsabilites passees ?

. If that is not so, it will no doubt suffice for
the CotinciI to ask the Commission to make any
arrangements. with the •parties which may seem
necessary to enable the Mixed Armistice Commission to function properly, and to request the
Secretary-General to provide the necessary staff,
by recruitment from among those already on the
spot or in any other way.

Si· tel n'estpoint le ellS, i! suffira sans doute
que le Conseil engage la Commission a faire avec
les parties les arrangements qui apparaitraient
necessaires pour. assurer le· bon fonctionnement
des commissions mixtes. d'armistice . etprie le.
Secretaire general d'assurer, par preU~vement sur
le personnel existant. sur place ou de touteautre
mamere, lesconcours personnels qui se rev:eleraient indispensables.
Cependant, en prenant acte des accords intervenus et en. eQ. tirant les. consequences, it· serait
normal que le Conseil marque aux parties a la
fois sa sollicitude et sa vigilance. Illui est aise
de le faire. 11 lui 'suffit de maintenir a son ordre
du jour la question palestinienne.

Neverth~less, it would be logical forth~.C.oun:­
cH, while taki;1g note of the Agreements and
dra.wing its··cdnclusions, to show the parties that
it is still much concerned and is keeping a watchful eye on the situation. That is an easy matter.
All that we need do is to keep the Palestine question on.our agenda.
Those .are the comments. which the French
delegation wishes to make on reading the Acting
17

t

;"

-

Telles sont les observations que suggere a la

deU~gation franc;aise la lecture du rapport du
Oil

.-t-

s

5
Mediator's report. Our comments are not inspired by any spirit of criticism. They try to keep
as close as possible to an enlightened attitude and
~o draw the most useful conclusions from valuable experience. They have been made in cm attempt to avoid any confusion of principles and
functions and in order to keep each organ within
its own proper field of action.

Mediateur par interim. Elles ne sont inspirees
d'aucun esprit critique. EIles tendent cl suivrce
d'aussi pres que possible une pensee avertie, a.
tirer d'une experience precieuse les conclusions
les plus utiles. Elles marquent un effort pour
eviter la confusion des principes et des attributions et pour maintenir chacun dans le domaine
qui lui est propre.

Je ne voudrais pas qu'on se meprenne sur le
I do nDt wish anyone to misunderstand the
meaning of my statement. I repeat that I con- sens de cette intervention. I1 me parait important,
sider it important for the Council to have a clear' je le repete, avant de passer aux: decisions, que
.idea about the following point before it takes any le Conseil ait une idee claire sur le point suivant:
decision: does the Council consider that the truce le Conseil considere-;;-il que la treve imposee par
it imposed should continue indefinitely side by lui subsiste sans limitation de duree, concurremside with the armistices and quite independently, ment avec les annistices et independamment
or does it, on the other hand, consider that the d'eux, ou bien estime-t-il, au contraire, que les
armistices se substituent cl la treve?
annisi:ices replace the truce?
In the first case, the Truce Supervision Organization must itself continue to exist and the
Question arises whether it should be linked to the
Conciliation Commission.

Dans le premier cas, l'appareil de controle de
la treve doit.lui-meme subsister, et la question
qui se pose est de savoir s'il y a lieu de rattacher
cet appareil cl la Commission de conciliation.

In the second case-and the French delegation
for its part cbnsiders that there if; an important
reason for choosing that solution~only those
parts of the Truce Supervision Organization
which are necessary to the organs 1>- ..Jvidea for
in the Armistice Agreements should remain. The
Conciliation Commission. would limit itself to
making the necessary arrangements to' that end
with the parties concerned.

Dans le second cas - et la delegation franc;aise, pour sa part, voit une raison. serieuse de
choisir cette solution - ne doit subsister de cet
appareil que ce qui serait necessaire au fonctionnement des organisme.<> prevus par lel> conventions
d'armistice; le role de la Commission de conciliation se bornerait cl faire avec lesparties le~
arrangements utiles a cet effet.

Mr. BUNCHE (Acting Mediator on Palestine) :
M. BUNCHE (M.ediateur .par interim pour la
I have very little to add in elaboration of the Palestine) (traduitde fangla-is) : J'ai tres pen de
statements set forth in my report of _26 July chose cl ajouter pour commenter le:> declarations
1949 to the Security Council contained in docu- formulees dans mon rapport du Conseil en date
ment Sj1357. I am fully at the disposal of the -du 26 juillet 1949, qui figt~re au doctL.'llent 5'/1357.
Security Council, however, for such additional Cependant, je suis a. la complete disposition du
information or views as its members may require Conseil de securite pour lui fournir tous renof me, but I think that a few remarks in clarifi- seignementscomplementaires ou avis que ses
cation of my report might prove useful at this membres desireraient obtenir de mol. Mais je
stage.
pense qu'il peut etre utile cl l'heure actuelle de
presenter quelques observations precisant certains
points de mon rapport.
In sum11].ary, the crux of the present situation,
as I see it, is as follows. The Security Council
called for a truce in the fighting in Palestine and
the parties complied. This truce was more thim
a simple cease-fire, for it involved certain specific
injunCtions as regards the importation of war
materials and the introduction of fighting personnel and men of military age. It also involved an
elaborate system of United Nations truce supervision. Subsequently, the Security Coundl called
upon the parti~s to take a .further step towards
peace in Palestine, the conclusion of armistice
agreements in "the transition to 'perm2nent peace
in Palestine", to use the language of the resolution [Sj1080].

The parties have now fully complied with this
request. It follows inescapably that the Security
Council.truce resolution have been rendered obsolete by the conclusion of the Armistice Agreements[S/1264, Sj1296, Sj1302/Rev.l and
S/1353]. These resolutions continue in force,
.=however, and they will remain in force until the
Security Council takes appropriate action con-

En bref, l'element essentiel, dans la situation
actuelle telle que je la vois, est le suivant.· Le .
Conseil de securite a demande qu'il soit apporte
une treve auxcombats de Palestine et les parties
se sont inclinees.Cette treve etait plus qu'un
simple ordre de cesser le feu, car e1le compcrtait
certaines prescriptions precises, en ce qui concerne
l'importation de materiel de guerre et l'introducnori de personnel combattant et d'hommes en age
de porter les armes. Elle entrainait egalemeht un
systeme complexe de surveillance de la treve par
les Nations Unies. Par la suite, le Conseil de
securite a invite les parties cl faire un pas de plus
vers l'efablissement de la paL"{. en Palestine: con..;.
clure des conventions d'armistice afin "de faciliter
le passage de la treve actue1le cl une paix permanente en Palestine'~, pour employer les tennes
memes de la resolution [Sj1080].
Les parties ont maintenant pleinement satisfait

a. cette demande. I1 s'ensuit inevitableemnt que les

resolutions du Conseilde securite relatives cl la
treve ont ete rendues caduques par la conclusion
des conventions d'armistice [S/1264, S/1296j
Rev.l, S/1302/Rev.1, et S/1353l Toutefois,ces
resolutions contiilUent cl rester en vigueur et le
resteront tant que le Conseil de securite ne pren-

6

cerning them. They are not self-terminating, and
if they are not cancelled, they will lead only to
confusion and misunderstandings.

dta pas a leur sujet les mesures qu'll convient de
prendre. Elles ne peuvent pas prendre fin d'f" 1memes et, si e1les ne sont pas abrtJgees, ell~~ ne
peuvent mener qu'a la confusion et a des malentendus.

Practically speaking, despite the Armistice
Agreements, by the terms of the existing Security
Council resolutions I am still obligated under the
resolution of 15 July 1948 [Sj902] "to supervise the observdclce of the truce and ... to deal
with breaches" of the truce, again to use the
language of the resolution. But I may confide in
the Security Council that I have borne this responsibility rather like a loose garment since the
conclusion of the Armistice Agreements. In any
event, the provisions of the Armistice Agreements, whkh are the product of voluntary negotiations by the disputing parties, are stronger
than the provisions of the truce-stronger by virtue of the fact that they are agreements voluntarily arrived at. They carry the strongest possible moral force, for they r~present voluntary
agreement on the part of the disputants.

Fratiquement parlant, je suis tOlljours tenu,
malgre les conventions d'armistice et en vertu de
la resolution du Conseil de securite en date du
15 juUlet 1948 [Sj902J, de surveiller l'observation de la· treve et "de trancher les cas de violation", pour employer encore une fois les termes
de la resolution. Mais je puis avouer au Conseil
de securite que, depuis la conclusion des conventions d'armistice, cette responsabilite a ete plutot
leg-ere a mes epaules. En tout cas, les dispositions
des conventions d'armistice, qui sont le resultat
de libres negociations entre les parties en conflit,
ont plus de force que les stipulations de la trcve,
en raison du fait que c'est librement que ces conventions mlt ete conclueso Elles comportent la
force morale la plus grande possible, parce
qu'eJles representent un accord condu volontairement par les parties adverses.

Les conventions d'armistice ne constituent pas
The Armistice Agreements are not the final
peace settlement, but the only possible interpre- un reglement pacifique definitif, mais la seule
tation of their very specific provisions is that interpretation possible de leurs dispositions
they signal the end of the military phase of the cxtremement precises est que ces conventIons
Palestine situation. The objective now clearly marquent la fin de la phan: militaire du conflit
should be to restore normal conditions of pea,e en Palestine. I1 apparait clairement que le but
to the fullest possible extent. There can be little a poursuivre maintenant devrait etre le retablissedoubt that both sides desire to be freed from the ment, dans la plus large mesure possible, de conmany burdensome restrictions and interferences ditions normates de pabc. Il n'est pas douteux
which were imposed under the truce. The entire que des deux cotes les parties desirent etre
heritage of restrictions which developed out of liberees des nombreuses restrictions et interventhe undeclared war should be done away with. tions genantes qui leur ant ete ilnposees pendant
There. should be normal access, restrictions on la treve. Tout I'-ensemble des restrictions, rp.sultat
importation and immigration should be elimi- de cette guerre non dedaree, devrait etre aboli.
nated, there should be free movement for legiti- L'acces a ces regions devrait ctre normal; les
mate shipping, and no vestiges of the wartime restrictions a l'importation et a l'immigration
blockade should be allowed to remain as they ar~ devraient etre levees; la navigation reguliere
inconsistent with both the letter and the spirit of devrait jouirde sa liberte de mouvement; tOllS les
the Armistice Agreements.
vestiges du blocusrie guerre devraient etre supprimes, car ils. sont incompatibles non seulement
avec la lettre mais encore avec l'espritdes conventions d'armistice.
In my opinion, great care should be taken to
avoid any aCtion which would in any way weaken
the force of the Armistice Agreements or tend to
discredit them, or which would appear to question the good .faith of the parties signatory to
them. In· the fourth paragraph of the memorandum which I have attached to my report as an
annex, I suggest that the Security Council might
indeed wish merely to reaffirm the simple ceasefire order set forth in its resolution of 15 July
1948. This suggestion is based on the assumption that despite the Armistice Agreements, the
Security Council might wish to maintain its basic
injunction against any fighting, pending the final
peace settlement. As I interpret the Security
Council's previous action in this matter, the basic
approach has been an order against resort to military action. That is an unconditional cease-fire,
the implementation of which was by means of a
truce carrying specific terms· and obligations.
Practically speaking, it would probably be the
the implementation of which was by means of a
reaffirmation of a simple cease-fire were incorporated in a· new resolution by this Council, in the
event of any renewed fighting in Palestine, the
.matter would be quickly brought to the attention

A mon avis, le plus grand soin devrait ctre
apporte a eviter toute mesure de nature a diminuer en quoi que ce soit la force des conventions
d'armistice ou ales discrediter, ainsi que toute
mesure semblant mettre en doute la bonne foi
des signataires. Au quatrieme paragraphe du
memorandum que j'ai joint en annexe a mon
rapport, j'emets la. suggestion que le Conseil de
securite pourrait mcme simplement desirer
affirmer a nouveau l'ordre de cesser le feu contenu dans sa resolution du 15 juillet 1948. Cette
suggestion repose sur l'hypothese que, malgre les
conventions d'armistice, le ConseiI de securite
desirerait maintenir sa prescription fondamentale, l'interdiction de combattre, en attendant le
reglement pacifique definitif. Selon mon interpretation des decisions prises jusqu'a present par le
Conseil de sectirite en la· matiere, son action fondatnentale aete l'interdiction de tout recours auX
mesures de caractere militaire, c'est-a-dire un
cessez-Ie-feu sans' condition; dont l'application
devait etre assuree au moyen d'une treve comportant des conditions et des obligations precises.
Pratiquement, qu'une disposition reaffinnant uil
simple cessez-Ie-feu soit incorporee ou non dans
une nouvelle resolution du Conseil, it est a pre-

s

3

r_

of th,~ Security Council in any rase, and the
Council presumably would issue a desist order.

The suggestion is that only the injunction
against resort to military action, that is to say,
the cease-fire order in the 15 July resolution,
should be reaffirmed and that the rest of the resolution should be !:onsiden'!d henceforthi as inapplicable. In view or the Armistice Agreements,
such an injunction is not indispensab1'e, but it
would perhaps have the value of keeping the
hand of the Security Council on the Palesth,e
situation, pending itS definitive settlement--al~
though the representative of France has just suggested another way of doing that, -by keeping the
item on the agenda. In view of the great influence' on the progress towards a solution whir.h
has thus far been exerted by this Council, I
would consider it highly desil'able that the Council should pot prematurely detach itself completely from the Palestine situation.
Sub-paragraph 2 (c) of the Get).eral Assembly's resolution of 11 Dp.cember 1948 [194(111)]
provides for the transfer to the Conciliation
Commission of fundionE 'assigned to the United
Nations Mediator on Palestine by resolutions of
the Security Council. The resolution of 11 December transferred to the Conciliation Commission all the fUlictions previously assigned to the
Mediator under General Assembly resolutions.
Since .11 December, therefore, my functions as
Acting Mediator have consisted of tri;1ce supervision and armistice negotiations, both under Security Council resolutions. Since the Armistice
Agreements are concluded and since they render
any continued truce ~upervision unnecessary, in
my view there are in fact no functions remaining
to me now, and therefore none to transfer to the
Conciliation Commission. The truce supervision
personnel has been drastically reduced; at the
present time the Observer Corps consists of only
thirty-five officers and thirty-four enlisted men.
This number can still be reduced, since it is estimated that no more than thirty or forty observers
at the outside need to be retained to a:ssist the
parties, at their request, in the supervision of the
terms of the fou!;, Armistice Agreements. This
is United Nations assistance which the parties
themselves request in the Armistice Agreements,
and which the United Nations should of coun;e
grant. It must, however, be emphasized that the
parties themselves have devised their own agreements for joint supervision of the terms of the
voluntary agreements, and the United Nations
therefore has no general responsibility for the
supervision of the Armistice Agreements.

In other words, in conclusion, in response to
urging by the Security Council, the disputing
parties have made very great strides towards
peace. The Armistice Agreements, all but one of
which have now been in effect for several
months, are proving very effective. There is cer,tail1ly no basis' whatsoever for questioning the
good faith of the Parties to those Agreements' or
___

1J!lI;;* i UJ.:t:H,.....l:JJ

_tlra~

...

7

- - na!d" - i

UkJ4

swner que, dans l'eventualite d'une reprise des'
hostilites en Palestine, la question serait en tout
cas rapidement portee devant le Conseil de secitrite qui, tres probablement, emettrait 1'ordre de
cesser le combat.
Je suggere done de reaffirmer seulement 1'interdiction du recours cl d€s mesu!'es de caractere
militaire, c'est-cl-dire l'ordre de cesser le feu contcnu dans la resolution du 15 juillet, et de considerer le teste de la resolutioncomme dorenavant
inapplicable. Etant donne les conventions d'armistice, cette interdiction n'est pas indispensable,
mais elle aurait peut-etre le medte de maintenir
la question de Palestine sous le controle du Conseil
de securite, en attendant son reglement definitif,
bien que le representant de la France vienne de
suggerer, p0ur arriver au meme resultat, cette
autre rnethode qui consiste cl maintenir laquestion cl 1'ordre du jour. Le Conseil de securite
ayant joue jusqu'a present un grand role dans les
progres accomrlis vers une solution, j'estime qu'il
serait extremement souhaitable qu'il ne se detachat pas completement de la question de Palestine d'une maniere prematuree.
L'alinea 2 c) de la resolution de l'AssemOlee
generale en date du 11 tlecembre 1948 [194 (III) ]
stipule le transfert cl la Commission de conciliation des fonctions attdb'lees au Mediateur des
Nations Unies pour la Palestine par des resolutions du: Conseil de securite. La resolution du
11 decembre t.-anstere a la Commission de conciliation tontes les fonctions confiees auparavant
at1 Mediatetir pOor des resolutions de l'Assemblee
generale. P!1r consequent, depuis le 11 decembr~,
mes fonctions de Mediateur par interim ont consiste': surveiller la treve et a. negocier des armis-;
tices - ces deux taches resultant <le resolutions,
du Conseil de secnrite. Etant donne que les con":
ventions d'armistice ont e'te conc1ues et etant
donne que ces conventions rendent inutile de 'continuer a sunreiller la treve, il ne, me reste a mon
avis" en fait, plus aucune fonction et, par consequent, aucune fonction cl transferer a la Commission de conciliation. Le personnel charge de la
surveillance de la treve a ete reauit radicalement;
en ce 'moment, le corps des observatenrs comprend seulement trente-cinq officiers et trente-'
quatre hommes; ce nombre peut encore etre
reauit, puisqu'il est estime qu'iJ n'est pas necessaire de conserver plus de trenteou quarante
observateurs seulement pour aider les ,parties, sur
leurdemande, pour la surveillance de l'observ&
tion des conditions. des quatre conventions d'armistice. Il s'agit ici d'une aide des Nations Uni€s
qui est demandee' par les partieselles-memes dan~'
les conventions d'armistice et que les Nations,
Unies. devra.ient naturellement leur accorder.
Cependant, ,il faut souligner que les parties ont
pris elles-menies leur'spropres dispositions en vue
de surveiller ensemble'l'observation des conditions de ces conventions volontairement conclues.
Par consequent, it n'incombe pas aux Nations
Dnies une responsabilite generale de surveillance
de l'execution des conventions d'armistice.
En d'autres termes, et en conclusion, pressees.
par le Conseil de securite, les pades au conflit
ont franchi de grancls pas vers la paix. Les con...;
ventions d'aimistice, qui sont toutes, sauf une, en
vigueur depuis plusieurs mois, s'averent tres
efficaces. It n'y a certainement aucune raison
pour niettre en cloute la bonne foides parties a
ces conventions ou leurs intentions futures en ce'
iIi!iIiL

r

..

--------~-._- ---

----:-

8

their future intentions as regards their observance. They should be commended for having
gone thus far along the road to peac~, and they
should be encouraged to continue alorlg that road
in a spirit of good-will and mutual trllstfulness.
The more recent news from Lausanne is encouraging; it gives support to my belief, often reiterated, that all outstanding obstacles to permanent
peace in Palestine, including the problem of the
Arab refugees who now suffer: ;nost from this
unfortunate conflict, can and will be overcome by
a mutual spirit of conciliation and by reciprocal
concessions by the parti~.s.

qui concerne leur observation. Les parties
devraient etre felicitees d'etre allees si loin sur la
route de la paix et devraient etre encouragees a
la suivre dans un esprit de bonne volonte et de
mutuelle confiancc. Les nouvelles les plus recentes
qui nous parviennent de Lausanne sont encourageantes. Elles renforcent la foi que j'ai souvent
affirmee dans le fait que tous les obstacles qui
se dressent encore devant l'etablissement d'une
paix permanente ::n Palestine - y compris le
probleme de ces re£ugies arabes qui sont ceux
qui souffrent maintenant le plus de ce malheureux
conflit - peuvent etre et seront surmontes, grace
it un esprit de conciliation mutuelle et aux Concessions reciproques que se feront les parties.

The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian) : I
think that the most suitable procedure for us to
follow in considering the Acting Mediator's report would be to begin by addressing any questions we may have to Mr. Bunche. After he has
replied, we might go on considering this report
and e..'l:amining proposals on the substance.

Le PRESIDENT (tradllit du, russe) : A mon avis,
la fa~on la plus logique de proceder a. l'examen
du rapport presente par le Mediateur par interim
serait que les membres du Conseil posent tout
d'abord des questions a. M. Bunche, s'its le desirent. Lorsque celui-ci y aura repondu, le Conseil
pourra passer a la discussion de son rapport et a.
l'examen de ses propositions quant au fond.
Si personne n'a d'objections a. elever, il sera
pro.cede de cette maniere.

If there is no objection, we will follow this
procedure.
Has anybody any questions to ask the Acting Mediator in connexion with his report?
If there are no questions we will proceed to
consider the substance of Mr. Bunche's report.
Does anyone wish to speak?

Mahmoud FAWZI Bey (Egypt): I am not now
going to ask all the questions which I might feel
impelled to put to Mr. Bunche. At the moment,
however, I should like to ask him a question
about one point which, if my understanding is
correct, has been mentioned by the representative of France: I am referring to the correlation
between the Truce and the Armistice Agree<ments. It seems to me that the representative of
France was wondering whether the truce should
be continued or discontinued under present circumstances and in spite of the Armistice Agreements. I should like some clarification from Mr.
Bunche on this point, if possible.
Mr. BUNCHE (Acting Mediator on Palestine) :
I shall be happy to attempt to answer the question put by the representative of Egypt. The
situation, as I see it, is that the Security Council imposed a truce which did· not envisage the
end of the fighting but which, in its terms, merely provided that there w,?uld be no fighting. .It
left the armies arrayed against each other. It
was inde11nite in its duration, and it maintained a
situation in which tension was inevitable.
The Security Council then called on the parties
to . tak;:: a step looking toward the liquidation of
the military phase of . the conflict by the negotiation and conclusion of armistice agr.eements. The
parties complied with that request, which was
contained in the resolution of 16 November 1948
[Sjl080].
It seems to me that the conclusion of those
Armistice Agreements, as I have indicated in my
prepa:oed statement, renders completely obsolete
and unnecessary the truce and the conditions of
the truce. Indeed, there was an obligation on the

Quelqu'un desire-t-il poser des questions au
Mediateur par interim a. propos de son rapport?

•

Si personne ne desire poser de questions. le
Conseil abordera la discussion du rapport de
M. Bunche quant au fond. Y a-t-iI queIqu'un qui
desire prendre la parole?
Mahmoud FAWZI Bey (Egypte) (traduit de
l'anglais): Je ne vais pas poser maintenant a.
M. Bunche toutes les questions que je pourrais
eprouver le besoin de lui poser. Je desirerais,
cependant, pour I'instant, le questionner sur un
point qui, si je comprends bien, a ete mentionne
par le representant de la France. I1 s'agit de la
relation entre la treve et les conventions d'armistice. I1 m'a semble que le representanii de la
France se demandait si, dans les circonstances
actueIIes et malgre les conventions d'armistice,
la treve se continuait DU non. M. Bunche pourrait-it nous donner quelques eclaircissements sur
ce point?
M. BUNCHE (Mediateur par interim pour la
Palestine) (traduit de l'anglais): C'est avp.c
piaisir que j'essayerai de repot;ldre- a. la question
posee par le representant de 'I'Egypte. A mes
yeux, la situation est la suivante: le Conseil de
securite a impose une treve qui prevoit, non pas
la fin des hostiIites, mais simplement qu'iI n'y
aura pas d'hostiIites. La treve laissait les armees
l'une en face de l'autre en ordre de bataiIIe. Elle
etait d'une duree indefinie et laissait subsister une
situation comportant un etat de tension inevitable.
Le Conseil de securite invita aIors les parties
a prendre des mesures en vue del la liquid,ation
de la phase miIitaire du conflit par la negociation et la conclusion de conventions d'armistice.
Les parties acquU~sceret;lt a cette demande, qui se
trouvait dans la resolution du 16 nocembre 1948.
[Sj1080].
A mon avis, la conclusion de ces ~onventions
d'armistice, comme je I'ai indique dans . ma declaration, rend la treve et ses, conditions absolument caduques et inutiIes. Il existe meme pour
le ConseiI de securite l'dbIigation, qui me parait
ZC'"

9
part of the Security Council, which it seems to
me is implicit in the resolution of 16 November
1948, to remove the burdensome restrictions of
the truce once the parties had complied with the
armistice request, because the S<"curity Council
called upon the parties to negotiate armistice
agreements with a view to making a transition
from truce to peace and provided for such matters as the demarcation of armistice Hnes and the
withdrawal and reduction of forces for the purpose of ensuring the maintenance of the armistice pending the final peace settlement. There
was, then, an implicit promise on the part of the
Security Council that, once the parties had complied with the armistice call, the burdensome restrictions of the truce would be removed because
the truce would have been superseded. Since
every front in Palestine is now covered by an
armistice agreement, I think the situation calls
for a recognition by the Security Council of the
fact that a forward step has been taken which
renders unnecessary any retention of the truce
or of the truce machinery.

resulter implicitement de la resolution du 16 novembre 1948, de supprimer les lourdes restrictions imposees par la treve des que les parties
auraient satisfait a l'invitation de conclure un
armistice, car le Conseil de securit'; demandait
aux parties de negocier des conventions d'armistice en vue de faciliter le passage de la treve
a la paix j il prevoyait, par exemple, la demarcation des lignes d'armistice, le retrait et la reduction des forces armees en vue d'assurer le maintien de l'armistice jusqu'au reglement pacifique
definitif. Par consequent, le Conseil de securite
avait implicitement promis que, lorsque les parties auraient satisfait a l'invitation de conclure
un armistice, les pesantes r~strictions du temps
de treve ~eraient levees parce que la treve aurait
ete remplacee par autre chose. Puisque; tous les
fronts en .l:alestine se trouvent regis par des conventions d'armistice, je pense que la situation est
telle que le Com;eil de securite doive reconnaitre
qu'un pas en avant a ete fait qui rend inutile de
conserver le regime de treve et son mecanisme.

I hope that clarifies the point raised by the
representative of Egypt.

J'espere avoir apporte les ec1aircissements desires par le representant de l'Egypte.

Mahmoud FAWZI Bey (Egypt): I wish to take
note of the answer just given by Dr. Bunche,
from which I understand that he told us, among
other things, that he considers that the Armistice
Agreements render obsolete-Completely obsolete, according to what he said-the truce and its
machinery, including the restrictions.

Mahmoud FAWZI Bey (Egypte) (traduit de
fanglais): Je prends note de la reponse que
vient de nous donner M. Bunche, de laquelle je
retiens qu'il nous a declare, entre autres chases,
estimer que les conventions d'armistice rendent
cac\ucs - absolument eaducs, d'apres ses propres
termes - la treve et son mecanisme, y compris
les restrictions que ce1ui-ci imposait.
Je suppose que· lorsque M. Bunche parle des
restrictions imposees par la treve, ilentend celles
qui furent imposees, par exemple, par les resolutions du Conseil de securite, telles que celles du
15 juillet 1948 [S/902], du 29 mai 1948 [5/801],
ainsi que flar toute autre resolution relative it la
treve et qui iinposait des restrictions. Je tiens a
remercierM. Bunchepour sa reponse tres nette
it ma question.

I take it that when he talks of the restrictions
of the truce, Dr. Bunche means such resolutions
of the Security Council as those of 15 July 1948
[Sj902], 29 May 1948 [S/801], or any other
resolution connected with the truce and imposing
restrictions. I wish to thank Dr. Bunche for the
clear answer he has given to my question.

Mr. EBAN (Israel) : The Government of Israel
gave immediate and wholehearted support to the
resolution adopted by the Security Council on
16 November 1948, calling for "negotiations ...
with a view to the immediate establishment of the
armistice". In proposing that resolution the representative of Canada called attention [380th
meeting] to the need for a new impetus moving
away irom the precarious balance of a military
truce towards the procedures of pacific settlement. The Acting Mediator reminded the Security Council that the armed conflict had become
~tterly futile. He went on to say [380th meet~ng] :

"Whatever might have 'been the objectives of
Arab arms in Palestine last spring, almost six
months· later these objectives have not been
achieved, On the other hand, the objective of
Jewish arms has been to defend their people and
.. :. . State ... against attack. The State of Israel
.. . is a strongly entrenched fact today, despite
concerted opposition, and that opposition therefore, has ceased to have practical purpose in
terms of its own stated original objective."
At all times the fundamental issue in the Pal,estine conflict was the rightful existence and sovereignty of the State of Israel. The internation-

M. EBAN (Israel) (traduit de l'anglais):
Le Gouvernement d'Israel a donne un appui
immMiat et s'incere a la resolution adoptee par
le Conseil de securite le 16 novembre 1948 et
qui invite les parties a des negociations "aux fins
de condure· immediatement un armistice". En
proposant cette resolution, le representant du
Canada a appe1e l'attention [380ente seance] sur
la necessite de donner une nouvelle impulsion
afin de passerde l'equilibre precaire d'une treve
militai:re aux procedures d'un reglement pacifique.
Le Mediateur par interim a rappele au Conseil
de securite que le conflit arme etait deventi
absolument vain. Il poursuivait [380eme seance] :
"Quels qu'aieht pu etre les objectifs des Arabes'
en Palestine au printe1iI.J,psdernier, presque six
mois ont passe et ces objectifs n'ont pas ete atteints. D'autre part, l'objectif des Juifs a ete de
defendre le peuple et l'Etat d'Israel . . . I'Etat
d'Israel est maintenant . . . une realite' solide- .
ment etablie malgre une opposition (:oncertee.
Cette opposition a done cesse d'avoir un but pratique si 1'0n considere les objectifs qu'elle s'etait
primitivement assignes."
A tout moment, la question fonda..-nentale dans
le conflitpalestinien fut celle de l'existence et de
la souverainete legitimes de l'Etat d'IsraeI. La

10
al community had emphatically determined that
issue by its own prior judgment dnd was later to
confirm it after the event by solemn acts of recognition and acceptance. With the basic issue
firmly settled, the Security Council was true to
its highest purpos~s in calling the Governments
concerned to the adjustment of their differences
by free and direct negotiations.

communaute internationale avait anterieurement
tranche cette question de fac;on tres nette et dIe
d\lvait par la suite confirmer apres coup son premier jugem~nt par des actes solennels d'acceptation et de reconnaissance du nouvel Etat. La
question fondamentale etant nettement regtee, le
Conseil de securite, fidele a ses buts eleves, invita
les Gouvernements interesses a regler leurs differends par des negodations libres et directes.

, There was a note .)f imagination and faith in
that call; for at no previous time during this
savage and inveterate conflict extendhlg over
three decades, had Arab representatives agreed
to establish formal contact with Jewish representatives for the settlement of opposing claims.
Sceptical voices were thprefore heard, casting
doubt on the realism of making the prospects of
a settlf"ment depend upon the chances of direct
negotiation. Those sceptical voices became more
insistent a few weeks later when the General
Assembly too, by its resolution of 11 December,
called for a political settlement to be attained not
by authoritative intervention from outside but by
negotiations leading to voluntary agreements.
The responsibility for evolving a full settlement
in two stages was thus placed squarely and irrevocably on the parties themselves.

I1 y avait dans cet appel une certaine imagination
et une certaine foi, car jamais jusque la, au cours
du combat aauvage et acharne qui s'etait poursuivi
pendant trente ans, les representants arabes
n'avaient accepte d'entrer en relations officielleg
avec les representants juifs en vue du reglement
de leurs revendications opposees. Aussi des voix
sceptiques se firent-elles entendre, qui jugeaient
peu realiste de tabler sur les chances que pouvaient offrir des negociations directes pour un
reglement de la question. Ces voix sceptiques se
firent encore plus insistantes quelques semaines
plus tard quand l'Assemblee generale, elle aussi,
par sa resolution du 11 decembre, invita a un
reglement politique de la question auquel on devait
parvenir, non pas par une intervention autoritaire
de l'exterieur, mais par des negociations menees
en vue d'aboutir a des accords librement conc1us.
Ainsi etait nettement et irrevocablement placee
sur les parties eIles-memes la responsibilite
d'elaborer un reglement complet en deux etapes.

The report of the Acting Mediator now lies on
the table. It is the record of triumph in a bold
enterprise whichl the Security Council set afoot
eight months ago. Only~in one major respect does
the report conspicuously fail to describe the true
origins of this success.

Le rapport du Mediateur par interim est maintenant devant nous. I1 enregistre le triomphe remporte en une entreprise audacieuse lancee par le
Conseil de securite voici huit mois. Sur un seul
point, de grande importance, le rapport omet - et
cela est manifeste - d'indiquer it quoi il faut
attribuer en realite ce succes.

My Government is a signatory to all four
Agreements. It has been actively concerned in
each episode of these "tortuous and difficult"
negotiations. It therefore knows from most intimate experience how much the. successful outcome is due to the patience, thf!) tact, the skill,
and the tenacious idealism of Mr. Bunche. These
high qualities of mind and spirit, harnessed to
the great cause of international co-operation,
have brought auout an achievement of immeasurable benefit to the peoples of the Near East
and of abiding value to the prestige of our
Organization.

Mon Gouvernement est signataire des quatre
conventtons. I1 a pris une part active it chacune
des phases de ces negociations "bngues et difficiles". Son experience lui a donc montre directement combien 1'0n doit cet heureux resultat it la
patience, au tact, it l'habilete et it l'idealisme tenace
de M. Bundle. Sa haute valeur spirituelle et intellectuelle, mise au service de la noble cause d-= la
cooperation internationale, a permis d'obtenir un
resultat d'un prix inestimable pour les peuples du
P ...oche-Orient et qui sera d'un effet durable pour
le prestige de notre Organisation.

As Mr Bun'che lays down his functions, the
Government of Israel wishes publicly to convey
to him its sentiment of profound appreciation
and esteem. The highest reward of any such
mission must lie in the consciousness of many
human lives saved from slaughter and of international authority vindicated as the supreme
deterrent to war. This merit, and with it the
gratitude of peace-loving men in the Near East
and everywhere, extends from Mr. Bunche to
General Riley, Mr. Vigier and. other United
Nations representatives who faithfully participated in this mission of peace.

Au moment ou M. Bunche abandonne ses fonctions, le Gouvernement d'Israel tient a lui
exprimer publiquement ses sentiments d'estime
profonde et de vive appreciation. Pour toute mission de ce genre la plus grande recompense ne
peut resider que dans la conscience d'avoir sauve
du massacre de nombreuses vies humaines et
d'avoir prouve que l'autorite internaionale avait
le pouvoir supreme d'empecher la guerre. Ce
tnerite, ainsi que la gratitude des hommes epris de
paix dans le Proche-Orient comme dans le monde
entier, reviennent egale..nent au general Riley, a
M. Vigier et aux autres representants de 1'0rganisatioll des Nations Unies qui ol1t loyalement
participe a cette mission de paix.

The draft resolution presented by Canada and
Norway [Sj1362] pays eloquent tribute to the
work of Count Bernadotte, out of whose mission
and report the conc~pt of the armistice originally emerged.

Le projet de resolution presente par le Canada
et la Norvege [Sj1362] rend un :lOmtrl.age eloquent al'ceuvre du comte Bernadotte; c'est de sa
mission et de son rapport que vint l'idee premiere
d'un armistice.

....

a
11
It is appropriate for the Security Council to
take stock at this time of the situation created by
the successful completion of the armistice system.
There is an organic link between these Agreements and the peace settlement which is now
being sought under the auspices of the General
Assembly through its Conciliation Commission.
In the Security Council resolution on which these
four Agreements are basedl the armistice is envisaged not as an end in itself but as a tltransition to permanent peace". In the General Assembly resolution laying down the principles of a
peace settlement [194(III)], Israel and the Arab
States are called upon tlto extend the scope of
the armistice negotiations "and to seek agreement
by negotiations with a view to the final settlement of all questions outstanding between them".
EviQ.ently then we must not regard the armistice
and peace negotiations as separate and parallel
processes. They are part of a single uninterrupted sequence. In attaining an armistice we
reach a stepping-stone, from which the remainder
of the journey may be surveyed and completed.
Both the principles and the resltlts of the armistice negotiations have their due and positive influence on the conciliation effort.

It est bon que le Conseil de securite fasse, it
l'heure actuelle, le point de la situation creee par
l'heureuse conclusion de cc systeme d'armistice.
It y a un lien organique entre ces conventions et
le reglement pacifique auquel on s'efforce maintenant de parvenir sous les auspices de l'Assembtee
generale, par l'entremise de sa Commission de
concilhition. Dans la resolution du Conseil de securite sur laquelle sont bases ces quatre accords,
l'armistice est envisage, non pas comme une fin en
soi, mais comme un tlpassage it une paix permanente". Dans la resolution de l'Assemblee geUl~rale
qui pose les principes d'un reglement pacifique
[1.r-f (III)L Israel et les Etats arabes sont invites
a tletendre le domaine" des negociations d'armistice et a. "rechercher un accord par voie de nego-"
ciations, en vue d'un reglement definitif de toutes
les questions sur lesquelles its ne se sont pas
encore mis d'accord". Il est evident que nous ne
devons pas considerer 1'armistice et les negociations de paix comme des operations paralleles,
mais separees. Ce sont les maillons d'une meme
chaine ininterrompue. En aboutissant a un armistice, nous arrivons a une sorte d'eminence d'ou
nous pouvons observer le reste du chemin it
accomplir, et nous y engager. L'effort de conciliation est influence de maniere positive, comme it
doit l'etre, a la fois par les principes qui ont
inspire les negociations d'annistice et par les resultats de ceUes-ci.

Paramount amongst these principles and absolutely over-riding in its importance is, the lesson
which Mr. Bunche deduces from the experience
of this. past year. He wrote [Sj1357]:

Parmi ces principes, la lec;on que M. Bunche
tire de l'experience de ran passe est d'une importance absolument primordiale. I1 ecrit [S/13571 :

"The negotiations leading to the Agreements
were in each case tortuous and difficult. But they
demonstrate that once the parties could be
brought together they could, with United Nations
assistance, be led to reasonable and honourable
agreement."

"Les negociations qui ont permis d'aboutir a
Ces accords ont ete, dans chaque cas, longues et
difficiles. Mais eUes prouvent que, lorqu'il a ete
possible d'amener les parties a negocier, e1les ont
pu, avec 1'assistance de 1'0rganisation des Nations
Unies, arriver a un accord raisonnable et
honorable."
"Lorsqu'il a ete possible d'amener les parties
a negocier." La conclusion qu'il convient de tirer
ici est que la procedure des contacts directs est
d'un effet decjsif sur le resultat final. On ne peut
arriver a un accord sans etablir de contacts. Par
des contacts, on ne peut guere arriver a autre
chose qu'un accord. I1 est extremement significatif
qu'Israel et un Etat arabe ne se soient jamais
rencontres pour negocier sans aboutir finalement a.
un accord forme!. Ayant reconnu la verite de ces
principes primordiaux, le groupe auquel avait He
confie le soin de la mediation s'est montre infatigable dans ses efforts pour rapprocher les parties.
I1 n'a impose a celles-ci aucune doctrine personnelle. I1 n'a formule aUCUD: jugement. Un
accord ne peut etre impose de 1'exterieur; il ne
peut venir que des parties en cause. Aussi est-il
d'un heureux augure que la directive de l'Assembtee generale cOllfol'mementa laqueUe l'effort de
conciliation se poursuit maintel13.nt souligne surtout, eUe aussi, la necessite d'atl'iver a un accord
sur les questions pendantespar voie de negociations, pour lesquelles on peut avoir recours aux
services de la Commission de conciliation.

"Once the parties could be brought together."
The conclusion here is that the procedure of
direct contact has a decisive effect on the final
result. You cannot get agreement without
contact. With contact you can hardly get anything except agreement. It is immensely significant that Israel and an Arab State have never
met in negotiation without ending up in formal
accord. The mediation organization, having
seized this central truth, was indefatigable in
bringing the parties together. It imposed no doctrine of its own. It passed no judgments. Agreement cannot be imposed from without; it can
only emerge from within. It is thus a happy
augury that the General Assembly directive
under which the conciliation effort now proceeds
also lays its main emphasis on the need to reach
agreement on outstanding questions by negotiation in which the services of the Conciliation
Commission are available.

The fact that these negotiations were tltortuous and difficult" is also of great significance; it
is a. warning against premature despair or
recourse to short cuts. In each of these negotia'tions there were moments of imminent breakdown and a strong temptation to admit failure.

bP

., .

Le fait que ces .negociations aient ete"longues
et difficiles" est egalement tres signifi<;atif; cela
montre qu'il ne faut pas ceder a un decouragement premature, ni vouIoir aller au plus court. Au
cours de chacune de ces negociations, il y eut d~s
moments ou leur rupture paraissait imminente et

12
Perseverance and tenacity tided over each crisis,
and as long as the parties were meeting, the hope
of success> was kept alive. The calendar is the
enemy of conciliation. My Government, for its
part, hopes that the transition to permanent peace
may be effected more swiftly than was thCi attainment of these Armistice Agreements. It has
from the very outset advocated direct meetings
under the auspices of the Conciliation Commission. But if this road is also to be difficult and
tortuous and early success is not reached, after
this experience, we shall not for a moment, believe that the method of negotiated agreement
has ivst any of its validity, or should in' any way
be set aside in favour of other procedures.

ou la tentation etait forte d'admettre un echec. La
perseverance et la tenacite ont permis de surmonter chacune des ces crises; aussi longtemps que les
parties continuaient a se rencontrer, subsistait
l'espoir du succes. Le calendrier est 1'ennemi de
la conciliation. Pour sa part, mon Gouvernemcnt
espere q\.le 1'on pourra passer it. l'etat p.e paix
permanente· plus rapidement que 1'on n'est parvenu a conclure ces accords d'armistice. Des le
debut, mon Gouvernement a preconise des reunions directes, sous les auspices de la Commission de conciliation. Mais si cette voie doit egalement etre longue et difficile et si l'on n'arrive pas
rapidement au succes, nous ne penserons pas un
seul instant, apres cette experience, que la methode des accords par voie de negociations a perdu
quoi que ce soit de sa valeur, ni qu'elle doive
1fucunement etre ecartee en faveur d'autres procedures.

One of the factors contributing to the succesS
of these negotiations was thl;l. procedure of bilateral meetings. Since Israel was in contact with
each Arab State individually, it was possible to
relate the agenda to specific and practical issues
affecting the interests of two parties and two
alone. Thus the complications of inter-State relations were kept down to the minimum. The conditions affecting Israel's relationship with the
Arab· States are obviously not identical in each
case or uniform for the area as a whole; geographical and political differences were important
~n respect to the armistice, as they must be in
respect to the final territorial settlement.

L'un des facteurs qui ont contribue au succes
de ces negociations fut la procedure des reunions
bilaterales, Israel ayant ere en contact avec chacun
des Etats arabes separement, 11 fut possible de
faire porter l'ordre du jour sur des questions precises et pratiques interessant les deux parties, et
elles seules. Ainsi, les complications des relations
entre Etats furent reduites au minimum. Les conditions dont dependent les rapports d'Israel avec
les Etats arabes ne sont evidemment pas identiques en chaque cas, ni un1£ormes dans l'ensemble
de la region; les differences d'ordre geographique
et politique apparurent importantes lors de la conclusion de l'armistice, comme elles l'apparaitront
lors du reglement territorial definitif.

So. much for the procedures and principles
which have led this venture to success. The
texts of the Armistice Agreements lie before the
Security Council. They deserve a brief comment,
since they now regulate the. precise relationship
of Israel with all the neighbouring States, and
thus constitute a provisional settlement which can
only be replaced by a peace agreement. It is a
matter of considerable satisfaction to my Government to find: its essential relations with its four
contiguous neighbours resting at this moment
upon foundations of mutual consent. On every
inch of ground where the authority of the Israeli
Government is effective,we have at this moment
the agreement of the Arab State concerned and
of the Security Council, under the aegis of which
these agreements were reached.

Tels sont la procedure et les principes qui ont
conduit cette entreprise au succes. Le Conseil de
securite .est saisi des textes des conventions d'armistice. Elles meritent un bref commentaire,
puisque maintenant ~lles reglent cl'une maniere
precise les rapports d'IsraeI avec tous les Etats
voisins, constituant ainsi un reglement provisoire
que seul pourra remplacer un accord de paix.
C'est, pour mon Gouvernement, une source de
vive satisfaction de voir que ses relations essentie1les avec ses quatre voisins im.'liediats reposent
maintenant sur le consentement mutuel. Pour
chaque pouce de terrain sur lequel le Gouvernement d'Israel exerce effectivement son autorite,
nous avonsactuellement l'acord de I'Etat arabe
interesse ainsi que du .Conseil, de securite, sous
l'egide duquel ces conventions ont eteconclues.

The Armistice Agreements, though provisional,
En depit de .1eur cara~tere provisoire, les conhave elements of stability which therefore offer ventions d'armistice presentent des elements de
a sound basis for the transition to permanent stabilite et offrent, de ce fait, une base saine pour
peace. Mr.. ~l1nche points out that they were le passage it. l'etat de paix permanente. M. Bunche
negotiated at governmental level and thus involve fait remarquer qu~elles ont ete negociees au plan
the highest considerations of political good faith. gouvernemental, aussi faut-il les considerer
Moreover, a pattern of normal andi orderly life comme empreintes d'une extrem:e bonne foi po!itihas spontaneously grown out of these agree- que. Par aiUeurs, un ordre de vie normal et
ments. Civilians as well as soldiers are vitally regulier s'est spontanement etab!i a la suite de
affected by .them. The . armistice lines do 1l0t ces conventions, quiaffectent de fa<;on vitale aussi
merely separate armed forces. They mark the bien l'element civil que l'element militaire de la
clearly .defined areas of full civil jurisdiction. population. _Les !ignes de demarcation fixees par
The Government, the courts, the legislatures, the l'armistice ne font pas seulement que separer les
security authorities of each respective State oper- forces armees. Elles determinent les regions
ate smoothly and unchallenged up to the appro-. clairement definies de pleine. juridiction civile. l.e
priate armistice line. These! lines. thus have tlie Gouvernement, les tribunaux, les corps legislatifs,
normal characteristics of provisional frontiers les services de surete de chacundes Etats respecuntil such time as a new process of negotiation t1£s ~fonctionnent sans heurts ni protes.tattons a
and agreement determines the final territorial l'interieur de leurs lignes de demarcation. Ces
settlement. They are also stabilized by the muttlal .lignes offrent done les caracteristiques, normales,.
•

I D · 1&'11_1 U

~

I[ur_ U

llIW •••• UI .

-

-.----------~--~-- .. _-- ~
de frontieres provisoires, jusqu'au moment ou une
nouvelle serie de negociations et d'accords determinera le reglement territorial definitif. Elles
sont egalement rendues stables, pour aussi longtemps que les conventions d'annistice demeureront Y.Ilables, par les engagements reciproques des
parties et par la sanction internationale la plus
complete.
Les conditions clans lesquelles les dispositions
The condjtions in which the dispositions of
these Agreements may be changed are set out de ces conventions peuvent etre modifiees sont
in articles XII of the Israeli-Egyptian and enoncees a. l'article XII des conventions entre
Israeli-Hashemite Agreeme:nts, and in articles Israel et l'Egypte et entre Israel et le GouverneVIII of the Syrian and Lebanese Agreements. In ment hachemite de Jordanie, 3,insi qu'a. l'amcle
VIII des conventions conc1ues avec la Syrie et'
each Agreement the relevant article reads:
avec le Liban. Dans chacune de ces conventions,
l'article considere a la teneur suivante:
"Cet accord, negocie et conc1u conformement
. "This Agreement, having been negotiated and
conduded in pursuance of the resolution of the a la resolution du Conseil de securite en. date da
Security Council of 16 November 1948 calling 16 novembre 1948t demandant la realisation d'un
for establishment of an armistice in order to armistice afin d'eliminer.la menace a la paix en
eliminate the threat to the peace in Palestine and Palestine et (le faciliter la transition de la treve
to facilitate the transition from the pr~sent truce actuelle vers une paix permanente en Palestine,
to permanent peace in Palestine, shall remain in restera en vigueur jusqu'a. ce que soit atteint un
force until a peaceful settlement between the reglement pacifique entre les parties, a. l'exception
parties is achieved, except as provided in para- des dispositions prevues au paragraphe 3 du pregraph 3 of this Ar~icle." .
sent article."
Le paragraplie 3 prevoit des revisions "par
Paragraph 3 makes provision for revisions "by
mutual consent" or eventual recourse to the consentement mutuel" ou un recours eventuel au
Security Council after a year. The effective posi- Conseil de securite a l'expiration du terme d'un
tion, therefore, is that these Agreements have no an. En fait, aucune limite de temps n'est donc
time limit and can be altered only by agreed fixee pour ces accords; ils ne peuvellt etre modi~
amendments or terminated by a peace settlement fies que par des amendements acceptes d'un comto be concluded between the parties.
mun accord, et it ne peut y etre mis fin que par
un reglement pacifique intervenu entre les parties.
It becomes evident, therefore, that further
It apparait donc evident que l'on ne peut faire
progress toward final peace can only be made by de nouveaux pas vers une paix definitive qu'en
maintaining and developing the procedures of maintenant et en developpant les procedures de
contact and negotiation used in the Armistice contact et de negociation qui ont ete appliquees
Agreements. The General Assembly's resolution pour la conclusion des conventions d'armistice.
is quite logical in envisaging the peace settle- La resolution de l'Assemblee generale est parment as an extension of the scope of the armistice faitement logique quand eUe envisage le reglement
negotiations; and the Conciliation Commission pacifique comme une extension de la portee des
has the same powers in relation to the peace negociations d'armistice; et la Commission de contalks as the Mediator had in respect of the armis- ciliation jouit, en ce .qui concerne les· pourparlers
tice negotiations. The Armistice Agreements de paix, des memes pouvoirs que possedait le
are not peace treaties. They do not prejudice the Mediateur pour .les negociations d'armistice. Les
final territorial settlements. On the other hand, . conventions d'armistice ne sont pas des traites de
the provisional· settlement established by the paix. Elles ne prejugentpas le reglement terriArmistice Agreements is unchangeable until a torial definit~f. D'autre part, le reglement provinew process of negotiation and agreement has soire etabli par les conventionsd'armistice ne pent
been successfully consummated·.
etre modifie jusqu'a. ce qu'une nouvelle serie de
negociations et d'accords ait heureusement abouti.
Israel has repeatedly announced its readiness
Israel a declare a. plusieurs reprises qu'il"etait
for this new process of negotiation. While we pret a entamer cette nouvelle phase de negociashould be prepared to negotiate the transition tions. Si nous devons nous tenir p:rets a. tout
from armistice to peace at any time, hhers are moment a. negocier ce passage de l'armistice a. la
hesitant or if other problems such as that of paix, d'autres peuvent hesiter a. lefaire; d'autres
.. refugees appear for the moment mqre urgent, problellies te1s. que celui des .refugies peuvent
we shall take our stand for as long as necessary egaleinent paraitre pour. l'instaht plus urgents;
on the precise and meticulous observance of the aussi nous en tiendrons-nous, aussi· longtemps
Agreements already reached. These Agreements qu'il sera necessaire, a. l'observance predseet
not only regulate the day-to-day relations of meticuleuse des accords dejaconclus. Cesaccords
Israel with the neighboring Arab States ; they reglent, non seulement les. relations quotidiennes
also contain what Mr. Bunche in his report de- d'Israel· avec les Etats arabes voisins; ils renferscribes as "a non-aggression pact".
ment egalement ce que M. Bunche, dans son rap·
port,appelle "un pacte de non-agression".
. My Government, for its part, supports the
Pour sa part, mon. Gouvernement partage
Mediator's conclusion tha't the military phase of l'opinion a laqueUe est parvenu le Mediateur: la
this problem has beell terminated. We go further phase·militaire de ce probleme estterminee. Nous·
. and say that the military phase should never have alIons plus loin et disons que cette phase n'aurait
regun. We should, however, prefer to contem- jamais du commencer. Cependant, nousprefere- ,
undertakings of the parties and· by the fullest
international sanction for as long as the Armis·
tice Agreements are vl:'Jid.

~

14
plate the future; and I wonder if we can be
assured that all Arab States officiallv share our
view in regarding these Agreements', no'l: as an
interlude or as a prelude to some second round,
but as a final and irrevocable end of hostilities
and a starting point in the further advance
toward peace.

rions envisager l'avenir et je me demande si nous
pouvons etre assures que tous les Etats arabes
partagent officiellement notre sentiment et regardent ces conventions, non comme un interlude
ou un prelude a. quelque deuxieme round, mais
comme marquant la fin definitive et irrevocable
des hostilites, comme un point de depart pour un
nouveau pas vers la paix.

Israel will observe each of these A~reements
and every part and section thereof. It will maintain them scrupulously in every respect until a
new agreement is reached. Israel has no ambitions with respect to the four Arab signatories,
except to establish relations of neighbourliness
and regional fraternity with them all. Under
these Agreements, Israel holds nothing and occupies nothing which has ever belonged to or been
awarded to any of the four signatories. Thus,
all the objective conditions exist for a lasting and
deepening accord to be reached after a new
process of successful conciliation. To the attainment of that accord, my Government will address
its most strenuous efforts at all times.

Israel respectera chacune de ces conventions
dans toutes ses parties et dans tous ses paragraphes. Il les observera scrupuleusement a. tous
egards, jtisqu'cl la signature de nouveaux accords.
IsratH n'a pas, cl l'egard des quatre Etats arabes
signataires, d'autre ambition que d'etablir avec
eux des relations de bon voisinage et de fraternite
regionaIe. Aux termes de ces conventions, Israel
ne detient rien, n'occupe den qui ait jamais appartenu ou qui ait janiais ete attribue cl aucun des
quatre signataires. Ainsi, toutes les conditions
necessaires sont reunies pour permettre la conclusion d'un accord durable et profond, apres une
nouvelle procedure de conciliation couronnee de
succes. A realiser cet accord mon Gouvernement
CQnsacrera en t<;>ttt temps ses efforts les plus
acharnes.
L'effort de conciliation fait a. Lausanne commence cl faire apparaitre des progres sensibles,
en partie, je l'espere, sous l'influence de certaines
propositions et procedures recemment suggerees
par la delegation d'Israel. Neanmoins it faut
nc.er qu'aucun contact direct entre Arabes et
Israeliens n'a encore eu lieu, et l'experience
prouve qu'une periode prolongee de contact directs
de ce genre semble etre le prelude necessaire d'un
accord final. Il serait donc prudent de St'pposer
que les conventions d'armistice pourront, pour un
temps assez long, etre les facteurs qui determineront les relations entre Arabes et Israeliens et
dans la vie quotidienne du Proche-Orient. Dans
ces conditions, il est necessaire que le Conseil de
securite et les Gouvernements signataires prennent toutes les meSures requises pour I'observance
precise et exacte de ces conventions. Les resuItats
deja acquis et I'esprit de conciliation qui est ne
maintenant doivent etre preserves avec un soin
jaloux. C'est daus cet esprit que j'aborde a present
quelques-uns des problemes precis qui se posent a.
ce stade.

The conciliation effort at Lausanne is beginning
to show substantial progress-partly, I hope,
under the influence of certain proposals and
procedures recently put forward by the Israeli
delegation. Nevertheless, ill: must be recorded
.that no direct Arab-Israeli meetings have yet
taken. place, a,nd experience proves that a prolonged period of such direct contact may be a
necessary prelude to eventual agreement. It
would therefore be prudent to assume that the
Armistice Agreements may be for some substantial time determining factors in Arab-Israeli
relations and in the everyday. life of the Near
Eastern region. In these circumstance.;;, it is
necessary for the Security Council and the signatory Governments to take an steps required for
the precise and exact observance of these Agreements. The results already achieved and the
spirit of conciliation now generated. must be
zealously conserved. It is in that spirit that I
turn to a few specific issues which arise at this
stage.
My Government fully supports Mr. Bunche's
conclusion that the truce period has been left
behii1d and that the first phase of the transition
to peace has been successfully accomplished. It
is therefore inevitable that many of the arrangements associated with the supervision of the
truce must now be superseded. The observation
machinery has, in any case, been progressively
reduced, 'and it is logical now to arrange for its
complete liquidation. The United Nations. will
then be represented in the Near- East only by the
officers serving as chairmen of the Mixed
Armistice Commissions established in each
Agreement by the voluntary act and invitation of
the signatory Governments. In a sense, therefore, the Security Council terminates its period
of active control. This does not mean, however,
that the influence of the Secarity Council has
ceased to be a factor of consequence in the maintenance atl.d further development of peace.

Mon Gouvernement appuie entierement la conclusion de M. Bunche selon laq~elle la periode c;le
treve appartient au passe et la premiere etape de
transition vers la paix a He franchie avec succes.
Il est inevitable, par consequent, que nombre des
dispositions liees a la surveillance de la treve
doivent maintenant etre remplacees. L'organisme
d'observation a ete progressivement reduit, d'ailleurs, et il est logique maintenant de prendre des
mesures pour sa liquidation complete. Les Nations
Unies ne seront alol's representees dans le ProcheOrient que, par les fonctionnaires qui font office
de presidents des commissions mixtes d'anl1istice
instituees dans chacune des conventions par un
acte volontaire et sur l'invitation des Gouvernements signataires. En un certain sens, par consequent, la periode de controle actif du Conseil desecurite se termine. Cela ne signifie pas, cependant,
que l'influence Clu COllseil de securite ait cesse
d'etre un facteul' important dans le maintien et
le developpement ulterieul' de la paix.

I apply this reflection especially to the question
of arms supplies. If the Security Council were

.Cette consideration s'applique specialement a la
question des fournitures d'armes. Si le c.:onseil d. . .

1&• . IlL•. •

i8WwJt"fJnl'~"_.lttJ trl'.A.....· n)f;.li.Jt~iO"!I.J lili, tn iif • ~*.~!o.sral j_!llfW",i,ii'ii~t'i&._~~JiR'.'¥~4415t*~S~:t:.4"k.~'

....

15
securite se bornait a. annuler la resolution relative
a. la treve, sans definir de quelle faIJon l'armistice
doit influer sur le probleme des armes, liberte
entiere serait automatiquement rendue cl tous les
Gouvernements d'acheter et de vendre des armes
dans le Proche-Orient, autant qu'it leur plairait. .
Ce ne serait pas la. une liberte theorique. De toutes
les parties du monde arabe nous parviennent les
nouvelles de plans de rearmement a grande echelle.
Malheureusement, ces plans s'accompagnent parfois de campagnes de propagande qui soulignent
que la guerre contre Israel pourrait bien n'etre
pas terminee, qu'il pourrait encore y avoir un
second' round • que peut-etre la. decision militaire
de l'an dernier pourrait encore etre renversee, que
l'acceptation de l'existence d'Israel ne devrait pas
encore etre envisagee pour le moment. L'opinion
populaire de ces pays est nourrie de doctrines de
ce genre. Le representantd'un certain Etat arabe.
aux Etats-Unis a cite des chiffres qui donnent une
idee de l'ampleur du rearmement projete. 11 parle
de 125 millions de dollars qui doivent etre consacres en un an a l'achat d'armes. It est Juste
d'ajouter que les buts de ce programme de rearmement sont expliques par des conditions generales d'ordre national et international qui n'ont
pas de lien direct avec Israel. Le chef de l'Etat
syrien a annonce un plan ambitieux de rearmement. L'Irak et le Royaume hachemite de J ordanie
ont avec le Royaumi-Uni, pnr traite, des relatione
qui, a moins que le Conseil de securite n'en decide
autrement, impliqueraient la reprise immediate
d'envois considerables d'armes a ces pays.
It is not difficult to imagine what Israel's attiIt n'est pas difficile d'imaginer a quelle attitude
tude must be in the event that its neighbours Israel se trouverait oblige d~ns le cas ou ses
would embark on large-scale rearmament. Many voisins se lanceraient dans un large programme de
Members of the United Nations, although pro- rearmement. Un grand nombre de Membres des
tected by the provisions of the Charter, neverthe- Nations Unies, bien qu'its soient proteges par les
less show deep concern for the state of their dispositions de la Ch~rte, ne se preoccupent pas
defences. Such concern is all the more natural !tlOins, avec gravite, de l'etat de leur de£ense. De
and understandable on the part of a State which telles preoccupations sont encore plus naturelles
has recently been the vidtim of a .concerted et comprehensibles de la part d'un Etat qui a ete
attack by each of its neighbours and which has recerntnent victime d'une attaque cGncertee de la
not yet managed to establish stable and normal part de chacun de ses voisins et qui l~'a pu encore
relations with any of them. These considerations etablir des relations normales et stables avec
added to the tone of certain propaganda impose aucun d'entre eux. Ces considerations, jointes au
a clear duty upon the Government of Israel, in ton d'une certaine propagande, imposent un devoir
the name of the very survival of the State. Israel evident au Gouvernement d'Israet, au nom de la
cannot allow itself. to be overtaken. It cannot in survivance meme de l'Etat. Israel ne peut pas se
any circumstances suffer itself to reach a state permettre d'etie surpris. It ne peut en aucun cas
of military inferiority' which might be a tempta- ~dmettre d'etre place dans un etat d'inferiorite
tion to renewed assault. Its very obligation to militaire qui pourrait etre une tentation de renoucontribute to the stability of the Near East veler l'assaut. L'engagement meme qu'it a pris
imposes upon it the duty of preparedness.
de contribuer a la stabilite du Proche-Orient lui
impose le devoir d'etre pret.
. Clearly, then, if the restrahts imposed by the
It est done clair, que, si les restrictions imposees
Security Council are entirely lifted and large- par .le Conseil de. securite sont entierement levees
scale rearmament becomes the policy of the Arab et si le rearmement a grande echelle devient la
States, the Near East must become the scene of politique des Etats arabes, le Proche-Orient va
an armaments race. We ask ourselves whether etre le theatre d'une course aux armements. Nous
the newly won peace is already so stable and so nous demandons si la' paix recemment conquise
firm as to easily survive the strains of that compe- est deja assez stable etassez forte pour pouvoir
tition. The Security Council must takel the re- aisement survivre a la tension d'une telle compesponsirility of answering that question. For our tition. Le Conseil de securite doit 'prendre la respart, we have no hesitation in saying that the ponsabilite de repondre a cette question. Quant a
mast elementary prudence requires the mainte- flOUS, nous n'hesitons pas a dire que la prudence
nance o~ the Security Council's present arms la plus elementaire: exige le maintien de la politipolicy. It is because we regard the Armistice qUe actuelle du Conseil de securite en matiere
Agreements as a highly notable and significant d'armes.. Parce que nousconsiderons les convenachievement that we urge the utmost caution on . tions d'armistice comme un resultat hautement
pehalf of their· preservation.
remar<;]uableet important, nous demandons instamment qu'on agisse avec. une extreme prudence
, pour les maintenir.
merely to cancel the truce resolution, without
defining the manner in which the arms question
is to be affected by the armistice, full liberty
would be automatically restored to all Governments to buy and sell arms in the Near East to
their hearts' content. This would .be no abstract
liberty. From every corner of the Arab world,
we hear of plans of large-scale rearmament.
Unhappily, 'these plans are sometimes accompanied by a campaign of public propaganda,
emphasizing that the war against Israel may not
be over, that the second round is yet to be fought,
that the military verdict may still be reversed, that
acquiescence in Israel's existence should not yet
be envisaged. Popular opinion in these countries
is being fed on these doctrines. The representative of one Arab State in this country has quoted
figures which give an impression of the scale of
the rearmament which is planned; He speaks of125 million dollars being spent in one year for
the purchase of arms. It is fair to add' that the
objectives of this rearmament programme are explained in terms of general internal and international conditions nof bound up directly with
Israel. The head of the Syrian $tate has an~ounced an ambitious plan of rearmament. Iraq
and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan have
treaty connexions with the United Kingdom,
which, unless the Security Council will decide
otherwise, would involve the immediate renewal
of heavy arms supplies to those countries.

...

16
The fact that the machinery of truce observation is no longer to exist does not prevent the
Security Council from affecting the arms policy
of Member States by a dear moral directive.
Such an authoritative ruling by the Security
Council would of itself, by the influence which
it would exert on the arms-supplying States,
insulate the Near East against the worst dangers
of an armaments race.

Le fait que l'organisme de surveillance de la
treve n'existera plus ne doit pas empecher le
Conseil de securite d'influer, par de claires instructions d'ordre moral, sur la politique des Etats
Membres en matiere d'annement. Vne telle decision du Conseit de securite, faisant autorite, pourrait en elle-meme, par l'influence qu'elle exercerait sur les- Etats foumisseurs d'armes, proteger
le Proche-Orient contre les pires danger d'une
course aux annements.

In urging the clear expression of the Security
Council's mature judgment, my -delegation is
conscious that this policy also conforms wi.th the
general welfare of the Near East. Vie do not
prqfess to understand how, if}- the existing social
and economic conditions of that area, any
Government can voluntarily wish ,to apply the
greater part of its resources to the purchase of
lethal weapons. The stability. of democratic
institutions throughout that region can be assured
not by competition in the purchase of arms but
by co-operation in the tasks of social and econo,..
inic development. This is the general doctrine
which Isra,el upholds with respect to tP,e needs
of its regional environment. If the acquisition
of arms is to be the main pursuit of all Governments in this area, then in all questions arising
between Israel and the Arah States the security
consideration is bound to _assume undue weight.
In these circumstances we feel that there is
nothing to be lost and much to be gained by calling upon Member States to maintain the existing
policy of the Security Council with respect to the
supply of arms.

En insistant' pour que le Conseil de securite
exprime c1airement son jugement reflechi, ma
delegation a conscience que cette politique est
egalement conforme a. l'interet general du ProcheOrient. Nous ne pouvons pas arriver a. comprendre comment, dans les conditions sociales et economiques actuelles de cette region, un gouvernement peut desirer volontairement consacrer la
plus grande partie de ses ressources a. l'achat
d'armes meurtrieres. La stabilite des institutions
democratiques dans toute cette region sera assuree,
non pas par la concurrence dans l'achat des armes,
mais par la cooperation dans les reuvres de progres social et economique. Telle est la doctrine
generale que soutient Israel, en ce qui conceme
les besoins de toute la region environnante. Si
l'acquisition d'amles doit etre le but principal de
tous les Gouvernements dans cette region, alors,
a. propos de tous les problemes qui pourront se
poser entre Israel et les Etats arabes, les considerati()ns de securite prendront obligatoirement une
importance excessive. Dans ces conditions, DOUS
estimons qu'il n'y a rien a. perdre, qu'il y a au
contraire beaucoup a. gagner, en irivita.nt les Etats
Membres a. ma,intenir la politique actuelle du ConsdI de securite en matiere de foumiture d'armes.

D'un autre cote, it est evident que certaines
On the other hand, it is clear that certain
restrictions which arose out of a situation of restrictions, qui trouvaient leur raison d'etre dans
actual war are now' no longer appropriate in the une situation de guerre effective, ne conviennent
new circumstances. The Armistice Agreements plus maintenant, dans les circonstances nouvelles.
call upon the Governments concerned to aJ:>stain Les conventions d'armistice invitent les Gouvernefrom any "war-like or hostile act". It is self- ments interesses a s'abstenir de tout "acte de
evident that acts of armed force are clearly pre- nature belliqueuse ou acte d'hostilite". I1 va de soi
cluded ; but it would seem equally obvious that que l'action des forces armees est ainsi nettement
artificial restrictions upon legitimate commerce exclue; mais il semblerait egalement evident que
and shipping should now be abandoned, for it les restrictions artificielles imposees a. ·la navigawould be difficult to -prove that to deprive a tion et au commerce reguliers devraient mainteneighbouring State of essential commodities nant etre levees, car il serait difficile de prouver
.which it obtarns .legitimately from abroad is not que priver un etat voisin de produits esseritiels
an "act of hostility". Therefore, it has been useful qU'il a acquis de l'etranger d'une maniere reguliere
to hear the Acting Mediator's authoritative view ne constitue pas un "acte d'hostilite". I1 est bon,
fhat the present situation would justify the aban- par consequent, que nous ayons entendu l'opinion
donment of acts of interception .and blockade autorisee dti Mediateur par interim, suivant lawhich, in so far as they had any legal basis, quelle la situation presente justifierait l'abandon
rested upon the assumption of official hostilities. d'actes d'interception et de blocus qui, pour autant
I believe that this authoritative approach, if qu'ils aient eu quelque base legale, reposaient sur
heeded by, both parties,' should· solve many vexa- l'hypothese .d'hostilites ouvertes. Je pense que
tious problems, indudWg the practice of seizing .cette opinion autorisee, si eUe etait acceptee par
cargoes of civilian commodities passing through les deux parties, permettrait de resoudre blen des
problemes delicats, y.compris la pratique de la '
§uez on their way to Israeli ports.
saisie de cargaisons de marchandises a.. usage civil,
passant par le Canal de Suez, en route vel'S les
ports d'Israel.
The first of the Armistice Agreements under . La premiere des conventions d'armistice dont it
discussion was signed early in March, and the s'agit a ete signeeau debut de mars, et la seconde
second' a morfth later. The practice of the en- un mois plus tarn. L'experience des semaines suisuing weeks has proved that. the machinery set vantes a prouve que le mecanisme organise pour
up .for the implementation of these Agreements l'application de ces conventions repond a. son
iseffedive for that purpose, and· thatt a sincere objet et que toutes les parties font preuve d'un
desire to ensure their success is generally appar:' desir sincered'assurer leur succes.
enton all sides.
.
••

1

$

ut

rsw·

"li

.18 &

-

17
Ayant ete assez heureux pour mener a bien
actes separes d'accord entre les Etats
arabes et Israel, apres tant d'annees, nous sommes
tres preoccupes de garantir l'observation exacte
de ces instruments.
C'est dans cet esprit que, en concluant, je voudrais attirer l'attention du Conseil de securite sur
la seule disposition importante d'une convention
d'armistice qui, jusqu'a present, n'ait pas encore
rec;u application. J e fais allusion a l'article VIII
de la convention generale d'armistice entre Israel
et le Royaume hachemite de Jordanie [S/1302];
Cette convention vise; entre autres choses, la situatior:. a Jerusalem. Aux tennes de ses dispositions,
la ville doit etre retablie dans la pleine jouissance
de la vie quotidienne normale.
L'article VIII enregistre 1'accord de principe
auquel les deux Gouvernements etaient parvenus
a Rhodes. Cet accord visait: la libre circulation
sur les routes d'importance vitale, y compris la
route de Bethleem et la route de Latron a J erusalem; la reprise du fonctionnement normal des
institutions culturelles et humanitaires au Mont
Scopus et la liberte d'acces a ce lieu; le libre acces
aux Lieux Saints et aux institutions culturelles,
et 1'usage du cimetiere au Mont des Oliviers ;et
la reprise d'autres services d'i..-nportance vitale
dans l'interet aussi bien des Arabes que des Juifs.
Un comite special a ete cree, entierement compose
de representants des deux Gouvernements; ce
comite, aux termes de 1'accord, etait invite it
elaborer des plans precis et des mesures de detail
permettant d'atte.indre ces objectifs.
Le Gouvernement d'Tc::rae! a annonce qu'iletait
tout dispose participer aux travaux du comite
special pour mettre en reuvre ces dispositions, ou,
si une decision plus rapide pouvait etre obtenue
par ce moyen, a transferer les pouvoirs, relativement a 1'application de cet article, ala Commission mixte d'armistice ou sein de laquelle les
Nations Unies sont representees, en outre des
deux parties. Jusqu'a present, cependant, aucur
progres n'a ete realise. Le Gouvernement hacM-:mite demeure reticent pour discuter les plans et
les mesures necessaires. Ce n'est pas la une questionde detail; elle tire une grande importance de
la nature speciale des Iieuxqui sont en jeu. Les
activites qui ont leur centre autour du Mont
Scopus et duMont des 01iviers ont une impor.,.
'tanGe qui· depasse de loin le plan local. Empecher
I'Universite Mbraique et le Centre medical de
Hadassah de reprendre leurs operations, c'est,
d'un seul coup, abaisser le niveau de l'activite
intellectuelle et medicale dans tout le Proche.,.
Orient.
It does not make the position any better to
La situation ne parait pas meiIIeure si l'on conreflect that the refusal to operate the provisions sidere que le refus d'appliquer· les dispositions de
of article VIII also impairs access to Holy Places I'article VIII affecte egalement I'acces· aux Lieux
and the water supply of the entire city. The Saints et I'approvisionnement en eau de toute la
United Nationshas a special responsibility here, ville. Les .Nations Unies assument id une resfor. Mount Scopus is a demilitarized area under ponsabilite speciale, car le Mont Scopus est tine
United Nations control; we suggest that it does region . demilitarisee sous le controle des Nations
not befit the dignity of the United Nations to be Unies; nous pensons qu'il n'est pas conforme a.
in occupation of the chief centres of higher learn- la dignite des Nations Unies d'octupe:r les centres
ing and health in the city, and sllnultaneously to principaux d'enseignement superieur et ·de sante
watch their neglect and ruin.
.
publique de la ville et d'etre en meme temps le
temoin de leur abandon et de leur ruin~.
In other cases where' demilitarized zones have
Dans d'autres cas ou des zones demiIitarisees
been placed provisionally under United Nations ont .ete provisoirement ptacees sous le controle.. :
supervision, it has at least been laid down that des- Nations Utiies, il a ete stipule tout au moins;.;:
Civilian activities .~houl,d be restored. Such a que les activites civiles. devraient etre retablies;2

Having been fortunate enough to achieve four
separate acts of Arab-Israeli agreement, after
so many decades, we should be concerned to
ensure the precise observance of these instruments.
It is in that spirit that in my concluding words
I would turn the attention of the Security Council to the one major provision of an Armistice
Agreement which is not being implemented at
this time. I refer to article VIII of the general
armistice agreement between Israel and the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan [SJ1302JRev.l].
T~lis agreement covers, amongst other things,
the situation in Jerusalem. Under its provisions
the city has been restored to the full dignity of
normal daily life;
Article VIII records the agreement in principle
arrived at between the two Governments at
Rhodes with respect to the free movement
traffic on.vital roads,'including the Bethlehem and
Latrun-Jerusalem roads; the resumption of the
norm:;ll functioning of the cultural and humanitarian institutions on Mount Scopus and free
access thereto; free access to the Holy Places
and cultural institutions and the use of the cemetery on the Mount of Olives; and the resumption
of other vital services in the interests of Arabs
and Jews alike. A special committee was
appointed, composed entirely of representatives
~f the two Governments, which was called upon
by the Agreement to formulate the precise plans
and arrangements whereby these objectives could
be secured.
The Government of Israel has announced its
willingness to work in the Special Committee for
the carrying out of these provisions, or if quicker
action could .be secured thereby, to. transfer
.jurisdiction with respect to this article to the
Mixed Armistice Commission on which the United
Nations is represented, in addition to the two
Parties. At the moment, however, no 'progress
h;lS been achieved. The Hashemite Government
remains unwilling to· discuss the requisite plans
and arrangements. This.is not a question of
detail. It derives great significance from the
special nature Of the places involved. The activities that centre around Mount Scopus and the
Mount of Olives have an importance that extends
far beyond the local environment.' To prevent
the Hebrew University and the Hadassah Medical Center from resuming their operations is, at
one blow, to depreciate the entire level of intellectual and medical activity in the Near East.

~quatre

of

b

a

18
prOVlston occurs in tlJ.e Syrian-Israeli Armistice Une disposition de ce genre apparait qans la conAgreement with respect to the area at Mishmar vention d'armistice entre la Syrie et Israel, en ce
Hayarden. My Government believes that its qui concerne la region de Mismar Hayarden. Mon
right to t:esume control of this area where these Gouvernement pense que son droit de reprendre le
great institutions have been built· by the sacrifice controle de cette region, OU des institutions impor..;
and devotion of the Jewish people, cannot in the tantes ont ete creees grace aux sacrifices et au
long run be challenged; and should be seriously devouement du peuple juif, ne peut en fin de
~onsidered in the peace negotiations. But while compte etre conteste et devra etre pris en serieuse
the area is under this special regime, it seems to consideration lors des negociations de paix. Mais,
us. that the principles of the armistice itself re- tant que cette region restera placee sous ce regime
quire special efforts to secure the operation of special, il nous semble que les principes de l'arthese institutions and the restimption of access mistice lui-meme exigent que des efforts particuimd public utilities as defined in artide VIII of Hers soient faits pour assurer le fonctionnement
the armistice agreement. It would, •I' submit, be des institutions dont il s,agit, ainsi que le r:etabIisse~i1structive to have the Acting Mediator's opinion ment du libre acces et des services publics, tels
on whether, it is satisfactory for the United qu'iIs sont definis it l'articIe VIII de la convention
Nations to be maintaining this zone on Mount d'armistice. Il serait, je pense, interessantde conScopus without the resumption of norm[., civilian naitre l'opinion du Mediateur par interim sur le
activities therein. A settlement of this one ques- point de savoir s'it est satisfaisant pour les
tion would complete the record of full, abso- Nations Unies d'assurer la gardede cette zone du
lute and precise compliance with every single Mont Scopus, sans que les activites normales de
pr?vision of eacli of the Armistice Agreements. la vie civile y soient reprises. Le reglement de cette
seule question rendrait complet le tableau d'un
respeetentier, absolu et precis dechacune des
dispositions de chactme des conventions d'armistice.
'
.... The Security Coumiil may ju~tly record the
Le Conseil de securitepeut, it juste titre, enrefour-fold armistice as a milestone in its efforts to gistrer le quadruple armi§Hce comme un jalon
, eontribute to the pacification of the Near East. sur le chemin des efforts qu'il a entrepris pour la
pacification du Proche-Orient. Les methodes et
Th~ ,methods .andprinciples· followed in this
. enterprise may be significant not only for the les principes suivis dan.s cette entreprise peuvent
future conciliation effort between Israel and the avoir leur importance, non seulement pour l'effort
Arab States; but also as a general guide to the . de, eonciliation it :venir entre Israel et les Etats
United Natl. ,us in its task of pacific settlemep.t arabes, rnais encore pour servir, d'une maniere
under the Charter. For the moral of Mr. generale, de guide aux Nations Uniesdans la
Bunche'sreport doe"" not concern Israel and the ~ission dereglement' pacifique que leur confie la
Ar,aJ:> States alone. If a dispute so deep-seated and Charte. Car la morale du rapport de M. Bunche
passionate can· yet respond to the. process of· con- ne concerne pas seulement Israel et les Etats
ciliation. and be terminated, by mutual agreement, arabes. Si un differend aussi profond et passionne
surely there can be few issues of international peut cependant se preter it la procedure de con,.
~onflict that will not· respond to the same process. , ciliation et prendre fin par un accord mutuel, il
All who have helped to achieve this result have i y aura surement peu de cas de conflit international
thus deepened the confidence which the United qui ne puissent se preter it la meme procedure.
Nations.inspires in the peoples of the world and Tous ceux qui ont contribue a obtenir Ce resultat
have exalted the credit of international institu- ont ainsi renforce la confiance QUe les Nations
tions.
tJni~s inspir~t:lt apx peuples du- monde et ont
·rehausse le' prestige des institutIons internationales.·
.
o.

. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): I
have been informed that the French delegation
has agreed to forgo the F,'rench interpretation of
Mr. Eban's statement so as to save time. If the
French delegation does not. insist on interpretapon, we can proceed with our. discussion.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit dte rllsse) : On rn'avise
que la delegation de la France consent a renoncer
,a I'interpretation en fram;ais du discours de M.
Eban, ceciafin de gagner du temps. S'ilen est
bien ainsi, le' Conseil peut poursuivre imrllediate'"
ment la discussion. -

Mr. CHAUVEL (France) (translated from
M. CHAUVEL (France) : Au contraire, la dele,.
French): On the contrary, the French delega- gation franc;aise attend avec beaucoup d'interet
tion. is' awaiting with great interest the interpre- l'interpretation de l'intervention de M. Eban. I1 eut
tation, of Mr. Eban's speech. It would obviously .ete .evidemment plus simple d'avoir ,une interprehave been simpler to have had simultaneous inter:- tation simultanee, conformement it I'usage; cepenpretationas usual, but since that has not been dant~ comme cela n'a. pasete le cas, il serait agreprovided, my delegation wo~ld like to .hear the able it ma delegation que l'on proceclafal;interinterpretation.
pretation.
0,. The PRESIDENT '. (translated from RU$sian): . · ,Le PRESIDENT (traduit du russe) : Dans ce cas,
1n that case, will you, please prOceed. to the it ya etre procecle a l'interpretation en ftanc;ais.
French, interpretation. .
Atthis.Pointth,e interpretation.into French lIf ' Il est alors p'/ocede a l'interpreta-tion en frattthe Israeli representative\~ remarks 'l!Jas given.
(;ais 4~disct):u/rs dw representant. d'Israel.

"The PRESI!>Jf~T et tr~nslated from Russian): I .
Le.PRESJ;bENT·Ctmdui£ldu ;~sse') ~ Il y a encore
:have, fonr'more names on my list of speakers: the ' qllatre., orate.urs in.,.scrits, a. ~ay. oir:le repr~se'!t~.n~
..representative of the United Kingdotn; the Act- I ·du Royaume-Unt,' le Medtateur par ,mtentn
•

till'I..

ilSdUl!QCBil1 I I HI.

-

19
ing Mediator, Mr. Bunche; the representative of
the United States; and the representative of
Canada. If there is no objection, we will now
adjourn and continue our meeting at 3 p.m.

M. Bunche; le representant des Etats-Unis et le
representant du Canada. Si personne ne presente
9'objection, je vais lever la seance et le Conseil
reprendra la discussion a 15 heures.

The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

La seance est levee a 13 h. 15,

FOUR HUNDRED AND THIRTY·
FOURTH MEETING·

QUATRE CENT TRENTE.QUATRIEME
SEANCE

Held at Lakf' Success, New York,
on Thursday, 4 August 1949, at 3 p.m.

Tenue a Lake Success, New-Yc-rk,
le jeudi 4 aout 1949, a 15 heures.

P:~'sident: Mr. S. TSARAPKIN
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

President: M. S.. TSARAPRINE
(Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques)

Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Argentina, Canada, China, Cuba,
Egypt, France, Norway, Ukrainian Soviet
Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist
Repu'blics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America.

Presents.: Les representants des pays suivants:
Argentine, Cariaaa, Chine, Cuba, Egypte, France.
N orvege,
Republique
socialiste
sovietique
d'Ukraine, Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques, Royaume-Uni de Grande-Bretagne et
d'Irlande du Nord, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

The agenda was that of the 433rd meeting
(S/Agenda 433).

L'ordre du jour est celui de la 343eml? seance
(S/Agenda 433).

5. The Palestine question (continued)

5. La question palestinienne (suite)

At t-he invitation of the President, Mr. Bunche
United Nations Acting Mediator on Pale~tine,
and Mr. Eban, representat-i'U'e of Israel, took their
seats at the Council table.

Sur l'invitation duPresident, M. Bunche, Meidiateur par interim des Nations Unies pour lIa
Palestine, et M~ Eban, Representant d'Israel,
prennent place a la table du C;onseil.

The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): I
have just received a letter from the representative of Svria [S/1363], asking to be allowed to
take part in the discussion. The representative
of the Secretariat will read the letter.

Le PRESIDENT (tradllit du russe) : Je viens de
recevoir du representant de la Syrieune lettre
[S/1363] dans laquelle il demande l'autcirisation
de prendre part a la discussion.· Le representant
du Secretariat va en donner lecture.

M. ZINCHENKO (Secretaire generale· adjoint
charge des affaires .du Conseil de securite) ( trOiduit. de l'anglais) : Void le"texte de la lettre de la
. delegation syrienne:
"On behalf of the Government of the Republic
"Au nom du Gouvernement de la Republique
of Syria, I have the honour to request you to syrienne, j'ai l'honneur de vous prier dem'autopermit me to participate without vote in the dis- riser a participer sans droit de vote aux deba* .
cussions of the Security Council in connexion du Conseil de securite sur le rapport du Mediawith the report of the Acting Mediator on Pales- teur par interim pour la Palestine, conformement
tine, which is in accordance with Article 31 of the a l'Article 31 de la Charte etaux artides 37 et 38
Charter and of rules 37 and 38 of the provisional du reglement interieur provisoire du Cbnseil de
,secllrite.
.
rules of procedure of the Security Council.

Mr. ZINCHENKO (Assistant Secretary-General
in charge of Security O:>Uncil Affairs): The letter from the Syrian delegation reads as follows:

"I avail myself of this opportunity to express
to you the a.ssurance of my high consideration."

(Signed)

Rafik ASHA

"le saisis cetteoccasl0n de. vous renouveler
l'a!'3urance de ma ha-ute consideration."
(Signe) Rafik ASHA

The PRESIDENT (translated J:rom Russian):
Have the members of the Security Council any
observations to make? If there are none, the
Syrian representative's request will be granted.

, Le PRESIDENT (traduitdtt russe) : Y a-t-il des
membres du Conseil <',.ui desirent presenter des
observations? Si personne n'a d'observation a
presenter, il sera fait droit ala demande durepresentant de la Syrie.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Rafik
Asha, rep1'esentative of Syria, took a seat at the
Council table.

Sur l'inviation du President,. M. Rafik Asha~
;representant de la Syrie, prend place a la tabU
du Conseil.

The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian):
The text of the Syrian representative's letter will
be circulated. shortly·. by the Secretariat to all
members of the Security Council.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit du russe): Le texte de
la lettre adressee par le representant de la .Syrie
sera distribue incessamment a tous les membres
du Conseil par les soins du· Secretariat.,

We shall resume the discussion of the Acting
Mediator's report on the Palestine question.

Nous poursuivons maintenant la discussion dtt
rapport du Mediateur par interitnsur la question
I palestinienne.

tnn__

.

SALES AGENTS-OF THE UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATION
OEPOS'TAIRES DES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
ARGENTINA-ARGENTINE
Editorial Sudamericami S.A.
Alsina 500
BUENOS AIRES

AUSTRALlA-AUSTRALIE
H. A. Goddard Pty. Ltd.
255a Geol'ge Street
SYDNEY, N. S. W.
BELGIUM-BELGIQUE
Agence et Messageries de la
Presse, S. A.
14-22 rue dti Persi!
BRUXELLES

HELSINKI

FRANCE
Editions A. Pedone
13, rue Soumot
PARIS, Ve
GREECE-GRECE
"Eleftheroudakis"
Lihrairie internationale
Place de la Constitution
ATID:NES

BOllVIA-BOUVIE .
.
Lihreria cientffica y Literaria
Avenida 16 de Julio, 216
Casilla 972
LA PAZ

CANADA
The Ryerson Press
299 .Queen Street West
TORONTO

CHILE-CHill .
Edmundo Pizarro
Merced 846
SAN'JrIAGO

CHINA-CHINE
The Commercial Press Ltd.
211 Honan Road
SHANGHAI

COLOMBIA-COLOMBIE
Lihreria Latina Ltda.
Apart!ldo Aereo 4011
BOGOTA

COSTA RICA-COSTA·RICA
Trejos Hermanos
Apartado 1313
SANJOSE

FINLAND-FINIANDE
Akateeminen Kirjakauppa
2, Keskuskatu

-

CUBA
La Casa Belga
Rene de Smedt
O'Reilly 455
LAHABANA

CZECHOSLOVAKIATCHECOSLOVAQUIE
F~. Topic
Narodnl Trida 9
PRAHA 1
DENMARK-DANEMARK
Einar Munksgaard
Nplrregade6
Kf/lBENHAVN

DOMINICAN REPUBLlC~­
REPUBUQUE .DOMINICAINE
Libreria Dominicana
CalleMercedes No. 49
Apartado656
CIUDAD·1'RUJILLO

ECUADOR-EQUATEUR
Muiioz Hermanos y Cia.
Nueve de Octuhre 703
Casilla 10-24
GUAYAQUIL

EGYPT-EGY~n

Lihrairie "L~ Renaissance d'Egypte'~
9 Sh. Adly Pasha
CAffiO

&THIOPIA-ETHIOPIE
Agence ethiopienne de puhlicite
P.O.Box8
ADDIS-ABEBA

Printed in the U.S.A.

GUATEMALA
Jose Gouhaud
Gouhaud & Cia. Ltda.
Sucesor
5a Av. Sur No. 6 y 9a C. P.
GUATEMALA

HAITI
Max BoucheIeau
Lihrairie "A la Caravelle"
Boite postale 111-B
PORT-AU-PRINCE

ICELAND-!SLANDE
Bokaverzlun Sigfusar Eymundsonnar
Austurstreti 18
REYKJAVIK

INDIA-INDE
Oxford Book & Stationery Company
Scinma House
NEW-DELHI

IRAN
Bongahe Piaderow'
731 Shah Avenue
TEHERAN

IRAQ-IRAK
Mackenzie & Mackenzie
The Bookshop
BAGHDAD

LEBANON-LlBAN
Lihrairie .universelle
BEYRCUTH

LUXEMBOURG
Lihrairie J.Schummer
Place Guillaume
LUXEMBOURG

NETHERLAND5-PAYS·BAS
N. V. Martinus Nijhoff
Lange Voorhout 9
'S·GRAVENHAGE

NEW ZEALANDNOUVELLE-ZELANDE
Gordon & Gotch, Ltd.
Waring Taylor Street
WELLINGTON

Unitt>d Nations AssociatioD. of
New Zealand
P. O. 1011, G.P.O.
WELLINGTON

NICARAGUA
Ramiro Ramirez V.
Agencia de Puhlicaciones
MANAGUA. D. N.

NORWAY-NORVEGE
Johan Grundt Tanum Forlag
Kr. Augustgt. 7A
OSLO

Price in the United .States: 40 cents

PE~U-PEROU

Librerfa internacional del P
S.A.
Casilla 1417
LIMA
PHILlPPIN§:S
D. P. Perez Co.
132 Riverside
SAN JUAN, RIZAL

POLAND-POLOGNE
Spotdzielna Wydawnicza
"Czytelnik"
38 Poznanska
WARSZAWA

SWEDEN-SUEDE
A.-B. C. E. Fritzes Kungl.
Hofhokhandel
Fredsgatan 2
STOCKHOLM

SWITZERLAND~SUISSE

Lihrairie Payot S. A.
LAUSANNE, GENEVE. VEVEY,
MONTREUX, NEUCHATEL,
BERNE, BASEL

Hans Raunhardt
Kirchgasse 17
ZURICH I
SYRIA~SYRIE

Librauie universelle
DAMAS

TURKEv.-TURQUIE
Lihrairie IIachette
469 Istillal Caddesi
BEYOGLU-IsTANBUL

UNION OF SOl .TH AFRiCA.....
UNION SUD·AF~~CAINE
.
Central News Agency
..
Commissioner & Rissik Sts..
JOHANNESBURG .and at CAPE'1'O
and· DlJ'1mAN
UNITED KINGDOMROYAUMfi·UNI
H. M. Stationery Office
P. O. Box 569
LOr.DON, S.E. 1
and at RM.S.O. Shops in
LONDON, EDINBuRGH, MANe ..
CAlIDIFF, BELFAST, BmMINGHA.
and ~RISTOL •..~-. ",

UNITED "STATESOFAMElRICA
ETATS·UNIS D'AMERIQUE
International Documents Sem
Colllmbia University Press
2960 Broadway
NEW XQRK 27, N. Y.
URUGUAY
Oflcina de Representaci6n. de
Editoriales
.
Av. 18 de Julio 1333 Esc. 1
MONTEVIDEO

VENEZUELA
EscritorfaPerez Machado
Conde a Pifiango 11
CARACAS

YUGOSLAVIA-YOUGOSLAVI
.Drzavn() Preduzece
Jugoslovenska Knjiga
Moskovska Ul. 36
BEOGRAD

\.
