Resolutions adopted on reports of the A.d Hoe Political Committee
refugees is rendered with the maximum of co-ordination and efficiency ;
14. Expresses its appreciation to the numerous religious, charitable and humanitarian organizations
whose programmes have afforded valuable supplementary assistance to Palestine refugees, and again requests
them to continue and expand to the extent possible the
work which they have undertaken on behalf of the
refugees.
365th plenary meeting,
26 January 1952.
514 (VI) .. Report of the Security Council
The General Assembly
Takes note of the report 9 of the Security Council to
the General Assembly covering the period from 16
July 1950 to 15 July 1951.
370th plenary meeting,
1 February 1952.
515 (VI). Libya: annual report of the United
Nations Commissioner in Libya; annual re•
ports of the Administering Powers in Libya
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 289 A (IV) of 21 November 1949 and 387 (V) of 17 November 1950 resolving
that Libya be constituted a united, independent and
sovereign State, and providing for the adoption of certain measures to this end,
Recalling further its resolution 398 (V) of 17
November 1950 on technical assistance for Libya after
achievement of independence,
Noting the report 10 of the United Nations Commissioner in Libya of 30 October 1951, and his supplementary report 11 of 8 January 1952, prepared in consultation with the Council for Libya, as well as the reports 12
submitted by the Administering Powers in accordance
with resolution 289 A (IV) of 21 November 1949,
Noting with appreciation the part played by the
United N ati<?n~ C~mmissioner, the Council for Libya
and the Admm1stermg Powers towards the implementati<:m _of the ~bov<': r~soluti<?ns o! the General Assembly
w1thm the t1me-hm1t specified m those resolutions,
Noting that on 24 December 1951 the United Kingdom of Libya was established as an independent and
sovereign State, all authority in Libya having been relinquished by the Administering Powers to the Government of the United Kingdom of Libya,
1. Congratulates the people and the Government of
the United Kingdom of Libya on the establishment of
Libyan independence in accordance with the provisions
of the pertinent General Assembly resolutions ;1 3
• Ibid., Supplement No. 2.
•• Ibid., Supplement No. 17.
11
/bid., Supplement No. 17 A.
"See documents A/1970 and Add. 1; A/2024 and Add. 1.
12
See, inter alia, resolutions 289 A (IV) 387 (V) and 388

A (V).

'

13

2. Note~ that free and democratic national elt!ctions
will be held in Libya in the near future in accol-dance
with the provisions of the Constitution of the United
Kingdom of Libya;
'.
3. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
study, in consultation with the Government of the
United Kingdom of Libya, ways and means by which
the United Nations, with the co-operation of all governments and the competent specialized agencies, and upon
the request of the Government of Libya, could furnish
additional assistance to the United Kingdom of Libya
with a view to financing its fundamental and urgent
programmes of economic and social development, giving consideration to the possibility of opening a special
account of voluntary contributions to that end, and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its seventh
session;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to give the Economic and Social Council any assistance necessary to
enable it to carry out this task;
5. Requests also the Secretary-General to give in
his studies special attention to the economic problems
of the United Kingdom of Libya, and notes in that
connexion Economic and Social Council resolution 367
B (XIII) of 14 August 1951 in which the Council requested the Secretary-General to continue to report,
as part of the annual world economic report, on economic developments in Africa, with special attention
to the measures being taken under the technical assistance and other programmes of the United Nations and
the specialized agencies ;
6. Requests the Secretary-General and the specialized agencies to continue to extend to the United Kingdom of Libya, upon its request, such technical assistance as they may be in a position to render in accordance with the principles of their technical assistance
programmes ;
7. Considers, since the United Kingdom of Libya
has been established as an independent and sovereign
State and has applied for membership in the United
Nations, that it should now be admitted to the United
Nations in accordance with Article 4 of the Charter
and the General Assembly's previous recommendations
on this subject.
370th plenary meeting,
1 February 1952.
516 (VI). The appropriate adjustment of the
frontiers between Egypt and the United King•
dom of Libya, with particular reference to
paragraphs 2 and 3 of annex XI of the Treaty
of Peace with Italy
The General Assembly
Takes note of the intention of the Government of
Egypt 14 to enter into negotiations with the Government
of the United Kingdom of Libya with a view to settling in a friendly and good-neighbourly spirit the question of the appropriate adjustment of the frontiers
between Egypt and the United Kingdom of Libya,

,. See O/ficial Records of the General Assembly, Sixth Session, Ad Hoe Political Committee, 54th meeting.

14

General AeaePlhly-Sixth Session

with particular reference to paragraphs 2 and 3 of
annex XI of the Treaty of Peace with Italy. 15
370th plenary meeting,
1 Febtuary 1952.

517 (VI). Repatriation of Greek children
The General Assembly,
Viewing with concern the reports of the International Committee of the Red Cross and the League of
Red Cross Societies 16 and of the Secretary-General,17
and in particular the fact that, with the exception of
Yugoslavia, none of the countries harbouring Greek
children has yet taken the necessary steps to enable
those children to return to their homes, as provided for
in resolution 193 C (III) of 27 November 1948 and the
subsequent resolutions 18 of the General Assembly on
the matter,
Recognizing that the United Nations must continue
its efforts, from a humanitarian point of view, to enable the Greek children to return to their homes,
Noting the report19 of the Standing Committee on
the Repatriation of Greek Children that, of the governments invited to send representatives to enter into consultations with the Standing Committee on the problem
during the present session of the General Assembly,
only one has actually participated in the consultations,
1. Thanks the International Committee of the Red
Cross, the League of Red Cross Societies, the Stand'"See Treaty Series, Treaties and international agreements
registered or filed and recorded with the Secretariat of the
United Nations, volume 49, 1950, I, No. 747, pp. 214-215.
"See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixth Session, Annexes, agenda item 19, documents A/1848 and A/1932.
"Ibid., document A/1933.
11
Resolutions 288 B (IV) and 382 C (V).
"See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixth Session, Annexes, agenda item 19, document A/ AC.53/L.44.

ing Committee on the Repatriation of Greek Children
and the Secretary-General for their efforts to give
effect to General Assembly resolutions 193 C (III),
288 B (IV) and 382 C (V);
2. N ates with satisfaction that a further group of
Grtek children has been repatriated from Yugoslavia;
3. Expresses the hope that it will be possible to
make rapid progress with the repatriation of the Greek
children in Czechoslovakia ;
4. Deeply regrets that all the other States harbouring Greek children have declined to enter into consultations with the Standing Committee with a view to giving effect to the resolutions of the General Assembly
on the matter;
5. Considers that the technical and other grounds
advanced by those countries harbouring Greek children
which have declined to co-operate fully in the solution
of the problem are not insurmountable or such as to
constitute a reason for further delay in permitting the
return of children in respect of whom requests for repatriation have been submitted and verified by the international Red Cross organizations;
6. Urges all countries harbouring Greek children to
take steps to facilitate the early return of the children
to their homes;
7. Decides to continue the Standing Committee
with the terms of reference previously laid down;
8. Requests the International Committee of the Red
Cross and the League of Red Cross Societies to continue their work for this humanitarian purpose;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to report from
time to time to Member States on the progress made
in the implementation of the present resolution, and
requests the international Red Cross organizations and
the Secretary-General to submit reports on the progress
achieved before the seventh regular session of the
General Assembly is convened.
371st plenary meetmg,
2 February 1952.
