S/PV.8805

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8805th meeting

Friday, 25 June 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jürgenson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Estonia)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Gupta
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mrs. Toroitich
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Maman Sani
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. Prince
Mr. Ladeb
Mr. Roscoe
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield
Mr. Dang

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-16729 (E)
*2116729*

S/PV.8805

The situation in the Middle East

resolution of the conflict. I sense there is widespread
support among Council members for this.

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Geir
Pedersen, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria; and Ms. Abeer Hussain, Syrian women’s rights
promoter and a member of the Syrian Women’s Political
Movement.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Pedersen.
Mr. Pedersen: I am very grateful to speak to the
Security Council in person on Syria — it has been 18
months since I have been able to do so.
An imminent priority is of course the humanitarian
situation, and let me fully reiterate the SecretaryGeneral’s appeal when he briefed the Security Council
on Wednesday (see S/PV.8803). Civilians across the
country desperately need life-saving assistance and help
building resilience. It is absolutely vital to maintain and
expand access, including cross-border and cross-line
operations. A large-scale cross-border response for an
additional 12 months is essential to save lives. Council
members’ unity on this will be critical.
The same unity is needed for the political process.
I think we are all disappointed that we are not making
real advances on the political track to implement
resolution 2254 (2015), including a new constitution
and elections administered under United Nations
supervision. Regrettably, the gulf of mistrust among
the parties and the complexity of the situation on the
ground makes early progress towards a comprehensive
settlement unlikely. But we must find ways to unite
around advancing elements of the resolution, so that in
time the situation will be ripe for a more comprehensive
2/23

25/06/2021

Trust and confidence will be built through actions
not words. Key players need to be ready to come to
the table with the necessary goodwill and something
to deliver. I believe we need a new constructive
international dialogue on Syria to discuss concrete
steps — steps that should be reciprocal and mutual,
defined with realism and precision, implemented in
parallel and verifiable. My idea is to deepen exploratory
substantive consultations that help identify the very
first steps that Syrian and international players could
deliver to explore not only what they ask of others, but
what kind of specific steps each can entertain.
I know that will not be easy. But I sense that all key
players are interested in deepening this conversation. I
have been in regular contact with senior officials from
the Russian Federation and the United States, before
and since the recent Geneva summit. I have also been
in regular contact with many other Council members
and key States in the region. From New York, I will
fly to Rome for consultations with Foreign Ministers
participating in a ministerial meeting on Syria
convened by Italy and the United States. I hope to be
in Moscow soon and to consult Turkey and Iran and as
well — there will be an Astana format meeting in NurSultan in early July.
I believe there are several areas where the initial
steps might be found. They are areas of vital concern
for average Syrians where there is potential common
ground among key players and where progress would
promote internal and regional stability and build trust
and confidence.
Take, for example, the call for action on detainees,
abductees and missing persons in resolution 2254
(2015). Yes, we continue engaging the Syrian parties
and participating in a working group on that issue. But
those efforts so far have not delivered in a way that is
commensurate with the nature and scale of the issue.
That is tragic, because families from every corner
of Syria have seen loved ones detained, abducted
or gone missing. Women are particularly impacted
when detained or when their family members are, as
we regularly hear from the Women’s Advisory Board.
All sides — Syrian and international — say that they
agree that action is needed. All sides stand to benefit
from progress. We recently again engaged the Syrian
Government on this subject, following up on a number
21-16729

25/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

of suggestions that we made, while also seeking
information on the latest presidential decree of 2 May
and recent reported releases. I believe a steps-for-steps
discussion could help unlock more serious progress.
The call for a nationwide ceasefire in resolution
2254 (2015) is another area for potential cooperation.
I need not remind Council members that there are five
foreign armies jostling inside Syria. Syrian territory is
split into a number of de facto zones, with the country’s
sovereignty seriously compromised. A patchwork of
regional de-escalation and ceasefire agreements — in
which Russia, Turkey and the United States are key
players — have brought about 15 months of relative
calm between those zones. But there is a danger that
existing arrangements could unravel. They could be
slowly eroded by the near-constant tempo of limited
violence across front lines. Even worse, they could
swiftly collapse as a result of a much more dramatic
escalation. A nationwide ceasefire should therefore
be a common cause — to avert those dangers, to keep
civilians safe and to serve as the first step toward the
ultimate reunification of Syria and the restoration of
its sovereignty.
There were alarming signs of escalation this
month in the attack on Al-Shifa hospital, in Afrin city.
Civilians, including medical personnel, were killed
and injured, and parts of the hospital were destroyed.
Let me reiterate here my strong condemnation of that
appalling attack and stress that all parties must fully
comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian law, including the protection of civilians
and civilian objects. We also saw another escalation
in southern Idlib, with mutual shelling, air strikes
inside Idlib, reports of civilian fatalities and significant
displacement. Elsewhere, this month has seen more
air strikes attributed to Israel, more turbulence in the
south-west and more attacks by Security Council-listed
terrorist groups, including operations claimed by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).
Indeed, countering listed terrorist groups is
another priority area for common effort. There are
worrying signs that ISIL may be strengthening, given
the increased frequency and reach of its latest attacks.
Other listed terrorist groups remain at large and in
control of territory. Key international players can and
should cooperate on countering listed terrorist groups,
in an effective way that protects civilians and promotes
stability, in line with international law.

S/PV. 8805

Recovering from the economic impact that most
Syrians face after a decade of war and devastation
is another area of potential common focus. By some
measures — particularly the currency — the situation
has stabilized somewhat in recent weeks. But many
Syrians are struggling to put food on the table, to
find medicine and health care for loved ones, to find
fuel for transport, to sustain their businesses, and to
access electricity and water. Indeed, water cuts and
restrictions, and the worst water deficit ever in the
Euphrates basin, continue to impact millions of Syrians
in the north-east. The convergence of an economic
crisis and a humanitarian crisis will continue to have
dramatic consequences if not addressed. The result will
be not only more human suffering and hopelessness
but also instability. That cannot be in anyone’s
interest. For things to change, we need real reform and
international engagement.
Let me note here that it is important that any
humanitarian effects of sanctions exacerbating the
plight of ordinary Syrians be avoided and mitigated,
in particular in terms of overcompliance. I note the
measures taken in this direction recently by the relevant
players, but continual action on this is indeed needed.
Let us also focus on the displacement crisis in Syria.
It is almost incomprehensible in scale, with 13 million
people forced to flee their homes, within Syria and
abroad — half the country’s pre-war population. That
is a profound humanitarian and national tragedy and
also a ticking time bomb for regional stability. We need
to see actions that create the necessary conditions and
confidence for safe, dignified and voluntary return.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees has laid out protection thresholds and
parameters in that regard. I believe that there are steps
that could be taken by the Government and that there
are steps that could be taken by others, too, to promote
concrete progress.
These are the kinds of issues — and there may be
others, too — that I believe could be seriously discussed
and where mutual and reciprocal actions could begin to
make a positive difference for Syrians and give impetus
to a political process.
In the meantime, let me stress that I continue to
seek to facilitate the Constitutional Committee as
an important contribution to a broader process. It is
no doubt difficult to work on a new constitution in a
situation of unresolved conflict. But that is what the two

21-167293/23

S/PV.8805

The situation in the Middle East

parties — the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
and the Syrian Negotiation Commission — agreed
to when they concluded the terms of reference and
core rules of procedure for a credible, balanced and
inclusive Constitutional Committee, facilitated by the
United Nations in Geneva. The Council welcomed that
agreement in a presidential statement on 8 October
2019 (S/PRST/2019/12). I think most Syrians and most
of us here in this Chamber are disappointed that the
Committee, which has met five times, is not yet working
expeditiously to produce results and continued progress
on its agreed mandate to prepare and draft for popular
approval a constitutional reform.
Further to my update in my most recent briefing
(see S/2021/418), I continue to seek to facilitate the
agreement of the Syrian co-Chairs on how to ensure
that the existing challenges are addressed, based on my
April bridging proposal. Deputy Special Envoy Khawla
Matar is currently in Damascus in the context of that
effort. When the co-Chair agreement is in place, we will
brief the middle third of the Constitutional Committee
and immediately set in motion the planning for a sixth
session in Geneva and the work of the Committee
going forward.
As we seek to advance a political process, we should
engage the many Syrians who are working to ameliorate
the consequences of this conflict and to build bridges in
their society. That is why it is a high priority for me and
my team, as it was for my predecessors, to involve the
widest spectrum of Syrian civil society in the political
process, including via our Civil Society Support Room.
I am pleased to report that this month we have
deepened that effort in two ways. First, we launched
the first in a series of thematic working groups, to give
participants in our Civil Society Support Room a more
structured way to contribute their expertise and inform
my mediation efforts, aided by a virtual platform.
Secondly, earlier this week, Deputy Matar and our
team began a series of virtual regional consultations
of the Civil Society Support Room. Approximately 120
Syrian civil-society actors are taking part, more than
a third of them women, participating from across all
Syrian governorates and from abroad. I look forward to
engaging with them myself next week.
My own thinking continues to be shaped by these
encounters with Syrians and the common messages
that they bring forth. There is a thirst for a political
resolution of the conflict as the only means to put the
4/23

25/06/2021

country back together again. There is a sense that this
is not just desirable but possible and that the United
Nations must preserve and facilitate the political
process for that purpose. There is also a sense that at
this juncture, the most important priority should be to
address the issues that are causing more and more daily
suffering to the Syrians themselves. And there is a very
strong sense that many of the issues have fallen out of
Syrian hands and require international attention.
Syrian civil society — and, indeed, I think, the
vast majority of Syrians — are desperately looking
for signals that the members of the international
community, despite their differences, can work
together. I urge all present to assist me on that in the
weeks and months ahead. In doing so, I hope that we
can ease the suffering of many millions of Syrians,
promote stability and move forward, step by step. Our
goal remains a lasting political settlement that meets
the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people and
restores Syria’s sovereignty, unity, independence and
territorial integrity, in line with resolution 2254 (2015).
The President: I thank Mr. Pedersen for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Hussain.
Ms. Hussain (spoke in Arabic): Allow me to start
by expressing gratitude for the opportunity to address
the Security Council today at a time that requires
commitment and courage for political action.
I am honoured to deliver my briefing on behalf of
the Syrian Women’s Political Movement. As I present
my comments today, I carry with me the strength of
a movement across Syria and the world. It is our hope
that this Security Council briefing indicates that the
international community is still concerned about the
fate of the Syrian people. Today, as a consequence of
war and economic deterioration, the Syrian people are in
need of humanitarian aid, which is critical to improving
the quality of life of millions of people in Syria. We
are grateful for the Council’s attention to the Syrian
people. However, for a sustainable future in Syria, our
hope lies in galvanizing a genuine political solution and
supporting the stability, security and reconstruction of
Syria. We will then not need international aid to survive.
All members of the Syrian Women’s Political
Movement inside Syria, including myself, will say what
one of our colleagues so eloquently stated:
“We women residing inside Syria are strong,
and no one needs to pity us due to our geographic
21-16729

25/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

location. We chose to stay because we believe that
we have a greater opportunity to create change, at
least in our communities. Virtual platforms have
contributed to breaking down barriers between
women inside and outside Syria. Expressions of
sympathy for us make us feel that we are weak and
deserve pity. With all due respect for people’s noble
sentiments, we are strong. We are heading in the
right direction, and we persist in our struggle to
achieve what we want.”
International reports provide comprehensive data
on the deterioration of the living conditions of the
Syrian people on several levels, the worst of which
is the deprivation of the most basic components of a
normal life due to high prices and the scarcity of job
opportunities. Our children are deprived of education
due to military operations, including the bombing of
schools, frequent displacement and children being
forced to work to support their families because of the
destitution facing most Syrians.
I have witnessed the suffering of women: lack of
economic security and stability, chaos, gender-based
violence, displacement, kidnappings and the spread
of disease. This reality worsened yet further with the
coronavirus pandemic. Hospitals are no longer able to
take in patients and provide the necessary treatment.
The causes of fear are similar in the
regime-controlled areas due to the deteriorating
living and health conditions, coupled with the fear of
arbitrary arrest by the security services, which is still
an ongoing practice.
The war economy has contributed to the spread
of organized crime, drug trafficking, kidnapping and
murder. However, communication and solidarity remain
strong among those who reside within and outside
regime-controlled areas, at least through virtual means.
The various de facto forces, with their various agendas,
and geographic divisions have reinforced societal and
identity-based divisions and weakened the possibilities
for dialogue. This still hinders our communication and
our capacity to reach a common vision that contributes
to building an inclusive national identity.
Faced with this reality, the Syrian regime still does
not recognize the Syrians residing outside the areas
under its control. This was evident in the presidential
elections, whereby it granted itself another term in
office, ignoring Security Council resolutions, notably
resolution 2254 (2015). The elections did not include

S/PV. 8805

all Syrians at home and abroad and challenged the
international community and ignored the road map for
a political solution that provided for the completion of
a new constitution and elections under the supervision
of the United Nations, in accordance with that
new constitution.
From my own observations on the ground, and
our national consultation on elections, which included
input from women in 15 regions within and outwith
the regime’s control in Syria, all confirmed that those
elections were a fraud. There were security pressures
from the Syrian regime to vote for it. Due to fear and
that a voting card is required for official transactions,
such as renewing a travel document or the so-called
smart card with Syrians use to get bread, cooking gas
and motor fuel, the whole process did not respect the
most basic internationally recognized standards.
In the light of this reality, with increasing risk, local
chaotic escalation and international complications for
Syria and the countries of the region, it is astonishing
that the international community has not been able to
adopt a comprehensive political solution to implement
the resolutions adopted by the Security Council
itself — to achieve a cessation of military operations
throughout Syrian territory, to support the work of the
Constitutional Committee with a clear time frame for
the completion of a constitution in line with the interests
and rights of Syrian women and men, and to resume the
political process to form a transitional governing body
by working on the four baskets simultaneously in order
to reach a comprehensive solution.
We are fully aware that the comprehensive solution
to which we aspire might require some time, but some
steps can be taken in order to limit the deterioration
of the security situation and to support those who seek
to build confidence among the Syrian people, notably
women. We need the Council’s support to begin
implementing the conditions for establishing a safe
and neutral environment in accordance with resolution
2254 (2015) and to work on building mutual trust. That
can be accomplished by the following means.
First and foremost would be the immediate and
unconditional release of all detainees. Establishing
the fate of the abducted and forcibly disappeared is
essential for building a safe and neutral environment.
The issue of detainees is non-negotiable for us. It is our
top priority.

21-167295/23

S/PV.8805

The situation in the Middle East

Secondly, armed groups, supported regionally or
internationally, that have never worked in service of the
Syrian people but deepened the rift between us, must
be controlled.
Thirdly, the practices contributing to demographic
‘change must be brought to an end. These have occurred
in several regions in Syria, including Al-Qusayr,
eastern Ghouta, Dara’a and Homs. These practices
include forced displacement, which is still an ongoing
practice in various regions.
Fourthly, the necessary conditions must be put in
place to ensure the safe, voluntary and dignified return
of Syrians to their original places of residence.
Finally, the political settlement must be linked
to accountability for those responsible for crimes
committed against Syrian women and men, as a first
step on the path to justice.
Syria was the first Arab country to grant women
the right to vote, in 1949. However, we observe a decline
in women’s political participation. We are working for
equal and full citizenship, justice and democracy, which
will remain incomplete without the participation of all
active political forces in Syria agreeing on a political
solution. Democracy will remain incomplete if we do not
strengthen the political participation of Syrian women
in the negotiation process on an equal and integrated
basis with men to build our future with a common
position. This can be done by drafting a constitution
that guarantees women’s rights by defining the status
of international conventions in the legislative system
to take precedence over the legal system in order to
abolish all kinds of discrimination against women. This
will impact the sustainability of the political solution
and its application on the ground by ensuring women’s
participation in the development and implementation
of security sector governance strategies so that we can
achieve a safe and neutral environment as we move
towards reconstruction.
We are confident in our ability to play a decisive
and effective role in the peace process as a pressing
force in the process of democratization for sustainable
peace and sustainable development. The reality on the
ground does not encourage women to be involved in
political decision-making, despite the election of a few
women to local councils.
We, the Syrian Women’s Political Movement, work
with Syrian feminists in civil society by organizing
6/23

25/06/2021

a feminist agenda and its priorities. We work on
coherence between the political and civil track and
on establishing a mechanism to guarantee women’s
meaningful presence in decision-making positions and
in all bodies and institutions, with a percentage of no
less than 30 per cent of the total seats for women only.
Even if women delegates are not appointed, those seats
should not be filled by men; they should be kept vacant
until women fill them. This percentage would be a
temporary positive measure to reach parity, in line with
resolution 1325 (2000) on the role of women in peaceand security-building processes. The theme for our
conference this year was “No Women, No Legitimacy”.
I thank you for your attention, Mr. President, and
once again thank the Security Council for ensuring that
the voice of Syrian women is heard.
The President: I thank Ms. Hussain for her briefing.
I should like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his
briefing today.
The United States reiterates its full support for
tireless efforts of Mr. Pedersen and his team to broker
a peaceful solution to the conflict in Syria. A special
thank-you goes to Ms. Abeer Hussain for her efforts
and everything that she does to empower women and
girls in Syria.
Women and girls in Syria and around the world are
disproportionately impacted by conflict, and yet they
continue to be underrepresented in peace processes.
That underrepresentation is unjust. It also holds back
peace. We need to support the Women’s Advisory Board
and similar efforts because we know for a fact that
involving women in the negotiations and the resolution
process leads to peace. We need peace because, after
a decade of war, the suffering of the Syrian people
has gone on for far too long. There is only one way
forward for peace and stability in Syria — a resolution
to the conflict and an end to the war. The United States
therefore remains committed to resolution 2254 (2015),
21-16729

25/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

as it provides the only path to a just, sustainable political
solution to the Syrian conflict.
That decidedly is not what happened during the socalled election in May. Those elections were not free.
They were not fair. They were a sham, plain and simple.
They did not include the millions of Syrians who have
fled their homes and are displaced inside Syria or across
the region. As the Security Council has unanimously
declared, elections in Syria should occur, pursuant to
resolution 2254 (2015), following the enactment of a
new Constitution and under United Nations supervision.
None of that happened. The Syrian people deserve
elections, and those elections should feature a diverse
range of candidates, a safe voting environment and a
meaningful way for displaced people to participate.
In the meantime, the ongoing conflict in Syria poses
a threat to regional and international security. We are
particularly concerned about the repeated violations of
the Idlib ceasefire. In addition, recent strikes, such as
the one that hit residential areas and Al-Shifa hospital
in Afrin cannot continue. Military actions, particularly
against protected health facilities, will not lead to peace.
They only lead to suffering. We call on all parties, that
is, all parties, to adhere to the nationwide ceasefire. It
is time to engage in the political process and end the
war. We support efforts by the Office of the Special
Envoy to secure the release of the tens of thousands
of arbitrarily, or wrongfully, detained Syrian. The
families of thousands of missing Syrians have waited
for far too long and deserve information about the fate
of their loved ones.
We also take note of Special Envoy Pedersen’s
efforts to seek progress in the work of the Constitutional
Committee. All parties should engage constructively
with those good efforts. However, without progress
in achieving political reforms, the United States will
not normalize or support any reconstruction aid that
benefits the Al-Assad regime.
Finally, we need to achieve a political solution
urgently in no small part because of the dire humanitarian
situation. As we all know, that situation will go from
bad to worse if some Council members refuse to renew
the cross-border mandate. The United States supports
all methods of aid delivery, including cross-line.
But, as everyone made clear to me when I visited the
border — refugees, non-governmental organization
representatives, United Nations humanitarian workers
and local experts — there is no alternative to cross-

S/PV. 8805

border assistance — none. For millions of Syrians Bab
Al-Hawa is a literal lifeline, and we must reauthorize
it and reinstate Bab Al-Salam and Al-Yarubiyah.
This dire humanitarian crisis directly informs the
political situation. If we cut off cross-border aid, we
will further destabilize the region and encourage even
more internally displaced people. It will encourage
more internally displaced people to flee. We call on
the Security Council to reauthorize and expand United
Nations cross-border humanitarian assistance in order
to give the Syrian people a future — a future for
themselves, a future for their children and a future that
leads us to a sustainable, just peace.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): I thank Special Envoy Pedersen and
Ms. Hussain for their briefings. I also welcome the
representatives of Syria, Iran and Turkey.
As we have just heard from Mr. Pedersen,
negotiations on Syria’s political future remain at an
impasse, despite his many attempts to overcome the
deadlock. We regret that the parties have failed to
reach an agreement to hold the sixth meeting of the
small group of the Constitutional Committee. Some
20 months have elapsed since the first meeting of this
Committee without significant progress being made.
We therefore urge the delegations, and in particular
the delegation appointed by the Syrian Government,
to engage constructively in the negotiations. Without
dialogue, points of common interest cannot be reflected
in a future Syrian Constitution. There is no doubt that
a comprehensive and inclusive political process is
required to make progress in resolving the conflict,
which must be accompanied by a durable and sustained
nationwide ceasefire.
We have also just heard in Ms. Hussain’s briefing
about the crucial role played by civil society. We
therefore commend the Special Envoy’s efforts aimed
at maintaining regular interaction with the Syrian
Women’s Advisory Board and the civil society
delegation. Ten years of conflict have left deep scars in
the Syrian social fabric. Civil society is the cornerstone
of the country’s development and cohesion. We must
work with it.
Mexico echoes the Secretary-General’s call to
clarify the facts about the numerous cases of missing
persons, and we urge that detainees be released. Without
priority attention being given to the demands for
justice and for accountability with respect to arbitrary

21-167297/23

S/PV.8805

The situation in the Middle East

detentions, enforced disappearances and human rights
violations, it will be very difficult, if not impossible,
to find the path to reconciliation and sustainable peace
in Syria. Given that international crimes have been
committed, it seems to me that they should be referred
to the International Criminal Court for consideration.
We reiterate our call on all States to cooperate with the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
and the Independent International Commission
of Inquiry. We also reiterate our concern that the
conditions for the safe, secure and dignified return of
Syrian refugees are not in place. While we acknowledge
the many host countries, support for the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees must
continue in the region.
On the economic side, the news is not good either. The
deteriorating economic situation has been exacerbated
by the impact of the pandemic. This, in turn, has led
to growing citizen unrest resulting in mass protests in
various parts of the country. We call on the authorities
to respect the right of association of protesters and urge
the Syrian Government to cooperate with the Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights and allow it
to operate on the ground to protect and promote respect
for the human rights of the population.
A decade of conflict has had a very high human
cost and a broad geographic impact, which is reflected
in the severe humanitarian crisis. There is an urgent
need to move the political process forward. Without a
definitive end to hostilities, humanitarian needs will
continue to grow, and mistrust of resuming political
dialogue will continue to increase. The provision of
humanitarian assistance cannot be held hostage to
political considerations.
In conclusion, I would reiterate my country’s
concern about the abuse by some States of Article 51
of the Charter of the United Nations, which they invoke
to justify the use of force in Syria, going beyond the
terms of that provision so as to circumvent obtaining
the express authorization of the Security Council.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks Special Envoy Pedersen and Ms. Hussain
for their briefings. We welcome the presence of Special
Envoy Pedersen and express appreciation for his
efforts to promote the implementation of resolution
2254 (2015) and advance the work of the Syrian
Constitutional Committee.
8/23

25/06/2021

The Syrian issue should ultimately be resolved
through political means. It is precisely because of
the lack of progress on the political track that the
international relief efforts are so overstretched on the
humanitarian track. China supports a Syrian-led and
Syrian-owned political process, the full implementation
of resolution 2254 (2015) and the mediation efforts of
Special Envoy Pedersen.
As Syria suffers from foreign occupation,
unilateral sanctions and terrorism, it is difficult for
the Constitutional Committee to make the expected
progress. Nevertheless, negotiation is always better
than war. China hopes that the Constitutional
Committee will launch its sixth round of work as soon
as possible, while staying independent and free from
external interference.
At the same time, we must recognize that
Constitution-making and elections are not enough, by
themselves, to resolve the Syrian issue. Progress on
the political track depends on the building of mutual
trust between the Syrian parties and those who have
influence on the Syrian situation. Only with such mutual
trust can consensus be formed on issues of common
concern to the Syrian people and be implemented in a
step-by-step and reciprocal manner. In this process, the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria must be
fully respected, and so must the political independence
of the Syrian people. Unilateral sanctions against Syria
must stop. Any schemes to effect regime change in
Syria must be utterly renounced.
The authorization of Syrian cross-border
humanitarian access is about to expire. The Security
Council should have a thorough exchange of views on
the draft resolution on this subject, conduct in-depth
and comprehensive consultations, strive for consensus
and avoid a showdown. Doing so will help all parties to
increase mutual trust and create favourable conditions
for advancing the political process.
Advancement in the Syrian political process
requires a good security environment. In north-west
Syria, terrorist organizations listed by the Security
Council launch repeated attacks and kidnap civilians.
Frequent eruption of hostilities in the north-east have
resulted in civilian displacement. Foreign troops
continue to operate in Syria without any time frame
for withdrawal.
All those aspects have added to the complexity
of the Syrian security situation. China urges all the
21-16729

25/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

parties concerned to implement the Secretary-General’s
appeal for a global ceasefire and end the foreign
occupation of Syria as soon as possible. China calls
on the international community to strengthen counterterrorism cooperation, in accordance with international
law and the relevant Security Council resolutions, and
jointly combat terrorist forces in Syria.
The Syrian economy is in deep distress. Without
timely international assistance, the humanitarian
consequences will be disastrous. Claiming to seek
solutions while allowing the problem to worsen will
simply not work. China calls on the relevant countries
to resume economic and development assistance to
Syria and avoid linking aid with the political process.
Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General Pedersen for his
briefing. As others said, it is very good to see him
back in the Chamber with us. I am also very grateful to
Ms. Hussain for her briefing. I think that she offered us
a stark description of the desperate situation in Syria,
especially with regard to violence and discrimination
against women and their counterproductive exclusion
from the political process. It was interesting to hear
the extent to which her diagnosis of and remedy for the
situation aligns with ours. As she insisted, we offer her
no sympathy, but only admiration for her strength and
determination to challenge an illegitimate regime and
fight for change and accountability.
We remain firm in our belief that the way to secure
rights for all Syrians is by bringing about a negotiated
end to the appalling conflict and that the political
process established by resolution 2254 (2015) remains
the only viable route to lasting and inclusive peace.
As the Council made clear in resolution 2254 (2015),
the meaningful participation of women in the United
Nations-facilitated political process is critical. And it
was good to hear Ms. Hussain reiterate that herself.
Indeed, we cannot envisage a solution to the situation
without the participation of women. We therefore very
much welcome the vital work of the Syrian Women’s
Political Movement and ongoing engagement by the
Special Envoy with women representatives. I was very
encouraged by the information that he gave us on the
way that he is engaging civil society in the process in
innovative ways.
Now that the distraction of the so-called
presidential elections in Syria is out of the
way — I noted Ms. Hussain’s description of them

S/PV. 8805

as a sham — we call on the Syrian regime finally to
engage constructively with the political process and the
Constitutional Committee towards a new constitution
and free and fair elections pursuant to the constitution.
We recognize the Special Envoy’s efforts to that end
and his efforts to accelerate progress on all aspects
of resolution 2254 (2015), including by encouraging
greater international consensus on the path forward.
We would be interested to hear more about his ideas for
a new international dialogue.
We must not forget that the conflict continues in
Syria, and we are deeply concerned about increasing
levels of violence, including strikes on southern Idlib,
a regime attack on a school facility in a camp for
internally displaced person on 9 June and an attack on
yet another hospital in Afrin on 12 June. We call on all
parties to uphold their obligations under international
humanitarian law, abide by existing ceasefire
agreements and implement resolution 2254 (2015)’s
instruction for a nationwide ceasefire. That remains as
urgent as ever.
We also note the call of resolution 2254 (2015) to
allow humanitarian access to those in need, and we
thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his comments today.
We obviously discussed the imperative of humanitarian
access in some detail on Wednesday, 23 June (see
S/PV.8803). We therefore will not reiterate those
points today.
Like others, we call once again on the regime to
release those whom it holds in arbitrary detention,
which Ms. Hussain described as her group’s greatest
priority, allow medical access to those detained and
provide information on the missing to their families,
in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and Human Rights
Council resolutions on Syria.
Lastly, progress on the political process is the only
way to build conditions for the safe and voluntary return
of refugees and internally displaced persons to their
homes and secure a lasting end to the conflict in Syria.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): At the outset, I would
like to thank Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
Geir Pedersen for his briefing today and express our
appreciation for his hard work on the ground at this
very challenging time. I also thank Ms. Abeer Hussain
for sharing her insights. I welcome the participation
of the representatives of Syria, Turkey and Iran at our
meeting today.

21-167299/23

S/PV.8805

The situation in the Middle East

Let me begin by stressing our staunch support
for the Syrian-led and Syrian-owned United Nationsfacilitated political process, in line with resolution 2254
(2015), in its full adherence to international law and
the Charter of the United Nations, including respect
for the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of Syria.
A political solution that allows the Syrians
themselves to decide their future is the only viable way
to achieve long-term peace and stability to end their
untold sufferings. The realization of the Syrian people’s
aspiration for peace, stability and development should
be given immediate priority.
On that account, my delegation would like to stress
the following points.
First, with regard to building trust and promoting
dialogue, arriving at a political solution will require
renewed efforts in order to bridge the substantial
differences among all parties concerned. If that is
not the case, we are afraid that those differences will
be exacerbated and become impossible to settle. We
call on the Syrian parties to engage in constructive
dialogue with a view towards achieving breakthroughs
within the framework of the Constitutional Committee,
as well as the broader political process. We hope that
the parties will soon reach an agreement on a working
methodology in order to create the necessary conditions
to continue dialogue. We would also like to stress the
need to ensure the equal participation of women in the
political process.
At the same time, a political solution cannot
take place without the meaningful engagement of all
international interlocutors. That requires close and
constructive dialogue in order to end the long-standing
divergence of views and lack of confidence among the
international community. My delegation takes this
opportunity to reiterate its full support for the work of
the United Nations, the Special Envoy and his team. His
critical bridge-building role is of great importance in
bringing the parties together.
Secondly, with regard to an environment conducive
to dialogue and negotiation, a fragile calm, as described
by the Special Envoy, has been maintained for more than
a year. However, sporadic security incidents continue
to occur in many areas, and terrorists’ activities do not
seem to be on the decline. The most recent attack in
Afrin, which killed 19 civilians and injured 40 others
at Al-Shifa hospital, is extremely concerning. It clearly
10/23

25/06/2021

shows the fragility of the security situation in Syria.
We call on all parties to exercise maximum restraint
and refrain from actions that could lead to further
escalation. A period of sustainable calm is of vital
importance to allow progress in the political domain.
It is also critical to continue efforts to combat
terrorist groups designated as such by the Security
Council. At the same time, such efforts should be
coordinated to best ensure respect for international
law, including humanitarian law, as well as the relevant
Security Council resolutions.
Thirdly, concerning continued support for the
Syrian people, more than a decade of conflict has
brought about extreme hardships and suffering for the
Syrian people. The humanitarian situation continues
to deteriorate, especially in the past year with the cruel
impact of the economic crisis and the coronavirus
disease pandemic. There are now 13.4 million people in
need of humanitarian assistance — the highest number
since the start of the conflict.
Let me conclude by emphasizing the need for the
unity of the international community in assisting Syria.
The Syrian people need our unwavering support during
this critical time.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Special Envoy Pedersen
for his briefing. We are very happy to finally have him
here in person. I also want to thank Abeer Hussein
for her remarks and for the important work conducted
by her organization to promote the rights of women
and girls.
Regrettably, since last month’s meeting (see
S/2021/418), there has been little to no progress on
the political track. We are well aware that the Special
Envoy has worked intensively with the parties in the
Constitutional Committee to reach agreement on a
framework for further negotiations. Yet a compromise
proposal has not yet been fully agreed. We give our full
support to Mr. Pedersen’s efforts to make sure there are
concrete results in the next round of negotiations. We
urge the parties to work with the Special Envoy in good
faith to lay the groundwork for a reformed Constitution,
as part of a Syrian-led, Syrian-owned peace process.
Let me also emphasize the important contribution
of the Syrian Women’s Advisory Board and the
Syrian Civil Society Support Room towards an
inclusive process.
21-16729

25/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

As we have said previously, the Constitutional
Committee is just one piece of the larger political
process. Other parts of resolution 2254 (2015) must
also be implemented, including a nationwide ceasefire,
the release of arbitrarily detained persons and the
voluntary, safe and dignified return of refugees. We
have the framework for a solution in Syria, which was
adopted by consensus by the Council. Now we need it
to be fully implemented.
As the Special Envoy has elaborated, there is a
fragile calm in Syria, with less violence than earlier
in the conflict. However, as the attack on 12 June on
a hospital in Afrin shows, civilians are still being
killed and injured as a consequence of the conflict.
A nationwide ceasefire is needed. We continue to
urge all parties to comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law, including with regard
to the protection of civilians and civilian objects.
The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant still has
a significant presence in Syria and continues to take
advantage of the ongoing conflict and a lack of stability
and a political solution. We must stay vigilant and
continue our support to fight the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham on every level.
Let me conclude by repeating our call for broader and
better coordinated international engagement. Together
with the Syrians themselves, all actors involved must
be engaged in the process, especially those present on
the ground. A new international mechanism for moving
the process forward may be combined with a step-bystep approach, as proposed by the Special Envoy. We
must start by building trust on all sides and then move
ahead together to solve the larger questions of political
reform and a political solution — one based on human
rights and the rule of law.
Mrs. Toroitich (Kenya): I thank Special Envoy
Pedersen — it is good to see him in person — and
Ms. Hussein of the Syrian Women’s Political Movement
for their briefings today.

S/PV. 8805

most vulnerable suffering the worst consequences,
particularly women and children.
Also alarming is the increasing terrorist activity,
including wanton attacks against civilians and control
of swaths of territory by terrorist groups, such as the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and other armed
groups. In that regard, Kenya reiterates the following
three points.
First, all parties must honour the ceasefire and do
their best to ensure that it holds.
Secondly, there is a need for renewed unified
action against terrorist groups, including holding
to account those responsible for heinous crimes, in
accordance with international law and applicable
United Nations resolutions.
Thirdly, all parties, including foreign armies,
should exercise maximum restraint and refrain from
actions that would jeopardize the safety and security of
the people and the country.
It is regrettable that there have been no meaningful
developments in the work of the Constitutional
Committee. We continue to encourage the resumption
of the sessions and call on the Syrian parties to be
objective and pragmatic in their engagements.
Kenya commends the Special Envoy’s continued
robust engagements with civil society, including the
Women’s Advisory Board. Those groups can make
significant positive contributions to the political
process if they are meaningfully included.
With regard to the plight of detainees, abductees
and missing persons, Kenya encourages programmes
for psychosocial support and coping mechanisms,
particularly for women whose spouses have been
detained, abducted or are missing. Such women, who
work hard against many odds to support their families,
are often rejected, stigmatized and denied their human
right to dignity by the society.

As we have stated before, the reality of the situation
in Syria is an indictment on multilateralism, particularly
on the Security Council, whose primary mandate is the
maintenance of international peace and security.

As we mark the second anniversary of resolution
2474 (2019), on missing persons in armed conflict,
we call for renewed attention to resolving the issue of
detainees and missing persons as a confidence- and
trust-building measure among the Syrian parties.

The renewed incidents of daily shelling, air strikes
and violence among non-State armed groups and the
prevalence of explosive hazards continue to generate
unnecessary causalities and displacements, with the

With more than 3.4 million people in need of
humanitarian aid in north-western Syria alone, the
cross-border aid mechanism remains a critical avenue
for humanitarian assistance, including coronavirus

21-1672911/23

S/PV.8805

The situation in the Middle East

disease vaccines, to reach the millions in need. I
reaffirm Kenya’s position that the cross-border and
cross-line mechanisms must coexist and complement
one another for effective humanitarian access.
In conclusion, Kenya commends the tireless efforts
of the Special Envoy in supporting the Syrian political
process. We reiterate that the long-term solution to the
Syrian crisis lies in a Syrian-owned and Syrian-led
political dialogue that speaks to the needs of the people
of Syria.
Mr. Maman Sani (Niger) (spoke in French): I
thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his briefing and
his tireless efforts to find a negotiated solution to
the crisis in Syria. I also thank Ms. Abeer Hussein
for her contribution to today’s debate. I would like to
welcome the representatives of Syria, Iran and Turkey
to today’s meeting.
The end of the Syrian crisis will not be achieved
solely by the power of force of weapons, but rather,
and it cannot be stated enough, through a negotiated
political solution borne out of a Syrian-led process that
involves the various components of Syrian society.
That has become obvious with each monthly briefing
on the issue. However, it must be noted that, in spite
of the Special Envoy’s efforts to help the parties to the
conflict find common ground for a lasting and just
solution to the crisis, progress is by no means as we
had expected. That is why the political process must
urgently be put back on track, in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015). In that connection, I would like
to make the following comments.
On the security front, the Niger is concerned about
the resurgence of violence, particularly in the northwest of the country. We call on the parties to put an end
to the hostilities, which is a sine qua non for making
tangible progress in resolving the crisis in Syria. The
use of improvised explosive devices, landmines and
unexploded ordnance and the increasing pace of air
strikes and bombings, resulting in a growing number
of civilian deaths and injuries, including many women
and children, are not conducive to such progress.
My delegation calls on the parties to the conflict to
observe a comprehensive ceasefire in Syria, as called
for by the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy. We
remain convinced that a ceasefire will help to create the
conditions for a successful political process and make
the fight against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic possible and effective.
12/23

25/06/2021

We believe that the need for a collective effort in the
face of the COVID-19 pandemic should not distract us
from the fight against terrorist groups, which continue
to ignore the Secretary-General’s call for a ceasefire
and try to take advantage of the pandemic and measures
taken to reassert themselves. Syria, in the exercise of its
sovereignty, must relentlessly pursue the fight against
terrorism. Any attempt to undermine its sovereignty or
territorial integrity is simply unacceptable.
The Niger remains concerned about the fate of the
many detainees on both sides. We call on the parties to
take steps to build mutual trust, including through the
unilateral mass release of detainees and clarifications
to families about missing persons. That will help to
ease tensions and build confidence between the parties,
thereby making it possible to achieve the progress we
all expect on the political front.
In that regard, we lament the lack of progress in
the work of the Syrian Constitutional Committee. The
Niger reiterates that, after several attempts, it is time to
improve the Committee’s working methods. To that end,
the Niger calls on all stakeholders to show flexibility in
moving the political process forward. Only an inclusive
Syrian-led dialogue that reflects the will of the Syrian
people will lead to a peaceful long-term solution in
Syria. The success of the political process will also
determine the success of all efforts on the humanitarian
side of the crisis.
I would like to conclude my remarks by urging
members of the Council to show a true sense of unity
in order to finally give reason for hope to the Syrian
people who, after more than a decade of war, yearn only
for peace.
Mr. Gupta (India): Let me begin by thanking
Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for his very comprehensive
briefing today. I also wish to thank Ms. Abeer Hussain
of the Syrian Women’s Political Movement for bringing
the civil society perspective to today’s meeting.
As things stand presently, the political track has not
moved any further since our most recent discussion in
the Security Council, on 26 May (see S/2021/418). The
United Nations-facilitated Constitutional Committee
process therefore has the onerous task of preparing
and drafting, for popular approval, a Constitution
that will contribute to the political settlement in Syria
and the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015).
However, there has not been much progress since its
establishment, in September 2019.
21-16729

25/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

We call upon all sides to remain engaged in
discussions on the bridging proposal put forth by the
Special Envoy in April. We have noted the update
on Deputy Special Envoy Khawla Matar’s recent
engagements in Damascus. We hope that the Special
Envoy will succeed in bringing about an understanding
among all three groups on the work plan and
methodology, paving the way for convening the sixth
session at the earliest opportunity.
Let me reiterate once again that, for the United
Nations-led political track to move forward, we
need cooperation from all major stakeholders in the
conflict. The political transition in Syria facilitated
by the United Nations is not an exclusive process.
The stakeholders need to bridge existing divides by
focusing on measured, incremental positive steps.
They need to review their long-entrenched positions,
act collaboratively and strengthen the hand of the
Special Envoy, thereby giving a collective push to the
United Nations-led political track. We believe that can
be realized if all parties agree to work together in good
faith and provided their sponsors do not interfere.
The recent attack on the hospital in the city of Afrin
in northern Syria underscores the need for a nationwide
comprehensive ceasefire. We condemn the attack
on the hospital and the killing of innocent civilians.
Across the country, including in north-western Syria,
fighting along the front lines has continued in one
form or another, putting the lives of innocent civilians
in jeopardy. It is also a matter of concern that the
fundamental principles of international law, such as
non-interference in the internal affairs of States and
respect for territorial integrity and independence, have
been repeatedly violated in Syria. The presence of
foreign forces and the provision of support to armed
groups have led to an extremely dangerous situation
in Syria.
India remains deeply concerned by the involvement
of external actors in Syria, which has given a fillip to the
growth of terrorism in Syria and beyond in the region.
We urge the international community to reflect on that
aspect of the Syrian conflict with all earnestness. We
need to be consistent in strongly condemning terrorism.
The latest 60-day report of the Secretary-General on
the humanitarian situation (S/2021/583) mentions
the attacks carried out by Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, a
designated terrorist group, and the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL).

S/PV. 8805

The latest report of the United Nations Investigative
Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (see
S/2021/419) also refers to the repeated use of chemical
weapons by ISIL against civilian populations between
2014 and 2016. Reports of the presence of mercenaries
from Syria in Africa is equally worrisome. It is
imperative that all parties adhere to their international
obligations to fight terrorism and terrorist organizations
in Syria, as designated by the Security Council.
We welcome the Special Envoy’s participation in
the upcoming meeting on the situation in Syria in Rome
on 28 June and look forward to hearing his comments
on the broader issues to be discussed there.
Finally, India firmly believes that the long-term
security and stability of the region can be achieved only
by preserving the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Syria. We also remain convinced that there can be
no military solution to the Syrian conflict and reaffirm
our commitment to advancing a Syrian-led and Syrianowned United Nations-facilitated political process in
line with resolution 2254 (2015).
Ms. Prince (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): I
thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his usual thorough
briefing. It is good to have him here in person. We also
thank Ms. Abeer Hussein for her remarks today.
Syria’s only viable path to peace and stability is
through a credible, balanced and inclusive political
process that is owned and led by the Syrian people and
meets their legitimate aspirations. Yet, 10 years after
the conflict began, the Syrian people continue to suffer
as a result of dynamics over which they have neither
influence nor control.
Constructive and pragmatic international diplomacy
is needed now more than ever to assist in creating an
environment that is conducive to the fulfilment of the
political process.
In that regard, we must acknowledge and commend
the unwavering efforts of the Special Envoy, and we
continue to strongly urge all parties to recommit to
working together in a spirit of mutual respect and
compromise in the pursuit of peace and stability.
The Constitutional Committee remains an essential
component of the wider political process and we
emphasize the importance of convening a sixth session
as soon as practicable. The Committee’s consultations
should involve the meaningful participation of all

21-1672913/23

S/PV.8805

The situation in the Middle East

groups, including women and youth. We remain hopeful
that the Committee will be a driver of progress in the
political process for the sake of the Syrian people.
Measures aimed at building confidence are also
vital to the success of the wider process. In that context,
we reiterate the urgent need to address the issues of
detainees, abductees and missing persons. Further,
conditions must be cultivated for the safe, dignified
and voluntary return of refugees and internally
displaced persons. Those expressions of goodwill
will undoubtedly promote reconciliation within Syria.
They will also aid the parties in the development of
trust and thereby promote active participation in the
political process.
We acknowledge the close linkage between
a ceasefire and the parallel political process. The
implementation of a complete and immediate nationwide
cessation of hostilities is essential to stabilizing the
country’s volatile security situation. We appeal to the
parties to exercise maximum restraint and we remind
them of their obligations under international law,
including in the conduct of counter-terrorism activities.
There exists a well-established link between
justice and peace, and it has long been recognized that
neither one is able to thrive in isolation of the other.
We therefore reiterate that accountability for acts
committed in violation of international law ought to
remain a high priority.
We maintain that the political and humanitarian
situations are inextricably connected. The stagnation
of the political process has the disastrous effect of
prolonging the conflict and, in turn, worsens the
dire humanitarian situation. A holistic approach
remains imperative.
The international community must prioritize the
people of Syria and leave behind geopolitical disputes,
which continue to compound the complexities of the
conflict. This dictates the removal of all unauthorized
foreign forces in respect for Syria’s sovereignty
and its territorial integrity. It further requires the
lifting of all unilateral coercive measures, which
have had a detrimental impact on Syria’s overall
socioeconomic condition.
Syria and its people deserve security and to live
in a state of calm. The Security Council and the wider
international community bear a great responsibility to
14/23

25/06/2021

assist them through positive action to emerge from the
despair created by 10 long years of war.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
thank the Special Envoy and Ms. Abeer Hussain for
their briefings.
This is a serious time for the Security Council. We
must decide in the coming days to restore a glimmer
of hope to the millions of people who depend on the
renewal of the cross-border humanitarian assistance
mechanism to receive the aid they need. The Security
Council cannot abandon them to the goodwill of the
Syrian regime.
It is high time to relaunch a real political process
that will finally bring tangible results. After nearly two
years, the Constitutional Committee has, regrettably,
yielded no results. The regime continues to oppose
good-faith and serious discussions. That has been
demonstrated again in its refusal of the Special Envoy’s
compromise proposal. France fully supports the Special
Envoy’s efforts to overcome the morass and re-establish
a credible political process.
We must return to the heart of resolution 2254
(2015), which paves the way for a political settlement
and was adopted unanimously by the members of the
Security Council. All its elements must be implemented
without further delay. That means that there must be
urgent progress on the issue of detainees in the hands
of the regime and disappeared persons, which is a key
demand of all sectors of Syrian society. It also requires
progress on a sustainable and verifiable nationwide
cessation of hostilities and preparations for elections.
That is what all Syrians expect.
The presidential election organized by the
Syrian regime does not contribute in any way to the
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). How could
it lead to the lifting of sanctions, reconstruction or
normalization? We oppose it. We will nonetheless
continue to assume our responsibilities in terms of
humanitarian response, which we are financing with
our partners up to 92 per cent, despite the obstacles that
the regime continues to impose on the delivery of aid
and the work of the United Nations.
Only a robust political settlement will make it
possible to permanently extinguish the hotbed of
terrorism that the country has become and to put an
end to the human tragedy and instability in Syria. We
21-16729

25/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8805

stand ready to work with the Special Envoy and all
Council members.

equal and meaningful basis. That, I understand, is their
right and not their request.

Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): It is good to see
Special Envoy Geir Pedersen in the Chamber with
us. I thank him for his briefing and, of course, for his
ongoing efforts on the Constitutional Committee. We
sincerely welcome those efforts to focus the Security
Council’s attention on the crisis in Syria and to press all
parties to work together on concrete steps towards the
full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015).

While a ceasefire continues to largely hold in the
north-west, the attack on Al-Shifa hospital in Afrin was
an appalling attack. It resulted in the killing and injury
of civilians, including medical personnel and children,
and the destruction of parts of the hospital. Ireland
strongly condemns that disgraceful attack and calls for
an end to all such attacks.

We also very much welcome the Special Envoy’s
initiative to launch virtual thematic working groups,
which will allow civil society actors to engage with
each other and the United Nations, regardless of their
geographic location or ability to travel. We know
from experience and best practice that peace efforts
produce more sustainable outcomes when civil society
is adequately and, more importantly, meaningfully
included in political and mediation processes. I thank
him for that initiative.
Despite the Special Envoy’s commendable efforts,
I know that the Syrian authorities have yet to engage
meaningfully in the work of the Constitutional
Committee. Ireland reiterates its call on the Syrian
authorities to end their unacceptable stalling tactics,
which leave the prospects for substantive progress
in the Constitutional Committee as far away as ever.
Regrettably, we are no closer to meeting the expectations
of the Syrian people for substantive progress on the
political solution and national reconciliation that were
foreseen in resolution 2254 (2015). Such progress is
unattainable, in our view, without a new constitution
that sets out a peaceful and inclusive vision for all
Syrians. Sadly, last month’s elections brought us no
nearer to that goal.
In particular, I want to welcome this morning the
participation in this meeting of Ms. Abeer Hussain. We
listened with great interest to her and about her work
focused on empowering women. I see that work as
absolutely critical, and I happen to believe in her final
words to us: “No women, no legitimacy”. We join in
her desire to see what she aptly describes as the strong
women of Syria take their rightful place in the peace
process in working for equal and full citizenship and
in working for justice to reach a democracy. We heard
her appeal to see women play a decisive and effective
role as a pressing force in the political process on a full,

This latest appalling incident and the continuing
violence underline the importance once again of a
nationwide ceasefire in Syria.
Ireland strongly condemns those parties in Syria
that continue to disregard international human rights
and humanitarian law. All must fully comply with
their obligations under international humanitarian
law, including those relating to the protection of
civilians and civilian objects. The Syrian authorities,
through their repressive security apparatus, continue
to arbitrarily arrest and detain their own citizens, with
flagrant disregard for due process.
We must never forget that tens of thousands of Syrian
citizens have been subjected to arbitrary detention, in
addition to those who are missing. We think of their
families left cruelly in limbo, without knowing the fate
of their loved ones. It is unconscionable to us that the
Syrian authorities have such callous disregard for their
own citizens.
We welcome Mr. Pedersen’s continued efforts to
make progress on detainees, abductees and missing
persons, and he has our full support in that work.
The violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law by the Syrian regime are extremely
well documented. Ireland has consistently called for full
accountability for the crimes and violations committed.
Ireland commends the International, Impartial
and Independent Mechanism and the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic for their work. The Commission of
Inquiry’s reports testify to horrific crimes, including
the bombing of hospitals, schools and other civilian
infrastructure. Ireland strongly condemns those acts as
well as attacks against civil-society actors and human
rights defenders.
To conclude, we call on the Syrian authorities
to engage urgently and meaningfully with the
Constitutional Committee, and with the wider political

21-1672915/23

S/PV.8805

The situation in the Middle East

process, as outlined in resolution 2254 (2015). We urge
the Syrian authorities to comply with their obligations
under international law and to put an end to their brutal
policies. Only when that comes to pass will the Syrian
people be able to begin rebuilding their lives and look
forward to a hopeful and peaceful future. As we have
often said, that is the very least that the long-suffering
people of Syria deserve.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria,
Mr. Geir Pedersen, for his briefing, and I welcome his
presence here today. I also thank Ms. Abeer Hussain,
Syrian women’s rights promoter and a member of the
Syrian Women’s Political Movement, for her briefing.
I welcome the participation of the representatives of
Syria, Turkey and Iran in this meeting.
There is an urgent need to bring stability to Syria and
to put an end to the military approach to the crisis. That
approach has been futile and exacerbated the suffering
of Syrians throughout the decade-long crisis and led
to an impasse in the political process. If the deadlock
remains, those tensions will cause the situation to
deteriorate further and increase the number of terrorist
acts in Syria, as well as the waves of displacement,
deepening the humanitarian tragedy for the Syrian
people, with all of the attendant negative repercussions
for security in the region and for international peace
and security.
The deterioration of the daily lives of the Syrian
people is unprecedented. The international community
and the Security Council therefore have today more than
ever a historic responsibility to find a comprehensive
and lasting settlement based on constructive approaches,
purposeful interaction and joint coordination.
Tunisia reiterates its support for the work of the
Special Envoy, Mr. Pedersen, and his team in their
good-offices efforts to bring the Syrian parties together,
building confidence and resolving controversial issues
in line with resolution 2254 (2015), while respecting the
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Syria.
In that context, we urge that efforts be redoubled to
achieve a comprehensive and lasting ceasefire in Syria
and to guarantee the dignified return of refugees and
displaced persons, while improving the daily living
conditions of the Syrian people and combating terrorist
groups in the country, as well as to make headway on
the issue of detained persons and the constitutional and
political process.
16/23

25/06/2021

We hope that the actors involved will be able in
coming days to agree on a common vision on the various
aspects of the crisis and promote a constitutional and
political process that is Syrian-led and Syrian-owned,
facilitated by the United Nations. Tunisia supports the
resumption of the Constitutional Committee’s work in
the framework of its sixth session, to be convened in
Geneva very soon. We encourage the Syrian parties once
again to constructively contribute to the Committee’s
work and to find common ground, focusing as a priority
on the best interests of the Syrian people and achieving
constitutional reform.
Tunisia expresses its deep concern about the
current negative trends in terms of renewed violence
and tension in many parts of Syria. Violations continue,
and we are also deeply concerned about the escalation of
attacks committed by the Da’esh terrorist organization
in the region, including its cross-border action, which
undermines the unity and territorial integrity of Syria
and the stability of the entire region.
Tunisia last year sounded the alarm about the
recurring actions of Da’esh in Syria during the spread
of the coronavirus disease, exploiting the impact of the
pandemic, the security vacuum and the deterioration
of the economic situation for its own interests. We
reiterate the importance of putting an end to the crisis
and the exacerbated suffering of the Syrian people.
There is no option other than to reach a comprehensive
political settlement, with the participation of women,
in line with the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council, notably resolution 2254 (2015). It is important
to accelerate efforts to combat terrorism and to put an
end through cooperation to organizations that have
been listed by the Council, based on international law
as a foundation for achieving security, stability and a
lasting political solution in Syria.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Geir Pedersen, the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, and
Ms. Abeer Hussain for their briefings.
In spite of the overall stabilization of the military
and political situation, the situation remains tense in
Syria. Indeed, 60 per cent of the population is facing
the real threat of hunger. The socioeconomic and
humanitarian situation in the country has deteriorated,
first and foremost due to the illegal economic restrictions
imposed by the West, in contravention of Security
Council resolutions and in spite of the appeals of the
21-16729

25/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

Secretary-General to ease the pressure of sanctions
at the height of the pandemic. We consider this a
continuing attempt to oust the legitimate authorities of
the country through economic suffocation.
The areas not under the control of the Syrian
Government remain zones of instability. They
are controlled by terrorists from Hayat Tahrir
Al-Sham — we are speaking here about Idlib and the
regions of the north-east.
We are concerned about reports of continued clashes
in the Euphrates region in the north of Syria. The fact
that the issue of restoring the full sovereignty of the
Syrian Arab Republic remains unresolved and that
the related security challenges persist is exploited by
terrorists from the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
No less of a threat to the stability and security
both inside Syria and in the region as a whole are the
artificially concocted projects to divide the country
along ethnic and religious lines. We also condemn the
increasing number of air strikes conducted by Israel
against Syrian territory. That seriously complicates the
efforts to stabilize the situation in Syria and the region
as a whole.
For our part, we are convinced that the Syrian
conflict does not have a military solution and can be
resolved only by promoting a sustainable political
process on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015), with
the support of the United Nations. Respect for the
sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of the country remains essential.
On the political track, we support the efforts of Geir
Pedersen. We believe that it is important to convene
a sixth session of the Constitutional Committee in
Geneva. We call on all parties to engage constructively
in order to enhance the productivity of the intra-Syrian
dialogue. The dialogue is not easy, but it is important to
support the process in every way possible. At the same
time, it is vital that it remain Syrian-led and Syrianowned, without external interference or artificial
timelines and with neutral United Nations mediation.
We are also convinced that the intra-Syrian dialogue
must not become hostage to technical modalities.
The Russian Federation will continue to encourage
negotiations among the Syrians, both in its national
capacity and together with Turkey and Iran within
the framework of the Astana format. We are planning
another meeting in that format in the near future.

S/PV. 8805

Russia is doing its utmost to promote a peaceful
settlement in Syria. However, literally every aspect
of that is encountering opposition. In the hands of
our partners, the chemical dossier, where through our
common efforts we managed to achieve the elimination
of the Syrian chemical arsenal, has degenerated into yet
another element of pressure against Syria.
We are also trying to ease the politicization of
the Syrian humanitarian track and to help establish
constructive cooperation between the United Nations
and Damascus to provide humanitarian assistance to
all Syrians, in compliance with the basic principles set
forth in General Assembly resolution 46/182.
We commend the efforts of the Government of
Syria to rebuild the country after the conflict and
establish normal living conditions for the citizens of
the country, including refugees. However, the Syrian
authorities cannot shoulder the burden of post-war
reconstruction by themselves. There is a need for the
international community to work together to establish
a peaceful life through infrastructure projects for the
country’s initial reconstruction. In that connection,
we call in particular for support for the initiative of
the President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC), Peter Maurer, to restore basic
infrastructure facilities in the Syrian Arab Republic. We
support the ICRC’s assessment that a lack of solutions
in that regard threatens to extend the humanitarian
disaster not only within Syria itself but also into the
neighbouring countries.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Estonia.
I thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his briefing on
the political situation in Syria. My special gratitude
goes to Ms. Hussein for joining us today. Her
honest testimony on the situation on the ground was
extremely informative.
It is clear that repression in Syria continue. Millions
have been displaced. Violence prevails, while thousands
remain arbitrarily detained and missing. Under those
difficult circumstances, it is even more encouraging
to see Syrian activists standing up and making a
change, even when the Constitutional Committee is in
a deadlock.
The work that the members of the Syrian Women’s
Political Movement are doing is a vivid example of
the will that people have to participate in the political

21-1672917/23

S/PV.8805

The situation in the Middle East

life. Estonia insists on the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women in peace processes and finding
a political solution for the Syrian conflict. The United
Nations, including the Security Council, cannot let
down women who have risked their lives to take part in
deciding their country’s future.
The Security Council needs to act decisively
against the widespread and systematic violations
of international human rights law and international
humanitarian law in Syria. Attacks against civilians
and the use of chemical weapons amount to war crimes
and crimes against humanity. Such violations often
take place with almost absolute impunity.
Estonia reiterates the call of the European Union
with regard to the need to create an international
mechanism to locate missing people or their remains.
There must be accountability for the many war crimes
and crimes against humanity and an end to impunity.
Without justice for the victims, there will not be any
real peace in Syria.
I further highlight resolution 2474 (2019),
championed by our Kuwaiti colleagues two years ago.
In that resolution, the Security Council calls upon
parties to actively search for persons reported missing
and enable the return of their remains. Estonia will
keep demanding that from the Syrian Government.
Investigative mechanisms such as the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International
Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since
March 2011, established by the General Assembly, the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on
the Syrian Arab Republic of the Human Rights Council
and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons fact-finding mission in the Syrian Arab
Republic all play a central role in collecting evidence
and moving towards accountability.
Estonia and the European Union remain committed
to finding a lasting and credible political solution to the
conflict in Syria, in line with resolution 2254 (2015)
and the 2012 Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex).
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to Mr. Pedersen to respond to
comments and questions raised.
18/23

25/06/2021

Mr. Pedersen: I have been listening very carefully
to what everyone had to say. I must thank everyone for
the strong support that came from all for the work that
I am doing together with my team. I also very much
appreciate the deep understanding of the challenges
that we are facing. Of course, after 10 years of conflict,
that is not something that is going to change overnight.
However, I think the shared frustration we have
that we are not really making progress on the political
front should serve as an impetus and as a reminder that
we need to increase the dialogue on how to move that
process forward. I have been asked a few questions
on more details in that regard, and I hope, with the
engagement that I am now having with the different
foreign ministers in the days ahead — and I indicated
my travel plans — that when we meet next, it will be
possible to go into a little more detail as to how we can
move forward together on this particular file,
I indicated the areas where I think that there is
potential room for cooperation. Listening to Council
members today, I have to some extent been strengthened
in my view that this is indeed the way forward. I hope
that, after my visit to Rome and, as I said, hopefully
soon to Moscow, also after consultations with Iran and
with Turkey and then indeed also of the entire Astana
format, we will hopefully have some more clarity. It is
also my hope that when I next brief the Council, I will
be able to say that the Security Council has successfully
come to unified action on the issue of cross-border and
cross-line operations. Once again, I thank everyone
very much for their continued support. It is needed, and
we need to do even more than we have been able to do
so far.
The President: I thank Mr. Pedersen for the
clarifications he provided.
I now give the floor to Ms. Hussain to respond to
comments and questions raised.
Ms. Hussain (spoke in Arabic): I am grateful for
this great opportunity to provide the Security Council
with a picture of what is taking place inside Syria. I
sincerely thank the Council for prioritizing the voice
of Syrian women and for the fact that the international
community heeds the suffering of Syrian women, as
well as the entire Syrian people.
I note that, as a movement, we stand on an equal
footing with all forms of the demographic change that
has taken place in Syria. Many areas have experienced
21-16729

25/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

demographic changes. In addition to eastern Ghouta,
changes have taken place in Homs, Dara’a and
Al-Qusayr, as well as in Kefraya, Al-Fo’ah, Madaya
and Zabadani.
The political solution that we seek in Syria entails
putting an end to all actions and practices that have led
to this painful situation of forceful displacement and
demographic change. We look forward to establishing a
comprehensive vision that yields an inclusive political
solution which we hope to get from the Council.
The President: I thank Ms. Hussain for the
clarifications she provided.
I would like again to draw the attention of speakers
to paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): On 26 May, the Syrians raised their voice and
sent a clear message to the whole world that it must
acknowledge the choice of the Syrian people, who
supported the re-election of Mr. Bashar Al-Assad as
President of the Syrian Arab Republic by an absolute
majority of votes. The significant success in achieving
this national constitutional entitlement, and the
impressive public participation inside as well as outside
the country, have clearly demonstrated the Syrians’
ability to uphold the sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity of their country, and of their independent
national choices. They have also demonstrated the
Syrians’ support of their leadership and rejection of
occupation practices, aggression, terrorism, sanctions,
pressures and dictations, which are still being defended
and glossed over with deceptive slogans by some
countries within the Council and beyond it.
The results announced by the Speaker of the
People’s Assembly in the Syrian Arab Republic showed
that Mr. Bashar Al-Assad had obtained an absolute
majority of votes, with a percentage of 95.1 per cent of
the number of valid ballots. The Supreme Constitutional
Court also indicated that the total number of voters who
were entitled to vote inside and outside the Syrian Arab
Republic is 18,107,109 voters, while the total number
of voters who voted at home and abroad reached

S/PV. 8805

14,239,140 voters, representing 78.64 per cent of those
eligible to vote.
The statements of certain countries about the
confusion between this constitutional entitlement and
the implications of resolution 2254 (2015) are wrong
and misleading. We have stressed over and over again
that the holding of the presidential elections on time
is in line with the constitutional entitlement to ensure
the continuity of the Syrian State and its various
institutions, while preventing any constitutional
vacuum. There is thus no link between the elections
and resolution 2254 (2015).
The insistence of some countries on not listening to
the voice of the Syrian people and not deviating from
their erroneous policies in Syria and in our Arab region
has only brought terrorism and chaos, the destabilization
of security and stability, the plundering of wealth, and
harm to the lives and welfare of civilians. We therefore
call on those countries to conduct an honest review of
the catastrophic repercussions of their policies and to
put an end to their practices that violate the principles
of international law, the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations and the foundations of friendly relations
among States.
My country, Syria, is committed to a political
solution that is based on the Syrian national dialogue
and is Syrian-owned and Syrian-led, and has been
positively engaged in working to achieve it and provided
support and facilities for its success, in the light of its
full commitment to the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab
Republic, which represents a firm and constant principle
that cannot be conceded. In this context, the Syrian
Government continues to follow up on the efforts of
Special Envoy Geir Pedersen as a facilitator of this
process, and looks forward to soon holding the sixth
round of the Constitutional Committee to discuss the
constitution, stressing the need for no interference in
its work and no attempts to impose artificial timetables
or preconceived conclusions on its work. We also
affirm that Syria, represented by its national team in
the Constitutional Committee, has met all requirements
for the continuation of the work of the Committee, as
presented by Mr. Pedersen, and that there is no need
for any party to distort the facts, falsify what has been
agreed or complicate the work of the Committee with
pretexts that do not stand up to facts. We stress that any
attempt to that end is aimed at hindering the work of the
Committee and preventing its progress.

21-1672919/23

S/PV.8805

The situation in the Middle East

Within the framework of the Syrian Government’s
efforts to establish national reconciliation and settle the
conditions of detainees, on 2 May the President of the
Republic issued Legislative Decree No. 13, granting
a general amnesty to perpetrators of misdemeanours,
violations and felonies occurring before the date of its
issuance, and falling within a series of decrees that have
been issued in this regard. The Syrian Government has
also released dozens of detainees in a number of towns
in the countryside of Damascus, including Douma,
Irbeen, Kafr Batna and others. It has continued to make
every effort to secure the release of the hostages and
abductees held by terrorist organizations and to ensure
their safe return to their families. Unfortunately,
these efforts have been met with the Turkish regime’s
repudiation of its commitments under the Astana
process and its obstruction of any progress in conducting
serious exchanges by deliberately reducing the number
of hostages and abductees proposed to be exchanged.
It is unacceptable that some members of the
Council deal selectively and discriminately with this
humanitarian issue by continuing to accuse the Syrian
authorities, ignoring the situation of hostages and
abductees held by terrorist organizations and their
various entities, and the need to identify the fate of
thousands of missing persons in areas under the control
of these organizations.
My delegation has continued to brief the Security
Council and the Secretariat on the aggressive practices
carried out by the occupying forces of the United
States and Turkey on the territories of my country, in
cooperation with their proxy separatist militias and
terrorist entities. It also continues to report on the
repeated Israeli attacks, all of which represent flagrant
violations of international law, the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations and the sovereignty
and independence of the Syrian Arab Republic, as
affirmed by all the relevant resolutions to the situation
in my country.
In this context, and on behalf of my country’s
Government, I have addressed official letters to
the President of the Council about the conduct of
several Western Governments, including those of
three permanent members of the Security Council.
These Governments are violating the sovereignty
of my country by seeking to establish an illegal and
artificial status quo through their support for separatist
militias and by infiltrating their delegations into Syrian
territories like thieves, without the permission or prior
20/23

25/06/2021

approval of the Syrian Government. The most recent of
these was the United States delegation headed by the
acting Assistant Secretary of State.
In that regard, I would like to ask if it is permissible
for United States forces to cross the Iraqi-Syrian
border — as if they were crossing from New York to New
Jersey — to loot Syrian oil and wheat and kill Syrians
in flagrant defiance of the resolutions of the Security
Council and the Charter of the United Nations? Does
this behaviour reflect a commitment to the sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity of Syria by a country that
is supposed to be entrusted with contributing to the
maintenance of international peace and security? My
country will soon submit a request to compel the United
States to pay the value of what it has stolen in terms
of oil, wheat and other assets belonging to the Syrian
State, pursuant to the principle of accountability. We
want compensation for what the Syrian people have lost
as a result of the United States looting of their wealth.
We have also addressed dozens of letters to the
President of the Security Council on the Erdoğan
regime’s sponsorship of terrorist organizations in the
areas it occupies in northern and north-western Syria,
as well as its Turkification practices there, where it
seeks the obliteration of the Syrian identity through a
change in the demographic and administrative character
of those areas, raises the Turkish flag over Government
offices and service institutions, and appoints a
governor and Turkish Government employees to
supervise them. It is also confiscating lands, building
a so-called separation wall, changing the names of
roads and public squares and giving them Turkish and
Ottoman names. The Turkification extends to school
curriculums and related documents and license plates.
Turkish telecommunications and postal companies are
operating in the area, the electric power grids have
been linked to the Turkish grid, and the Turkish lira has
replaced the Syrian lira as the local currency. Moreover,
the Syrian Arab Red Crescent is not allowed to operate
in the humanitarian field, having been replaced by the
Turkish Red Crescent.
My question is: How long will the Security Council
continue to remain silent on the Turkish regime’s
violations, which its NATO allies are covering up?
In conclusion, after 10 years of failure of some
countries’ aggressive practices — which are known
to all and which totally contradict those countries’
claims of concern to respect Syria’s sovereignty and
21-16729

25/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

independence, to achieve a political solution and
support the restoration of security and stability in
Syria — is it not time for these countries to review
their policies and realistically consider the results of
their hostile practices against Syria, in particular, and
the region in general? Is it not time for these countries
to lift their inhumane siege of Syria and put an end to
their unilateral, coercive measures, which have denied
Syrians their livelihoods and their ability to benefit
from their country’s wealth? Is it not time for them to
follow the path of political dialogue and diplomacy to
address differences, instead of following the path of
aggression, threats to use force, pressure, diktats and
coercive measures?
The President: I now give the f loor to Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): I would like to thank
Special Envoy Pedersen for his briefing. I also thank
Ms. Abeer Hussain for her remarks.
As always, we actively support Mr. Pedersen’s
efforts aimed at finding a political solution to the
Syrian conf lict, in line with resolution 2254 (2015).
However, as Mr. Pedersen rightly pointed out in his
briefing, the political process is not advancing. Despite
his intense efforts over the last months, the sixth
round of the Constitutional Committee has not been
convened. Following the fake elections held last month
in violation of United Nations resolutions, the regime
is again trying to derail the Constitutional Committee.
Deputy Special Envoy Matar has devoted sustained
efforts to engage the regime in Damascus, but to no
avail. Al-Assad and his fellow criminals are ignoring
the opposition and acting in contravention of the rules
of procedure.
This situation cannot simply be described as
a standstill. Rather, it shows a dangerous trend of
regression in terms of the work of the Constitutional
Committee. The Security Council should stand against
the regime’s tactics to avoid negotiating a genuine
political solution.
We have been urging the opposition to continue its
constructive engagement despite all these difficulties
and challenges. We still believe that the Constitutional
Committee can make progress if the regime adopts a
similar approach. It is important that the Astana process
continues to function and should aim at contributing
to the efforts towards achieving a political solution
in Syria. The sixteenth meeting of Astana process is
planned to be held soon.

S/PV. 8805

The international community must give new
impetus to efforts aimed at reaching a political
solution in Syria. It is a major mistake not to devote
enough attention to this issue. I would like to take this
opportunity to invite key actors to come together and
re-energize the political process. For such joint efforts
to yield meaningful results, it is imperative that calm
on the ground be preserved.
We are deeply concerned that the regime has
intensified its ceasefire violations following the sham
elections. Attacks carried out in June have taken a heavy
civilian toll. We call on the regime and its backers to
uphold the ceasefire. Attacks targeting civilians must
stop. On 23 June, Turkish soldiers were wounded as a
result of the regime’s attack in Idlib. We cannot and
will not remain silent in the face of such attacks. There
is going to be a heavy price for any adventurous steps.
Meanwhile, the Kurdistan Workers’ Party/
People’s Protection Units (PKK/YPG) ramped up
their attacks on civilians. This cold-blooded terrorist
organization targeted the United Nations-supported
Al-Shifa hospital in Afrin on 12 June, killing scores of
innocent civilians and injuring many. Al-Shifa hospital
was one of the largest health facilities in northern
Syria, which offered thousands of medical-service
interventions each month. Its coordinates were shared
with the United Nations de-conf liction mechanism.
This terrorist attack is a crime against humanity, and it
must be investigated by the United Nations. These acts
of terrorism will continue as long as the perpetrators of
these attacks are not held accountable and continue to
receive outside support.
The most recent incidents in Manbij bear witness
to the local population’s resistance to the PKK/YPG’s
operations and acts of persecution. At least eight people
were killed, and scores more have been injured, as a
result of live rounds fired by the PKK-YPG to disperse
locals protesting against their forced-recruitment
policies. It is time to acknowledge that the support
provided to the PKK/YPG is channelled to oppress local
Syrians and forcefully recruit them for terrorist acts. I
would like to remind the Security Council once again
that there are not good terrorists and bad terrorists;
terrorists are all the same: evil. Turkey will continue to
stand against the PKK-YPG’s acts to terrorize the local
population and attempts to consolidate its grip over the
north-east through oppression.

21-1672921/23

S/PV.8805

The situation in the Middle East

Let me reiterate our strong determination to
address the plight of the Syrian people. Against all
odds, Turkey will persevere in seeking a political
settlement that will meet the legitimate aspirations
of Syrians. While doing so, we will also continue to
extend a helping hand to safeguard their lives against
the military campaign of the Al-Assad regime.
Syrian women are the unsung heroes of the
conf lict, which has lasted for more than a decade.
Millions of Syrian women’s lives have dramatically
changed overnight. They have had no choice but
to cope with war, on the one hand, while struggling
to make it through the day, on the other. They have
become the main breadwinners and have taken on
many challenges away from their communities and
traditional support systems, upon which they have
always relied. I salute all the brave women of Syria, like
the physician Dr. Amani Ballour, who saved countless
lives in an underground hospital for years in eastern
Ghouta, and Nujeen Mustafa, a staunch supporter and
advocate for refugees, who travelled across countries
in her wheelchair. Syrian women have an essential role
to play in the political process and the future of the
country, as Ms. Hussain said. We should not fail them.
The dignity of the Syrian people should be restored.
That can be achieved only with the strong support
of the Security Council. In the face of increased
humanitarian needs, we need the United Nations crossborder mechanism more than ever. Any failure on that
front will have a serious negative impact on the lives of
the people. The Council must authorize the mechanism
without delay, with additional crossings for a period of
at least 12 months.
The previous speaker once again repeated his
usual delusional allegations and shameless lies. As he
is not my legitimate counterpart, he does not deserve a
response from me. The answer to the criminal regime
that he represents will be given by the Syrian people
when they save and rebuild Syria.
The President: I now give the f loor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
Despite relative calm, Syria continues to face serious
challenges. Parts of Syria continue to be occupied by
foreign forces, dominated by groups with separatist
tendencies or controlled by Security Councildesignated terrorist groups. At the same time, the
22/23

25/06/2021

Israeli regime continues to commit acts of aggression
against Syria, in f lagrant violation of international law.
That unstable situation has far-reaching
implications for the security and stability of a volatile
region and for international peace and security at large.
The Security Council must live up to its responsibilities
and ensure Syria’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
In that context, all foreign forces unlawfully present
in Syria must leave without any precondition or delay.
Terrorist groups must not be allowed to use millions
of civilians as human shields to continue their heinous
activities, and the Israeli regime must be forced to end
its aggression against Syria.
In addition to those severe challenges, unlawful
unilateral sanctions are creating serious problems for
Syrians, who have already been suffering from the
adverse impacts of more than 10 years of conf lict.
Despite all the unjust measures I just mentioned,
the Constitutional Committee must continue its work.
The slow progress in the work of the Committee should
not give us any reason for pessimism with regard to the
extremely important role it can play in the future of
Syria. We hope that, with the constructive engagement
of the Committee’s co-Chairs with the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Syria, the Constitutional
Committee’s sixth session will be held soon. In that
context, we are in close coordination within the Astana
format with the United Nations.
At the same time, parallel efforts must be made to
ensure progress on other areas creating challenges for
Syria and its people. Indeed, linking in any way Syria’s
reconstruction or return of refugees and displaced
persons with progress in the work of the Constitutional
Committee or similar conditions will only prolong the
sufferings of the Syrian people, who have already paid
a heavy price as a result of the hegemonic policies of
certain Western countries that pursue their geopolitical
objectives in Syria through all means.
We reiterate once again that the Syrian crisis
must be settled peacefully in accordance with
principles of international law, particularly respect
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States,
non-intervention and non-interference in their internal
and external affairs and the peaceful settlement of
international disputes.
In our commitment to the restoration of the unity
and territorial integrity of Syria, we will continue our
21-16729

25/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

efforts in assisting the Government and the people
of Syria to overcome the enormous challenges they
face. In addition to our continued consultations with
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria,

S/PV. 8805

we will continue our constructive contribution to
international efforts aimed at the peaceful resolution
of the conf lict.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

21-1672923/23
