S/PV.8488

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8488th meeting

Wednesday, 20 March 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Delattre

(France)

Members:

Belgium
China
Côte d’Ivoire
Dominican Republic
Equatorial Guinea
Germany
Indonesia
Kuwait
Peru
Poland
Russian Federation
South Africa
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
United States of America

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Safronkov
Ms. Sabelo
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in Libya

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-07894 (E)
*1907894*

S/PV.8488

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

the fighting and in revenge attacks in the immediate
aftermath, at least 18 residents of Murzuq were killed
and a further 29 injured. Ninety homes were reported
burned in revenge attacks by tribal forces under the
command of the Libyan National Army.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Libya to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Ghassan
Salamé, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya, to participate in this meeting.
Mr. Salamé is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Tripoli.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

As this meeting, the Council will hear briefings by
Mr. Salamé and His Excellency Mr. Juergen Schulz,
Ambassador and Deputy Permanent Representative
of Germany, in his capacity as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011) concerning Libya.
I now give the floor to Mr. Salamé.
Mr. Salamé (spoke in French): At the outset, allow
me to congratulate France on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council.
(spoke in English)
I should have liked to be in New York and to have
the opportunity to brief Council members in person.
However, it is no exaggeration to say that the situation
in Libya has reached a crucial juncture. We are working
to prevent recent developments and tensions on the
ground from escalating, and instead to pivot to stability
and a political compact, which will enable an end to the
crisis in the country.
On 13 January, the forces of General Haftar
peacefully entered Sabha. While there were some minor
incidents, the arrival of Haftar’s forces was generally
perceived as a positive and stabilizing development.
When those forces moved to take control of Murzuq
in the south-west, there was active opposition from
the Tebu community and affiliated armed groups. In
2/7

20/03/2019

While the Libyan National Army has brought a
large measure of security and stability to the south,
which enabled the parallel bank in the east to deliver
bank notes to Sabha, it is unclear how long the campaign
can be sustained, given the long resupply lines and the
limited financial resources of the parallel Government.
There has been some mobilization of Libyan National
Army forces in Jufra, as well as the conduct of patrols
towards Sirte. That has led to friction and a rise in
tensions, with forces from the town of Misrata who
remain positioned in Sirte after their operations
countering the Islamic State of Iraq and the Sham there.
In the east, the fighting in Derna came to an end. I
am deeply concerned by reports of violations of human
rights and humanitarian law during the recent military
operations in Derna. The fighting reportedly resulted
in many civilian casualties.
In the west of the country, local forces have
mobilized in response to the current tensions. So far,
such local mobilizations appear to be shows of force
and no party appears imminently ready to launch
an attack against any other. But there is a real risk
of miscalculation or of extremist forces starting
skirmishes in the hope of drawing others into a larger
confrontation. The Tripoli ceasefire continues to hold,
but the Greater Tripoli security arrangements plan
remains only partially implemented
The United Nations Support Mission in Libya has
supported two rounds of preparatory talks between
the advisers of Prime Minister Al-Serraj and General
Haftar, which took place in our Tunis offices. As a
result of those talks, the two leaders met in Abu Dhabi
and agreed to a number of important principles. Libya
shall be a civilian and democratically governed State
that enjoys full civilian control of the military and a
peaceful transition of power. The parties also agreed
on the need to unify Libya’s long-divided institutions
and for the scheduling of national elections before
the end of the year. Many of these principles are not
new. Indeed, these talks are the continuation of the
process that started in September 2017. What is new
is the sincerity to turn these words into the end of the
transitional period through elections.
19-07894

20/03/2019

The situation in Libya

Let me now brief the Council on other developments
and activities on the ground.
I am pleased to announce that the United Nations
hub in Benghazi is open. After many months of its being
almost open, United Nations staff are being deployed to
Benghazi to better deliver across the east of the country.
Discussion is now under way concerning a further
hub in Sabha to support operations in the South of the
country and United Nations programmes have also now
visited Sabha for the first time since operations were
halted there in 2013.
In my previous briefings, I warned against the
consequences of the economy of predation. I am
encouraged by action taken to combat illegal smuggling.
On 7 February, the public prosecution issued over
100 arrest warrants against individuals accused of
involvement in smuggling and the illegal disposal of
fuel, and ordered the confiscation of 115 fuel stations.
This organized fuel smuggling amounts to more than
$750 million annually.
Overall, Libya’s infrastructure continues to
deteriorate at an alarming rate. Basic services, including
in health care, water and electricity, are eroding. The
situation of water production is particularly fragile.
With nearly four wells being disabled every month, the
western branch of the Great Man-Made River, which
is the primary supplier of water to the north-west, is in
imminent danger of collapse.
The 2019 humanitarian response plan for Libya
was launched on 5 February, seeking $202 million
to continue providing health care, protection, water
and shelter to more than half a million of the most
vulnerable people in Libya. An estimated 823,000
people, including migrants and 248,000 children, need
humanitarian assistance in Libya.
The situation of the economy is mixed. The
reopening of the Sharara oil field, in which the United
Nations played a crucial role, resulted in increased oil
production, which is returning to 1.2 million barrels per
day. The foreign currency exchange fee, in combination
with the liberalization of the opportunity to purchase
foreign currency, continues to generate revenue and
strengthen the dinar. This has increased purchasing
power and reduced inflation and the profitability of
the black market for currency. While important, these
benefits may be short-lived without genuine economic
reforms. Such reforms require a direct devaluation of
the currency and the lifting of subsidies, which consume

S/PV. 8488

nearly 10 per cent of the national budget. Working with
the two branches of the Central Bank of Libya, the
national audit review process will soon begin.
It is extremely positive that the Central Committee
for Municipal Council Elections will start a new round
of nine elections in the southern and western parts of
Libya on 30 March. In this context, it is essential that
there be only one body managing municipal elections.
The High National Election Commission is preparing
for national elections. We are pleased to see that the
Commission, with the help of the United Nations and
international partners, has finally now moved into
its secure new headquarters. It is now necessary for
the government to provide the necessary operational
funding for Commission to finalize preparations
for elections.
The Mission has been in steady contact with
a number of countries and regional organizations,
including the League of Arab States, the African Union
(AU) and the European Union. I joined the SecretaryGeneral at the African Union Summit and welcome the
AU’s interest in supporting the United Nations action
plan. I am grateful for the support expressed for our
efforts during the visit of Commissioner Chergui and
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo on 12 and 13 March.
The national conference will be held from 14 to
16 April inside Libya. It represents a critical opportunity
to end the transitional period, which began eight years
ago. Ahead of the national conference, we are working
with many parties to ensure as broad a buy-in as possible
to the political process. What is clear is that the Libyan
people fervently desire that their institutions be united
as soon as possible. Unfortunately, they are up against
powerful forces, which have materially profited from
the country’s chaos and division and are therefore loath
to work towards a unification.
There is much at stake. If the opportunity presented
by the national conference is not seized, then we will
be faced with only two possible options: prolonged
stalemate or conflict. This stalemate may also
ultimately lead to conflict or conflict may erupt much
sooner. A failure now to advance the political process
would demonstrate absolutely that the country is totally
controlled by force of arms. But today, we have the
ability to step back from the edge of this precipice.
The national conference offers a crucial
opportunity for all parties, without exception, to set
aside their differences for the good of the country, to

19-078943/7

S/PV.8488

The situation in Libya

unite, to avoid war and to choose the path of peace
and prosperity. The national conference will choose
whether to endorse the national charter, which is the
product of the national conference consultative process.
It will also chart a road map to conclude the transitional
period, either through simultaneous parliamentary and
presidential elections or through phased elections. It
will provide recommendations on how to deal with
the draft constitution produced by the Constitution
Drafting Assembly.
The days ahead will prove to be foundational to
the years ahead for Libyans and the region writ large.
I call on Libyans to come together and to avoid acts of
obstruction and incitement. There has been a notable
uptick in the weaponization of media platforms as tools
of incitement. This is tearing at Libya’s fragile but
vital social fabric and could well be used to instigate
violence. At this sensitive time, I call on all actors to
refrain from the use of inflammatory and alienating
rhetoric in the public sphere.
I also call on all in the international community
to put the interests of the Libyan people first and to
act committedly and sincerely to pressure all parties to
avoid conflict and conclude a peaceful formula to end
the transitional period in Libya, for the sake of all of the
Libyan people.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Salomé for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Schulz.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): In accordance with
paragraph 24 (e) of resolution 1970 (2011) of 26 February
2011, I have the honour to report to the Security
Council on the work of the Committee established
by the same resolution. The report covers the period
from 19 January 2019 to 20 March 2019. I would like
to highlight the following developments relating to the
work of the Committee.
First, with regard to the Panel of Experts, following
the adoption of resolution 2441 (2018), the SecretaryGeneral, on 2 January, appointed six individuals to
serve on the Panel. On 8 February, the Committee
held informal consultations and heard a briefing by
the Coordinator of the Panel of Experts on the Panel’s
work programme under resolution 2441 (2018). The
Panel briefed on its intended areas of focus in its
mandate, mainly the arms embargo, armed groups and
attempts at illicit exports of petroleum and the assets
4/7

20/03/2019

freeze. The presentation was followed by an interactive
discussion between Committee members and the Panel.
The Committee reiterated its support and appreciation
for the work of the Panel and encouraged the Panel to
intensify efforts to assist the Committee in carrying out
its mandate.
During the reporting period, the Committee
approved one request for exemption from the arms
embargo, under paragraph 9 (c) of resolution 1970 (2011),
submitted by Malta. The Committee further received,
and did not object to, two notifications for exemption
from the arms embargo, under paragraph 13 (b) of
resolution 2009 (2011), submitted by the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL). The Committee
also received one post-delivery notification from the
Kingdom of the Netherlands regarding a previously
approved exemption request. The consideration of
four additional requests, submitted by Libya under
paragraph 8 of resolution 2174 (2014), is ongoing. The
Committee is also considering a guidance request from
UNSMIL related to the arms embargo.
With regard to the assets freeze, the Committee
provided guidance to Lebanon about the implementation
of the relevant provisions. With respect to the travel
ban, the Committee approved one travel ban exemption
request pursuant to paragraph 16 (a) of resolution 1970
(2011) for Ms. Aisha Al-Qadhafi. The Committee
further approved one travel ban exemption extension
for Mr. Sayyid Mohammed Qadhaf Al-Dam. The
Committee also received preliminary information from
the Panel about a possible case of non-compliance with
the travel ban by a designated individual, who reportedly
travelled from Libya to Egypt through Tunisia.
During the reporting period, the Committee
also responded to a prior communication from Libya
regarding attempts to undertake illicit exports of
petroleum from Libya. With respect to the 1970
sanctions list, the Committee sought additional
identifying information from Libya regarding one
designated individual.
During the reporting period, the Committee
received one implementation report from the Kingdom
of Morocco, pursuant to paragraph 12 of resolution 2441
(2018). While recalling that the primary responsibility
for implementing the provisions of the sanctions regime
rests with member States, let me reassure the Council
that the Committee is committed to facilitating the
implementation of such measures.
19-07894

20/03/2019

The situation in Libya

Finally, I would like to recall my intention to
work proactively towards organizing a visit of the
Committee to all agreed areas of Libya, as mentioned
in the Committee’s 2018 annual report (S/2018/1176).
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Schulz
for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): I would like to begin by expressing
my appreciation to Mr. Ghassan Salamé, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL),
for his comprehensive briefing on the situation on the
ground and the work conducted by UNSMIL to address
the crisis. We admire his commitment to the complex
work of implementing the United Nations action plan
and encourage him to pursue his efforts. We wish him
every success in that endeavour and assure him that he
has my delegation’s full support.
We also thank Ambassador Schulz, in his capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, for his
briefing today.
Before I begin my statement proper, let me offer
our warm and full support to the people and the
Government of Libya in their current situation. As a
brotherly country, we hope that, with the help of the
African Union, the United Nations and the entire
international community, we will soon be able to find a
solution that restores peace to the Libyan people.
The crisis in Libya continues to raise serious concerns
in the Republic of Equatorial Guinea and throughout
the continent, as reiterated at the thirty-second summit
of the African Union, held in February. We appreciate
the fact that the situation in Libya remains unchanged
with respect to political instability and uncertainty, a
protracted fragile security and humanitarian situation,
cases of oil and weapons smuggling, along with the
movement of foreign fighters across porous borders.
The crisis has had serious consequences not only at
the national level but throughout the region. It has an
impact on other conflicts in Africa, which underscores
the urgent need for a stable and lasting political solution
in Libya that puts an end to the long transition process,
on the basis of a political agreement that guarantees the
rule of law and unified State institutions.

S/PV. 8488

After eight years of a conflict that will end only
through political solutions — various measures have
already been taken to resolve the situation although
the majority have been unsuccessful — perhaps it is
time to reflect and adopt a different approach. That is
why we welcome the initiative taken by African Union
Heads of State at the aforementioned thirty-second
summit, held in February. It is the African continent’s
duty to take the lead and join forces with the United
Nations to reach a definitive solution to the crisis in
Libya through negotiations that will allow presidential
and legislative elections to be held at the end of this
year and an inclusive national conference for peace and
reconciliation to be held during the first half of July
this year.
In addition, we welcome the visit of Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs, and Ambassador Smaïl
Chergui, African Union Commissioner for Peace and
Security, whose outcome is expected to be significant
in achieving a firm agreement aimed at improving the
political situation in Libya. We also eagerly await the
holding of the national conference, under the auspices
of UNSMIL, which we hope will allow us to begin a
process that will end with reconciliation as the basis for
progress towards a free, peaceful, unified, stable and
prosperous Libya.
In conclusion, we remain concerned about
humanitarian and human rights issues. We hope that,
sooner rather than later, a solution can be found for the
current situation.
Ms. Sabelo (South Africa): My delegation joins
others in thanking you, Sir, for convening today’s
meeting. Similarly, we thank Mr. Ghassan Salamé,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL), as well as Ambassador Juergen Schulz of
Germany, for their comprehensive briefings.
South Africa remains concerned about the
prevailing security situation in Libya, which continues
to gravely affect peace and security efforts in the
region. However, we are encouraged by the positive
steps taken by the Government of National Accord to
restore the rule of law in Libya and by the subsequent
adoption of the security plan for greater Tripoli. In our
view, that will contribute to improving the security
situation in Tripoli and, in the long term, create an
environment conducive to elections to take place.

19-078945/7

S/PV.8488

The situation in Libya

We particularly urge the parties to commit fully to
the ceasefire agreement reached in September 2018,
avoid any further escalation of violence and give peace
a chance.
South Africa fully supports the resolve of UNSMIL
to address the conflict in Libya and is also encouraged
by the international support for the implementation
of the United Nations action plan, which would
facilitate a national conference for reconciliation.
We also welcome the positive role being played by
the Libya quartet and urge neighbouring countries
to keep pushing for a negotiated settlement in Libya.
We support the ongoing efforts made by the African
Union (AU) through its Peace and Security Council
and the AU Ad Hoc High-level Committee on Libya,
under the leadership of President Sassou Nguesso. In
that regard, we look forward to a successful outcome of
the Committee meeting scheduled for 5 and 6 April in
Brazzaville. Additionally, we welcome the commitment
of the AU representatives for Libya as they continue
to engage with the main stakeholders in the country to
find a peaceful resolution.
On the humanitarian situation, we remain deeply
concerned about the deteriorating situation in Libya.
However, we welcome all the contributions that have
already been made towards the Stabilization Facility
for Libya and call for the additional funding needed for
the Libya humanitarian response plan for 2019.
South Africa also welcomes the work of the
Women’s Empowerment and Support Unit of the
Presidency Council to improve gender equality. We as
a country have experienced positive results in terms of
women participating in the peace process and therefore
view this progressive development as an imperative to
advance peace and security in Libya.
We wish to encourage the parties to the conflict
to find common ground and to reach agreement on the
outstanding constitutional amendments. This process
is critical to ensuring that political agreement can be
successfully implemented and that elections can be
held during the agreed period, and to ultimately putting
an end to the conflict and granting the wishes of the
Libyan people.
On sanctions, South Africa reiterates its support for
the work of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning
Libya, and we thank the Chair for his report. We are
convinced that a strong message should be sent to all
6/7

20/03/2019

individuals who are hampering the progress of the
political process in Libya. We believe, therefore, that
the strict implementation of the measures adopted by
the Security Council is crucial to dissuading the parties
involved. At the same time, South Africa believes that
sanctions should not be an end in and of themselves
but, rather, serve as a tool to create stability and build
an environment that is conducive to finding political
agreement for a lasting and durable peace.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Libya.
Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on the Franco-German co-presidency of the Council’s
work this month and to wish you every success. I also
thank Mr. Ghassan Salamé, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, for his briefing on the activities
of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL). I thank as well Ambassador Juergen Schulz,
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya,
for his briefing on the work and the activities of
the Committee.
My delegation appreciates all the efforts undertaken
by Mr. Salamé and certain sisterly and friendly
countries to urge stakeholders with influence in Libya
to participate in a political peaceful dialogue that is free
from violence. In that regard, I note the commitment of
the Government of National Accord to the democratic
process, whose aim is to establish the unification of
State institutions and to pave the way towards a civil,
democratic and modern State and ensure that there is
separation of powers.
The President of the Presidency Council of the
Government of National Accord met recently with
Libyan stakeholders to discuss ways of extricating the
country from the current crisis as well as to propose
consensual solutions that could be built upon during the
inclusive National Conference. In that regard, I wish to
stress that the solution is not owned by one stakeholder;
all Libyan stakeholders must be involved in order to
achieve the desired stability and hold presidential and
parliamentary elections by the end of the year on a solid
constitutional basis.
The Libyan people have pinned their hopes on
the inclusive national conference, overseen by the
United Nations, to break the impasse that has marred
the political process in Libya and to put an end to the
19-07894

20/03/2019

The situation in Libya

power struggle among the various Libyan stakeholders,
who must stop ignoring the sacrifices made by the
Libyans in order to establish a State that places the
supreme interest of its citizens at its very heart and
rejects policies of exclusion. These differences have
had a negative, even destructive impact on the process
of achieving stability and peace in Libya.
Those stakeholders are striving to advance their
parochial interests, forgetting the sacrifices made by
the Libyan people, who are seeking to live in peace
in a civil and democratic State, like other peoples of
the world who enjoy progress and prosperity. Those
stakeholders have for years been presenting pretexts
that can be interpreted only as attempts to maintain the
status quo, under which fear and terrorism reign. This is
undermining efforts to achieve national reconciliation
and build the State so long anticipated by the Libyan
people. We believe that free, fair and inclusive elections
are the only way to emerge from the crisis. Those who
are trying to undermine the efforts under way must
understand that power is not a reward but a national
mission subject to accountability. Those in power must
fight corruption and make tireless efforts to bring about
security, stability and prosperity in the country.
The Government of National Accord has been
making tremendous efforts to bring about economic
stability and security, but it is facing myriad difficulties
and challenges imposed by certain stakeholders in Libya
that do not hesitate to undermine those efforts. They
have launched media campaigns in order not to ease the
suffering of citizens but to create chaos, forgetting that
the Government of National Accord is the Government
of all the Libyan people alike and that it aspires to reach
a consensus that would lift the country out of the crisis.
Despite all these challenges, my country’s
Government has initiated economic and financial

S/PV. 8488

reforms that have yielded positive results. At the
security level, despite the difficult circumstances
plaguing the country, the Government is trying to
make changes through programmes carried out by
the Ministry of the Interior aimed at unifying and
strengthening security institutions throughout the
country in order for them to be able to discharge their
duties in a professional manner.
The Libyan Government has consistently supported
all efforts undertaken by the Libyan stakeholders to
restore stability and combat terrorist groups. In that
regard, we note the importance of cooperation and
coordination among all stakeholders throughout the
country in order to enable the State to provide the
services necessary to ensure security and to put an end
to practices of extortion, which are detrimental to vital
facilities and have cost the national economy hundreds
of millions of dollars.
In conclusion, my country’s delegation calls on
members of the international community and the
Security Council to set aside their differences, take
advantage of the current circumstances in Libya and
support the strenuous efforts made by Mr. Ghassan
Salamé, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, as well as the Libyan stakeholders, through
the holding of an inclusive national conference aimed
at reaching an agreement that would end intra-Libyan
discord and begin a new phase of total peace
throughout Libya.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

19-078947/7
