S/PV.4860

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
18 November 2003
Original: English

Official communiqué of the 4860th (closed) meeting of the
Security Council
Held in private at Headquarters, New York, on Tuesday,
18 November 2003, at 11 a.m.
In accordance with rule 55 of the provisional rules of procedure of the Security
Council, the following communiqué was issued through the Secretary-General in
place of a verbatim record:
“At its 4860th meeting, held in private on 18 November 2003, the
Security Council considered the item entitled ‘The situation in Guinea-Bissau’.
“In accordance with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, the President, with the consent of the Council, extended an
invitation under rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure to the
President of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau, His Excellency Mr. Henrique
Perreira Rosa.
“The President extended invitations under rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure to the President of the Economic and Social
Council (ECOSOC), His Excellency Mr. Gert Rosenthal; the representative of
the current Chairman of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), His Excellency Mr. Nana Effah-Apenteng; the representative of
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, His Excellency Mr.
Henrique Valle; the Chairman of the Ad hoc Advisory Group on GuineaBissau of ECOSOC, His Excellency Mr. Dumisani Kumalo; and the
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS), Mr. David Stephen.
“The Secretary-General, the President of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau,
members of the Security Council, the President of ECOSOC, the representative
of the current Chairman of ECOWAS, the representative of the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries, the Chairman of the Ad hoc Advisory Group
on Guinea-Bissau of ECOSOC and the Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of UNOGBIS had a constructive exchange of views.”

03-61856 (E)

181103

*
0
3
6
1
8
5
6
*
