A /67/PV.43

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Offi cial Records

Sixty-seventh session

43rd plenary meeting
Wednesday, 28 November 2012, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jeremić . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Serbia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Román-Morey
(Peru), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Agenda items 14, 113 and 119 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation of
and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
(a) Notes by the Secretary-General (A/67/82 and
A/67/270)
(b) Draft resolution (A/67/L.25)
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
(a) Reports of the Secretary-General (A/67/201
and A/67/257)
(b) Note by the Secretary-General (A/67/373)
United Nations reform: measures and proposals
Mr. Och (Mongolia): First of all, I wish to extend my
delegation’s great appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his annual report (A/67/257) entitled “Accelerating
progress towards the Millennium Development Goals”.
I believe that our discussions, based on a thorough and
comprehensive review and assessment of what has been
achieved and which goals remain out of reach, will
provoke new ideas on how we can scale up our efforts
towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs) and implementing other outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits.

As we can see from the report, the international
community should undertake targeted and scaledup action to alleviate the burden of those in need and
should promptly implement all commitments under the
global partnership for development in order to support
national efforts, in particular commitments in the areas
of aid, trade, debt relief and access to new technologies.
According to the Secretary-General’s report, that means
that official development assistance flows will have
to be more than doubled in order to meet the United
Nations target of 0.7 per cent.
We need to be innovative and find ways to
do more with limited resources. In our efforts to
accelerate progress towards the MDGs, we need to
take into account the results of surveys and studies
undertaken by various United Nations agencies and
research centres. In that connection, according to a
report launched this year by the United Nations Fund
for Population Activities — State of World Population
2012 — ensuring the availability of voluntary family
planning to everyone in developing countries would
reduce the costs for maternal and newborn health care
by $11.3 billion annually. The report also emphasizes
that family planning is more than merely an economic
issue and is connected to human rights and access to
education. It also estimates that 3 million fewer babies
would die in their first year of life if 120 million more
women had access to family planning.
My delegation also wishes to express its gratitude to
the Director-General of the World Health Organization
(WHO) for the report contained in document A/67/373,
which was prepared and submitted for consideration

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

12-61412 (E)

*1261412*

A/67/PV.43

under the agenda item entitled “Follow-up to the
outcome of the Millennium Summit”. That report
states that non-communicable diseases threaten the
population and fiscal health of all nations, and that
greater action in all countries and by all stakeholders
therefore remains imperative. The outcome document of
the Rio+20 United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development, entitled “The future we want”
(A/CONF.216/16), also acknowledges that the global
burden of non-communicable diseases constitutes one
of the major challenges for development today.
It is obvious that the primary role in, and
responsibility for, responding to the challenge of
non-communicable diseases resides with national
Governments. But the complexity of the challenges
posed by such diseases calls for actions of a multisectoral
nature and for multi-stakeholder partnerships beyond
Governments. My delegation therefore believes
that the five models for global partnerships against
non-communicable diseases proposed in the report
should be given due consideration.
The report provides interesting examples of
cross-sectoral Government engagement to reduce the
risk factors for non-communicable diseases, which
are tobacco use, physical inactivity, alcohol abuse
and an unhealthy diet. According to the report, a
survey conducted by WHO in 2010 found that 86 per
cent of countries have some form of partnerships or
collaborations for implementing key activities. Eightythree per cent of countries address tobacco use, 81 per
cent address diabetes, 77 per cent address unhealthy
diet, 77 per cent address cancer and 75 per cent address
physical inactivity.
In Mongolia, particular efforts are also being made
to reduce the risks of alcohol abuse, which has serious
implications for our country and the health of future
generations. It has become one of the major factors
contributing to accidents, traffic injuries, crime,
violence and unemployment. Studies in Mongolia
have shown that alcohol abuse is also associated with
poverty. Our efforts in that regard include, among
others, the nationwide promotion of public education
against alcohol consumption and an increase in the
taxes on alcohol. In 2011, the President of Mongolia
issued an appeal calling for abstention from alcohol,
which received wide support from the Government, the
private health sector and civil society organizations.
I would like to inform this body that, last year,
during the High-level Meeting on the prevention and
2

control of non-communicable diseases, Mongolia
put forward an idea for developing an international
convention on the control of alcohol consumption,
similar to the WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco
Control. We earnestly hope that that idea will receive
due consideration within the framework of WHO
in the coming years. My Government remains fully
committed to cooperating on that matter.
While accelerating our efforts towards achieving
all of the MDGs worldwide, we must also work on the
United Nations development agenda beyond 2015. My
delegation highly appreciates the steps undertaken by
the Secretary-General in that regard. We believe that
the work of the United Nations System Task Team on
that topic greatly contributes to the ongoing processes
of consultation at various levels.
Four interconnected core dimensions proposed by
the Task Team can serve as the basis for the definition
of the goals and targets of future agendas. To support
the implementation of the agenda, as the SecretaryGeneral highlighted in his report, the global partnership
for development would need to be strengthened as a
responsibility shared by all countries and involving
all stakeholders through a well-defined accountability
framework. We also look forward to the report of the
High-Level Panel of Eminent Persons on the topic in
2013.
Furthermore, we believe that greener and more
sustainable economic development should be adequately
reflected in the post-2015 development agenda in order
to address the widely shared need to work towards
a single unified global development agenda with
sustainable development at its core. We also support
the observation that we should have an inclusive,
open and transparent process with multi-stakeholder
participation through national, regional and global
forums, other intergovernmental processes and special
General Assembly meetings on development. In that
respect, we are looking forward with great expectation
to the outcome of a special event to be convened during
the sixty-eighth session of the General Assembly in
September 2013.
Our national implementation of the MDGs has
been evidenced by our fourth national report, which
noted that 77.9 per cent of the targets had been met, thus
providing a positive effect on the nation’s development.
Unfortunately, regression has been seen in terms
of some of the targets, and it is expected that some will

12-61412

A/67/PV.43

not be met if the current pace continues. Those targets
include MDG 1, on halving poverty, and MDG 7, on
ensuring environmental sustainability and eliminating
pollution, which have become issues of concern for
every Mongolian. That calls for stepped-up national
action and a greater focus on multilateral partnership.
Furthermore, the implementation of our MDGs-based
comprehensive national development strategy up to
2021 is expected to lay the foundation for strengthened,
inclusive, equitable and sustainable development in
Mongolia beyond 2015.
In conclusion, may I reiterate my delegation’s strong
resolve to work together with fellow Member States
towards strengthening the United Nations system, so
that it remains an effective centre for advancing the
development agenda around the world in the years to
come.
Mr. Wangchuk (Bhutan): I shall confine my
comments to agenda item 14, entitled “Integrated and
coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the
outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and
summits in the economic, social and related fields”, and
the follow-up to resolution 65/309.
The fundamental goal of every person is to lead
a fulfilling, meaningful and happy life is. In fact,
that is what makes us human. It was therefore fitting
that, on 19 July 2011, through the unanimous adoption
of resolution 65/309, entitled “Happiness: towards a
holistic approach to development”, this body resolved
that it was time to accept well-being and happiness
as a fundamental and universal goal that binds all
of humankind with a common vision and the quest
for a holistic, sustainable and inclusive approach to
development.
A few months ago, the General Assembly also
declared 20 March as the International Day of Happiness
(resolution 66/281). That day is an opportunity for
humankind to celebrate every precious component
that makes life worth living and to strive for genuine
happiness.
Mandated by resolution 65/309, Bhutan was
honoured to host a meeting on 2 April, at United Nations
Headquarters, on the theme “Happiness and well-being:
defining a new economic paradigm”. The meeting was a
gathering of 800 extraordinary minds, including world
leaders, members of academia and concerned citizens,
moved by the urgent need for change to a global path
that focuses more on human well-being and happiness.

12-61412

Pursuant to the recommendation of that meeting,
His Majesty King Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck
established an international expert working group,
made up of 50 thought leaders of the world. They have
been given the crucial responsibility of elaborating the
details of the proposed new development approach in
the coming two years. Simultaneously, His Majesty the
King also appointed a national steering committee to
guide and support the process.
The working group will elaborate and refi ne the four
themes, namely, well-being and happiness, ecological
sustainability, fair distribution and the efficient use
of resources. It will prepare a detailed report on how
the new development approach can work in practice. It
will also explore accounting and assessment systems,
regulatory and financial mechanisms, and trade,
governance and institutional arrangements. We believe
that the findings will complement and contribute to
the current efforts of the Secretary-General’s Highlevel Panel of Eminent Persons and the open working
group on sustainable development goals and the United
Nations post-2015 development agenda.
We welcome with appreciation the note of the
Secretary-General on the pursuit of well-being and
happiness, which is available via the website of the
Department of Economic and Social Affairs. We
are greatly encouraged by the number of initiatives
undertaken by Member States and international
organizations.
Bhutan remains fully committed to the promotion
of a sustainable and progressive human civilization
within a peaceful and secure environment. To advance
that endeavour, Bhutan is prepared to further share its
experience and modest development achievements.
In that regard, Bhutan would like to initiate a draft
procedural resolution on well-being and happiness
in the plenary of the sixty-seventh session of the
General Assembly. The draft resolution will pursue the
allocation of a new agenda sub-item on the topic under
sustainable development. We seek the valuable support
of the Assembly in adopting a consensus resolution to
better capture the importance of the universal goal of
every human being, namely, the pursuit of well-being
and happiness.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I take the floor to
speak on the report of the Secretary-General contained
in document A/67/201. At the outset, I would like to
thank the Secretary-General and to compliment him

3

A/67/PV.43

for his extremely informative and well analysed report
on strengthening the institutional arrangements for the
support of gender equality and the empowerment of
women.
When we established the edifice of the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), last year,
through resolution 64/289, we had envisaged it to be
an ambitious, results-oriented and dynamic entity
advancing the cause of gender equality and women’s
empowerment globally. Today, as we near the second
operational year of UN-Women, my delegation is happy
to note the significant milestones that the entity has
achieved under the dynamic leadership of Ms. Bachelet,
in such a short span of time.
The ways in which UN-Women has been able to
influence policy narratives across the globe, whether on
issues such as women’s rights in developing countries,
services for gender-based violence survivors in the
occupied Palestinian territory, or in championing the
rights of indigenous women in Ecuador, have certainly
achieved small, yet significant, milestones in a brief but
important journey.
In the South Asia region, UN-Women’s work
in areas ranging from political participation and
leadership, economic empowerment, ending violence
against women and gender responsive annual budgeting
has been enabling critical factors in terms of shaping
national policy narratives.
In that regard, allow me to place on record the
sincerest appreciation for UN-Women of my nodal
Ministry, namely, the Ministry of Women and
Child Development, for their active partnership and
constructive advice in the working group on our twelfth
plan’s chapter on women’s agency and empowerment.
Its agenda of making gender equality a lived reality
finds resonance in the overall policy approach of
the Government of India. That agenda has also been
outlined in the twelfth five-year plan of my country.
UN-Women, in partnership with the Government
of India, has enabled more than half a million elected
women representatives in five States of India to realize
their rights and develop their leadership skills through
the Promoting Women’s Political Leadership and
Governance in India and South Asia programme. By
the end of this year, nearly 365 million Indian women
will have been empowered by the programme, which
is designed to build the capacity of those women.

4

They are now equipped with the knowledge and skills
to participate in local governance. UN-Women’s
programme on the Dalit Women’s Livelihood
Accountability Initiative has been assessed as highly
effective in increasing women’s access to entitlements
provided as part of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
Employment Guarantee Act and in securing livelihoods
for many underprivileged families.
In the field of political empowerment, in States with
the largest proportion of women in the population, such
as Bihar and Orissa, UN-Women has helped women
candidates to file nominations and manage electoral
campaigns in local Panchayat elections through a
campaign assisted by civil society partners.
In terms of macropolicy partnerships within the
Government, support from UN-Women to the Gender
Responsive Budgeting initiative of the Ministry
of Women and Child Development has also helped
various ministries develop in-house expertise. Through
UN-Women’s training programmes and continuous
interaction, more than 500 Government counterparts
have been trained in gender budgeting.
As we draw close to the end of the second
operational year of UN-Women, my delegation is
satisfied to note the progress achieved by that entity as
it scales up its operations and embarks on the pursuit
of its mandate. While we are fully conscious that the
task at hand is enormous, my delegation is encouraged
by the progress made in reinstating the leading role of
the United Nations in pursuing gender equality and the
empowerment of women under the able leadership of
Ms. Michelle Bachelet.
India is home to more than 500 million women,
and we are firmly convinced that ensuring the rightful
place of women in society is not only a moral imperative
but also an essential prerequisite for achieving peace,
prosperity and sustainable development.
Our well-recognized success in the political
empowerment of women is transforming the traditional
and entrenched power dynamic in both rural and urban
India. Women are finding their rightful place in all
walks of professional and political life, ranging from
the highest echelons of the corporate empire to the
Government bureaucracy. They occupy the highest
offices in India, including, at present, those of the
Speaker of the lower house of Parliament and the leader
of the opposition and, until a few months back, the Office
of the President of India. More importantly, today,

12-61412

A/67/PV.43

more than 1 million women serve on local Government
bodies, where they exercise decision-making authority
on an almost daily basis.
Let me conclude by reaffirming India’s steadfast
commitment to the global, regional and national
efforts to achieve gender equality, the empowerment
of women and gender mainstreaming, as outlined in
the Secretary-General’s report. We assure members
that India will not be found wanting in support and
cooperation in realizing the shared vision that Member
States envisaged in the creation of UN-Women.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): In
accordance with resolution 57/32, of 19 November 2002,
I now call on the observer of the Inter-Parliamentary
Union.
Mr. Johnsson (Inter-Parliamentary Union): I take
the floor to speak on agenda item 113, on the followup to the outcome of the Millennium Summit. When
the Millennium Declaration (resolution 55/2) was
adopted in 2000, it was greeted with great hope. An
important highlight was, of course, the establishment
of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) as a set
of commitments that all countries could realistically
achieve within the span of 15 years.
With only three years left until the target date for
the implementation of the MDGs, the record is mixed.
Globally, some of the Goals appear to be on track but
the picture becomes less clear the moment we look at
the individual scorecards of most countries. With only
a short time left before 2015, we cannot afford to waste
a day. We must all collectively continue to work hard to
fill significant gaps.
For several years now, the Inter-Parliamentary
Union (IPU) has helped raise awareness of the MDGs
among parliamentarians. We have done that through
a number of debates and resolutions that provide a
consensus approach to the various Goals. We have
also achieved that by helping parliaments strengthen
their capacities to oversee Government action, adopt
enabling legislation and make budgetary decisions that
are in alignment with the development priorities of
each country.
While recognizing that all of the Goals are
important, we have chosen to focus particularly on the
health-related Goals, that is, those on maternal and
child mortality and HIV/AIDS, which, in our view,
play a key role in removing a number of significant

12-61412

obstacles. In support of Goal 3, on gender equality
and women’s empowerment, we continue to invest
considerable resources in promoting the participation
of women in politics. We are also working to strengthen
development cooperation as a key to the realization of
the MDGs and, indeed, of the development agenda as a
whole. That can be seen, for instance, in our very active
engagement within the Development Cooperation
Forum and, more recently, in the Busan Partnership for
Effective Development Cooperation.
Finally, and most critically, we have been working
to evaluate some of the institutional mechanisms, such
as parliamentary committees or caucuses, which may
help parliaments organize their work around the MDGs
through their key functions of oversight, legislation
and representation. In many of those activities, we
have enjoyed a good partnership with the United
Nations, particularly the United Nations Development
Programme and its Millennium Campaign.
While acceleration towards achieving the MDGs
must remain our primary obligation at this critical
junction, it is also important to take stock of lessons
that we should have learned by now as the international
community begins to chart a new post-2015
development framework. From the IPU perspective,
the most important lesson has been that of ensuring
the early involvement of parliaments in the shaping of
development goals. That is critical in order to ensure
national ownership and accountability across the board
and will, eventually, also help support implementation
through the whole legislative process. That is why
we are very pleased to see that the resolution adopted
in June on interaction between the United Nations,
national parliaments and the IPU contains a clear
reference to encouraging parliaments to contribute to
the design of the next generation of development goals
(resolution 66/261).
In order to deliver on that call, the IPU has begun
to work with parliaments to facilitate their involvement
in the post-2015 development consultations now
under way, both globally and at the country level. We
welcome the Secretary-General’s High-level Panel of
Eminent Persons, which has already begun its work,
as well as the open working group that is tasked with
focusing specifically on a new generation of sustainable
development goals. Pursuant to both of those processes,
we are planning a series of consultations with
parliamentarians that will, hopefully, inject a strong
parliamentary perspective into the deliberations.

5

A/67/PV.43

Among other things, the IPU is working with
the Millennium Campaign and other United Nations
partners at the regional and the subregional levels to
help gather the views of parliaments, with due regard
for regional particularities. Consultations have already
taken place in Africa and are under way in Asia. Another
important building block in the process is the 128th IPU
Assembly, to be held in Ecuador in March of next year
and whose theme will be rethinking the development
model in terms of well-being, rather than in terms of
economic growth alone. Again, in cooperation with
our United Nations partners, we will use the Assembly
in Quito to compile a survey of parliamentarians and
to discuss specific aspects of the future development
framework at various moments during the general
debate, as well as through a specialized workshop.
Meanwhile, we are looking for practical ways to engage
parliamentarians in the national consultations that are
expected to take place by the end of next March, as well
as in a number of electronic consultations that are in
the pipeline at various United Nations sites. All of those
efforts will culminate in next year’s joint parliamentary
hearing at the United Nations, here in New York, where
parliamentarians from around the world will review the
concrete proposals that are expected to emerge from
the various United Nations processes.
As with Governments, the views of parliamentarians
on the contents of a post-2015 development agenda
can be expected to range widely both in scope and
in direction. However, some issues have already
arisen in our discussions, namely, the central roles of
democracy and development cooperation. The problem
of development is not only economic but also political.
Unequal access to and participation in decision-making,
which often flows out of an unequal distribution of
incomes and wealth, confrontational politics where
the winner takes all, and other such imbalances, are
the root caused of many development failures. Because
democratic governance must underpin all areas of
development policy, it must also then find expression in
the future sustainable development goals with clearly
defined indicators or objectives. We propose to come
back to the General Assembly at a future date with
some suggestions as to how that can be done.
Equally important, the post-2015 development
framework will have to be accompanied by a clear
commitment to financing. Just as the MDGs have
been handicapped by financing of both poor quality
and insufficient quantity, the success of the future

6

sustainable development goals will depend in part on
the formulation of a successor goal to current MDG 8,
on developing a global partnership for development.
The new goal, however formulated, will of course
need to reflect the current landscape of development
cooperation, with its multiplicity of public and private
actors and corresponding flows.
In conclusion, the next three years will be decisive,
not only for the implementation of the current MDGs as
a key platform of the original Millennium Declaration
but also for the definition of a common vision of the
future. As it became most evident at the Rio Conference
on Sustainable Development last June, the world
community is at a turning point in more ways than one,
and strong leadership will be required as we approach
some very difficult decisions. The Assembly can rest
assured of the support of the IPU in the journey ahead.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): In
accordance with General Assembly resolution 58/83 of
9 December 2003, I now call on the observer for the
International Institute for Democracy and Electoral
Assistance.
Mr. Tommasoli (International Institute for
Democracy and Electoral Assistance): The International
Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance
(International IDEA) commends Mongolia for the
leadership role that it has played in the promotion of
the draft resolution on education for development
(A/67/L.25), and welcomes the consideration of
the draft resolution and its adoption. We strongly
support the draft resolution’s encouragement of the
integration of education for democracy into national
education standards and the development of national
and subnational programmes through both curricular
and extracurricular activities. Furthermore, given the
mobility of students, existing regional institutional
education frameworks and the limited harmonization
of curricula, cooperation and collaboration in the field
of education for democracy at the regional level should
also be strengthened.
There is solid evidence that doing so can contribute
to citizens’ empowerment and their participation
in political life and policymaking at all levels. Our
experience, as well as the work of many United Nations
funds, agencies and programmes, and other international
organizations, shows that investing in education is
important for both democracy and development. It
is possibly the most effective way of simultaneously

12-61412

A/67/PV.43

generating impacts on human development and the
consolidation of democratic institutions and processes.
The truth of that assertion can be seen from two
different and interlinked perspectives: the right to
education and the transformative power of education
for the development of democratic governance.
As regards the first perspective, any democratic
constitution enshrines and guarantees the right
to education. That is a fundamental issue for the
assessment of whether economic and social rights are
equally guaranteed for all. For example, the state-ofdemocracy assessment methodology developed by
International IDEA and applied by citizens groups and
organizations in over 20 countries, contains a question
on how extensive and inclusive the right to education,
including education in the rights and responsibilities of
citizenship, is in a given country. As witnessed by the
debates on the constitutional reforms accompanying
political transitions, not least in the Arab region, the
constitutional dimension of the right to education is
one of the most important issues addressed. It has a
direct impact on an inclusive concept of citizenship,
especially in relation to gender equality.
The second perspective — the transformative power
of education for democracy — is particularly important
for democracy-building and democracy assistance. In
the electoral field it has a direct impact on democratic
values, practices and behaviours. In fact, education
for democracy is directly linked to voter education
and therefore contributes to one of most visible and
traditional forms of democratic participation. But
it is equally important in other areas of democracybuilding, like parliamentary support and political
party development. In fact, education for democracy
and the consolidation of a democratic constitutional
culture shape the institutions and the substance of
democratic dialogue among political stakeholders. It
should ultimately contribute to effective legislative and
executive action within the framework of democratic
accountability.
International IDEA, in partnership with the United
Nations and other international actors, has developed
a global training curriculum on electoral processes,
known as Building Resources for Democracy,
Governance and Elections (BRIDGE), which is widely
used in political transitions for training election
administrators using adult education techniques. It is
no coincidence that one of the key modules of BRIDGE
focuses on civic education, covering such areas as the

12-61412

rationale for citizen participation in the democratic
processes; strategies for increasing the participation
of key stakeholder groups and beneficiaries, including
youth, media, women, and people with disabilities; and
techniques for identifying the different educational
needs of all stakeholders in civic education processes
by considering both community-based and schoolbased civic education. That example underscores
the importance of adult education alongside formal
education for the attainment of the objectives set in the
resolution that is being considered today. Education for
democracy is, in fact, a lifelong endeavour.
In conclusion, International IDEA welcomes the
recognition by the draft resolution that education is
key to the strengthening of democratic institutions, the
realization of human rights and the achievement of all
international goals, including the MDGs. In the MDG
context, education is an enabler at many levels. At the
same time, education is also one of the goals of the MDG
framework, with specific indicators and targets, and a
crucial factor for the consolidation and development of
democratic institutions and the achievement of the other
MDGs. International IDEA thinks that the interlinkages
between education, democratic institutions and the
MDGs should be further stressed in the ongoing policy
debates regarding the post-2015 development agenda.
International IDEA stands committed to
strengthening its partnership with the United Nations
to promote education for democracy.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
General Assembly will now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/67/L.25, entitled “Education for
democracy”.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): In connection with
draft resolution A/67/L.25, entitled “Education for
democracy”, I wish to put on record the following
statement of financial implications on behalf of the
Secretary-General, in accordance with rule 153 of the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly.
In paragraphs 7 and 9 of the draft resolution, the
General Assembly would invite the United Nations
Special Rapporteur on the right to education to
seek, in close cooperation with Member States, the
views of Governments, United Nations agencies

7

A/67/PV.43

and programmes, civil society and other relevant
United Nations mandate holders, in order to consider
including, in his next report to the General Assembly
at its sixty-ninth session, an update on Member States’
efforts in the field of education for democracy; and
invite Governments, agencies and organizations of
the United Nations system, and intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations, to intensify
their efforts to promote education for democracy;
and request the Secretary-General, within existing
reporting obligations, to report to the General Assembly
at its sixty-ninth session on the implementation of the
present resolution.
The request for documentation contained in
paragraphs 7 and 9 will constitute an addition to the
documentation workload of the Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management corresponding
to an estimated amount of $113,200, which would be
included in the proposed programme budget for the
biennium 2014-2015. Hence the adoption of the draft
resolution contained in document A/67/L.25 would
not entail any additional appropriation under the
programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/67/L.25.

8

I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to those delegations listed in document
A/67/L.25, the following countries have also become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Austria, Belgium,
Costa Rica, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, France, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Latvia,
Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Nigeria, Norway, Peru,
the Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova, San
Marino, Serbia, Slovenia, Thailand, Tunisia and Turkey.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): May
I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/67/L.25?
Draft resolution A/67/L.25 was adopted (resolution
67/18).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish):
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda items 14, 113 and 119.
The meeting rose at 3.55 p.m.

12-61412
