S/2021/1047

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 December 2021
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolution 2334 (2016)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is the twentieth quarterly report on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 2334 (2016). The reporting period is from 29 September
to 9 December 2021.

II. Settlement activities
2.
In its resolution 2334 (2016), the Security Council reaffirmed that the
establishment by Israel of settlements in the Palestinian territory occupied since 1967,
including East Jerusalem, had no legal validity and constituted a flagrant violation
under international law and a major obstacle to the achievement of the two -State
solution and a just, lasting and comprehensive peace. In th e same resolution, the
Council reiterated its demand that Israel immediately and completely cease all
settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem,
and that it fully respect all of its legal obligations in that rega rd. No such steps were
taken during the reporting period.
3.
On 4 and 18 October and 8 November, the Civil Administration of Israel held
discussions on objections to two settlement housing plans for a total of nearly 3,500
units in the strategic E1 area in the occupied West Bank. If the objections are rejected,
the plans will be two steps short of final approval. If implemented, the plans would
sever the connection between the northern and southern parts of the occupied West
Bank, hindering the possibility of establishing a viable and contiguous Palestinian
State.
4.
In mid-October, construction of a new residential compound in the Jewish
settlement in Hebron began. The project, totalling 31 housing units, was approved
and budgeted by previous Governments of Israel and is the first new construction
project in the settlement in over a decade.
5.
On 24 October, the Israel Land Authority announced tenders for some 1,350
settlement housing units. About half are in the settlement of Ari’el, at the heart of the
northern West Bank, and would significantly expand the built-up residential area
westwards, with serious implications for future Palestinian development in the area.
The announcement included the reissuance of tenders from January for some 80 units
in the settlement of Giv‘at Hamatos in occupied East Jerusalem. Construction in this

21-19017 (E)

221221

*2119017*

S/2021/1047

area would further consolidate the ring of settlements, potentially severing the link
between East Jerusalem and Bethlehem.
6.
On 27 October, the High Planning Committee of Israel advanced plans for 3,100
housing units in Area C, some located in outlying settlements, including 600 units in
Eli, 300 in Bracha and 200 in Talmon in the West Bank.
7.
On 28 October and 1 November, Israeli authorities advanced plans for 6,000
housing units for Palestinians in the occupied East Jerusalem neighbourhood of
Issawiya and 1,300 housing units for Palestinians in Area C.
8.
At a session held on 6 December, the Jerusalem District Planning Committee
discussed a controversial plan for some 9,000 housing units in Atarut, near Qalandiya,
between Jerusalem and Ramallah. Following the session, during which
representatives from several government ministries presented opposing views on the
plan, the Committee stated that, while the plan would utilize unuse d land reserves in
an appropriate manner, it could not be advanced before the completion of an
environmental impact survey, which is expected to delay the advancement process by
roughly one year.
9.
During the reporting period, demolitions and seizures of Palestinian-owned
structures continued across the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem. Citing
the absence of Israeli-issued building permits, which remain almost impossible for
Palestinians to obtain, Israeli authorities demolished, seized or forc ed people to
demolish 166 structures, resulting in the displacement of 106 people, including 44
children and 34 women, and leaving 5,495 others affected.
10. A total of 56 per cent of the structures were demolished or seized with no or
very short prior notice based on military order 1797, which authorizes an expedited
process for the demolition of unauthorized “new structures” in Area C and gives
owners 96 hours to demonstrate possession of a valid building permit. Another 20
structures were demolished by their owners following receipt of demolition orders. A
total of 30 structures demolished or seized were donor-funded.
11. On 29 September, the High Court of Justice of Israel granted a request by the
State of Israel to postpone to March 2022 its response to a petition to implement
eviction orders against the Bedouin village of Khan al-Ahmar in Area C. In the
request, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and the “current diplomaticsecurity situation” were cited as reasons for the postponement, and it was added that
there had been “significant progress” towards an agreement to avoid demolition.
12. On 25 October, in Hammat al-Maleh, in the northern Jordan Valley, Israeli
authorities confiscated structures, including a classroom and a medical clinic ser ving
five adjacent Bedouin and herder communities. Some 50 children were affected.
13. Overall, in occupied East Jerusalem, at least 218 Palestinian households
comprising 970 people, including 278 women and 424 children, are subject to eviction
cases in Israeli courts. Most cases were initiated by Israeli settler organizations and
are based on the application of Israeli laws that allow for properties in East Jerusalem
that were owned by Jews prior to 1948 to be reclaimed. No similar law allows
Palestinians to reclaim their property in Israel.
14. On 4 October, the Supreme Court of Israel presented a proposal to four
Palestinian families who were seeking to appeal a lower court ruling authorizing their
eviction from their homes in the East Jerusalem neighbourhood of Shaykh Jarrah. The
proposal would postpone their eviction, while requiring them to pay nominal annual
rent to the settler corporation seeking to evict them. The Court specified that the
agreement would not prejudge ongoing legal proceedings to dete rmine ownership of
the properties, but until a legal determination is made, the Palestinians would be
2/12

21-19017

S/2021/1047

recognized as protected tenants and the settlers as owners of the plots. The four
families rejected the Court’s proposal on 2 November, while the settler corporation
also reportedly raised reservations. The Court had previously announced that, if the
parties did not accept its proposal, it would issue a ruling on the pending appeal of
the Palestinian families.
15. On 28 November, the Jerusalem District Court rejected an appeal against the
demolition orders issued against 58 homes, affecting around 500 people, in the Silwan
neighbourhood of East Jerusalem, placing them at risk of demolition and eviction.

III. Violence against civilians, including acts of terror
16. In its resolution 2334 (2016), the Security Council called for immediate steps to
prevent all acts of violence against civilians, including acts of terror, as well as all
acts of provocation and destruction, called for accountability in that regard and called
for compliance with obligations under international law for the strengthening of
ongoing efforts to combat terrorism, including through existing security coordination,
and to clearly condemn all acts of terrorism.
17. The reporting period was characterized by daily violence throughout the
occupied Palestinian territory, including clashes between Palestinians and Israeli
security forces, high levels of settler-related violence, attacks and alleged attacks by
Palestinians against Israelis and the use of lethal force by Israeli security forces
against Palestinians.
18. Overall, throughout the reporting period, 10 Palestinians, including one woman
and 4 children, were killed by Israeli security forces during demonstrations, clashes,
search-and-arrest operations and other incidents across the occupied Palestinian
territory, and 1,085 Palestinians, including five women and 141 children, were
injured, including 16 by live ammunition and 830 by tear gas. In addition, 34
Palestinians were injured by Israeli settlers or other civilians, who also perpetrated
104 attacks resulting in damage to Palestinian property. In total, 1 Israeli civilian was
killed and 31 Israelis – 26 civilians and five members of Israeli security forces – were
injured by Palestinians in clashes, shooting, stabbing and ramming attacks, as well as
incidents involving the throwing of stones and Molotov cocktails and other incidents.
19. Israeli forces conducted 114 search-and-arrest operations, resulting in 510
Palestinians arrested, including 36 children. Many children reported ill -treatment and
breaches of due process by Israeli forces while in detention, with some reporting
physical violence. On 23 November, the Israel Security Agency announced that it had
exposed a network of some 50 Hamas operatives in the West Bank who, according to
the Israeli authorities, were preparing attacks against Israelis.
20. Near nightly confrontations between Palestinians and Israeli security forces and
Israeli civilians, including settlers, occurred around Damascus Gate in October, as
Israeli forces fired tear gas canisters, stun grenades, rubber bullets and skunk water,
while Palestinians threw stones and other objects. Some 64 of the tota l Palestinian
injuries over the reporting period occurred in the context of these events. On
9 October alone, 17 Palestinians were injured by rubber-coated bullets and stun
grenades fired by Israeli forces, while one Israeli police officer and one Israeli child
were injured by stone-throwing.
21. Across the occupied West Bank, clashes between Israeli forces and Palestinians
continued. On 5 November, a 13-year-old Palestinian child from Nablus was shot and
killed by Israeli forces during a clash near the Elon More settlement, east of Nablus.
About 842 Palestinians were injured, including 1 by live ammunition, 133 by rubber coated metal bullets and 708 by tear gas, in clashes that took place during the weekly
21-19017

3/12

S/2021/1047

demonstrations against settlements in and around Bayta and Bayt Dajan in Nablus
Governorate, and Kafr Qaddum, near Qalqiliyah.
22. On 30 September in the Old City of Jerusalem, a Palestinian woman allegedly
tried to stab Israeli police officers, who shot and killed her. On the same day, Israeli
forces shot and killed a Palestinian man in the village of Birqin in the northern West
Bank. Israeli forces said that the man had fired at Israeli soldiers as they were
conducting an arrest operation. Palestinian Islamic Jihad claimed him as one of their
members.
23. On 14 October, Israeli forces shot and killed a 14-year-old Palestinian boy and
wounded another after they allegedly threw Molotov cocktails at civilian vehicles
west of Bethlehem. On the same day, a Palestinian man drove his vehicle into an
Israeli soldier and injured him near the Qalandiya checkpoint. Israeli forces fired on
the vehicle and injured and arrested the driver.
24. On 16 November, Israeli forces shot and killed a Palestinian man during a search
operation and subsequent clashes in Tubas. Israeli authorities stated that Palestinians
had fired shots and thrown an improvised explosive device towards Israeli soldiers,
who had returned fire. Palestinian Islamic Jihad claimed the man as one of its
members.
25. On 17 November, a 16-year-old Palestinian stabbed and injured two Israeli
security forces personnel in the Old City of Jerusalem. He was subsequently shot –
first by an Israeli civilian, believed to be a settler, and then by Israeli security forces –
and killed. According to eyewitness accounts, the perpetrator was being restrained by
the Israeli security forces when he was first shot by the civilian, while Israeli police
stated that they were struggling with the boy when he was shot. The civilian has not
been arrested.
26. On 21 November, a Palestinian man shot and killed an Israeli civilian and
injured two others in the Old City of Jerusalem. Israeli forces killed the attacker. Two
Israeli security personnel were also lightly injured in the incident. Hamas claimed the
attacker as a member of its political wing.
27. On 4 December, a Palestinian man attacked an Israeli civilian and a police
officer with a knife in the Old City of Jerusalem and was killed after being shot
multiple times by Israeli security forces. Footage shows the man being shot and
subdued on the ground before Israeli forces shot him twice again, apparently killing
him.
28. On 6 December, a 15-year-old Palestinian boy reportedly carried out a carramming attack against Israeli security forces at the Jubara checkpoint near Tulkar m
and was subsequently shot and killed by the security forces. An Israeli security forces
officer was seriously injured in the incident.
29. On 8 December, a 14-year-old Palestinian girl reportedly stabbed and injured an
Israeli civilian woman in the Shaykh Jarrah neighbourhood of East Jerusalem. The
girl and her female friend were arrested and are currently in detention. Both have
denied all charges.
30. Settler violence and violence between Palestinians and Israeli settlers and other
civilians in the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, intensified during the
reporting period in the context of the annual olive harvest and continued settlement
expansion.
31. On 28 September, some 70 Israeli settlers attacked the Palestinian villages of
Um Faggarah, Rakeez, and Tuwani in the south Hebron hills. A total of eight
Palestinians were injured, including a three-year-old child, who suffered a critical
head injury. The settlers also killed livestock and damaged homes and infrastructure.
4/12

21-19017

S/2021/1047

In related clashes, 20 Palestinians and one Israeli soldier were injured. The Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Israel, Yair Lapid, condemned the attack and said that Israel
had “a responsibility to bring [the attackers] to justice”. Israeli authorities arrested at
least six Israelis in relation to the incident, as well as three Palestinians. While four
of the Israelis were released on 1 October, two Israeli children, a 15 -year-old and a
17-year-old, were indicted on 21 October for participating in the attack.
32. Many settler-related incidents were recorded in relation to the annual olive
harvest. Since the start of the harvest season on 4 October, at least 38 incidents have
been recorded, in which 11 Palestinian harvesters were injured, and over 3,300 olive
trees were damaged or had their harvest stolen. Harassment, theft and vandalism were
also reported. Some Palestinian farmers also faced challenges in accessing olive
groves located behind the separation barrier or in the vicinity of settlements, which
requires Israeli approval.
33. On 28 September, Israelis from the Yitzhar settlement attacked employees of the
International Committee of the Red Cross with pepper spray during a visit by the
Committee to olive groves in Burin, south of Nablus. Israeli forces subsequently
provided an escort and first aid. Israeli police have launched an investigation.
34. On 10 November, Israeli settlers erected a tent in Khalleyt Athaba’ in southern
Hebron. Although Israeli forces dismantled the tent, settlers returned to erect it again
and Palestinians reportedly threw stones at them. The settlers shot live ammunition at
the Palestinians and set a Palestinian tent on fire. Five Palestinians were injured, and
five Palestinian vehicles, including two ambulances, sustained damage.
35. Between 16 and 28 November, Israeli security forces and armed settlers
repeatedly attacked Palestinian school students and residents in Lubban al-Sharqiyah,
Nablus. The attacks included physical assaults and the use of stun grenades, tear gas
and rubber-coated metal bullets. At least 83 Palestinians, including 75 students, were
injured.
36. On 24 November, a Palestinian man and his 10-year-old son were injured near
Al-Mughayer as three men in an oncoming car, who, according to witnesses, appeared
to be settlers, threw a large object towards their vehicle, which subsequently
overturned. As at 9 December, the man remained in a coma. The incident is under
investigation.
37. In Gaza, on 30 September, Israeli forces shot and killed a Palestinian man near
the perimeter fence. The Israel Defense Forces stated that he had been carrying a
suspicious bag, but relatives of the man disputed this, saying that he was hunting.
38. In Ramallah, 10 hearings were held in the trial against 14 members of Preventive
Security Forces accused of killing the critic of the Palestinian Authority and former
parliamentary candidate, Nizar Banat.
39. On 22 October, the Ministry of Defence of Israel announced the designation of
six Palestinian non-governmental organizations (NGOs) as terrorist organiz ations. It
subsequently accused them of constituting “an inseparable arm” of the Popular Front
for the Liberation of Palestine, and the Israel Defense Forces subsequently extended
the applicability of the designations to the occupied West Bank through mili tary
orders on 7 November. According to Israeli legislation, members of a designated
terror organization or any individual who provides material or other support could be
criminally prosecuted and imprisoned.

21-19017

5/12

S/2021/1047

IV. Incitement, provocations and inflammatory rhetoric
40. In its resolution 2334 (2016), the Security Council called upon both parties to
act on the basis of international law, including international humanitarian law, and
their previous agreements and obligations, to observe calm and restraint and to refrain
from provocative actions, incitement and inflammatory rhetoric, with the aim, inter
alia, of de-escalating the situation on the ground, rebuilding trust and confidence,
demonstrating through policies and actions a genuine commitment to the two -State
solution and creating the conditions necessary for promoting peace.
41. On 5 October, tensions in the Old City of Jerusalem escalated after the Jerusalem
Magistrate Court granted the appeal of a Jewish Israeli who was expelled from the
Holy Esplanade for praying there. The decision was condemned by Palestinian,
Muslim and Christian leaders and by countries in the region as a violation of the status
quo. Israeli police appealed the decision to the Jerusalem District Court, which swiftly
reversed the Magistrate Court’s decision on 8 October, reinstating the appellant’s
temporary visitor ban. In response, the Minister of Public Security of Israel reiterated
that “the status quo must be observed”, adding that any change to the existing
arrangements “would endanger public safety and could cause a flare -up”. Tensions
escalated further after Israeli authorities began construction work on a public park
near the Yusufiya Islamic cemetery adjacent to the Old City, in particular after human
remains were unearthed on 10 October. A petition by the Islamic Waqf to stop the
construction was rejected by an Israeli court on 25 October and the work resumed.
42. Some Palestinian Authority and Fatah officials made remarks denying the
Jewish connection to Jerusalem or its holy sites. Fatah social media pages and some
Palestinian Authority and Palestine Liberation Organization officials continued to
glorify perpetrators of attacks against Israeli civilians. H amas welcomed and
celebrated attacks, including a shooting in the Old City in which an Israeli civilian
was killed.
43. Some Israeli officials made racist statements against Arabs and Palestinians.
One member of the Knesset repeatedly called Israeli Arab members of the Knesset
“terrorists”, using derogatory language, and separately threatened to ascend to the
holy sites with an Israeli flag. Another member of the Knesset called members of the
Knesset from the predominantly Arab joint list “enemies” and “terror supporters” and
said that they were in Israel “by mistake” because the first Prime Minister of Israel
“did not finish the job and did not throw [Israeli Arabs] out in 1948”.

V. Affirmative steps to reverse negative trends
44. In its resolution 2334 (2016), the Security Council called for affirmative steps
to be taken immediately to reverse the negative trends on the ground that were
imperilling the two-State solution. Negative trends persist, despite some positive
developments during the reporting period.
45. On 17 November, the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of the
International Assistance to Palestinians met in Oslo at the ministerial level and
addressed the fiscal crisis facing the Palestinian Authority, the humanitarian and
development situation, the need to maintain the fragile calm in Gaza and the fragility
across the occupied Palestinian territory. As expressed in the Chair’s summary, the
meeting called for support for a package of recommended steps for the parties and the
donor community focused, inter alia, on progress on outstanding fiscal files and
economic and fiscal reforms, as well as other measures such as enhanced trade and
the movement of persons and workers, aimed at boosting the Palestinian economy.
As Chair of the Committee, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway welcomed the
6/12

21-19017

S/2021/1047

“practical attitude” during the meeting, while urging particip ants to “translate this
attitude into real change”.
46. At the same time, stepped-up engagement between some senior Israeli and
Palestinian officials continued. On 4 October, the President of the State of Palestine,
Mahmoud Abbas, met with two Israeli ministers (the Minister of Health, Nitzan
Horowitz, and the Minister for Regional Cooperation, Isawi Frej) and a member of
the Knesset from the Meretz party. The Minister of Finance of the State of Palestine
and Mr. Frej met on 16 November in connection with the meeting of the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee. Additional interministerial contacts also continued, including
technical-level discussions about a meeting of the Joint Economic Committee,
expected to take place early in 2022.
47. The entry of goods and material into Gaza increased compared with the previous
reporting period. Volumes of imports for October and November through the Kerem
Shalom crossing were 10 per cent higher than the monthly average before the
escalation in May, with the share of construction material inc reasing significantly.
Similarly, import volumes through the Rafah crossing also reached one of the highest
levels since the beginning of the year. Exports from Kerem Shalom, however,
recorded a decrease of 9 per cent over the average monthly exports in th e previous
reporting period.
48. Following the destruction resulting from the escalation in May, about 8,500
internally displaced people in Gaza remain with host families or in rented
accommodation. To date, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and the United Nations Development
Programme have provided transitional shelter cash assistance to about 1,500
households.
49. The United Nations has launched reconstruction efforts for severely damaged
housing units, but around 13,000 partially damaged units are still in need of urgent
repair. Preparations for the reconstruction of around 1,000 of the 1,600 totally
destroyed homes have begun with assistance from Qatar and after the lifting of some
restrictions on the entry of construction materials by Israeli authorities.
50. In October, Israeli authorities announced that the total number of permits for
Gaza traders would be expanded to 10,000, the highest number in years. To date,
around 9,000 have been issued. On 7 November, for the first time, 500 permits were
announced for Palestinians in the West Bank working in the high -technology sector.
On 19 October, Israel also announced the approval of West Bank residency status for
4,000 Palestinians.
51. During the reporting period, the approval rate for permits for patients from Gaza
requiring medical referrals for treatment outside the Gaza Strip reached a three -year
low, with just 54 per cent of applications approved in September and 61 per cent in
October.
52. On 19 October, to mark the twenty-first anniversary of the adoption of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000), the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and
the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), in partnership with the General Union of
Palestinian Women, brought together Palestinian women and young people in Gaza
for a national dialogue on women and peace and security. The event served as a
platform for Palestinian women and the international community to reflect on the
implementation of the resolution in the occupied Palestinian territory. Participants
highlighted the vital role that Palestinian women can play in national reconciliation
and peacebuilding processes.
53. On 5 November, Israel began to provide water to Gaza through the new Bani
Sa’id connection point, allowing it to increase the amount of water that it sells to
21-19017

7/12

S/2021/1047

Gaza by 5 million cubic meters per year, as agreed between the parties. The increase
in the supply of potable water will reduce the pressure to dig new wells into the
aquifer, as well as improve the average quality of the water provided through the
municipal water network.
54. In November 2021, for the second consecutive year, UNRWA ran out of funds
to sustain its essential services until the end of the year. At the international
ministerial conference co-hosted by Jordan and Sweden on 16 November, additional
funds were pledged, leaving a $60 million shortfall to cover all services until the end
of the year. Consequently, UNRWA was compelled to defer the payment of November
salaries to over 28,000 United Nations teachers, doctors, nurses and other staff until
8 December. UNRWA currently lacks the funds to cover its operations in December
and will also carry over important liabilities into 2022, further worsening its financial
situation.
55. The Central Election Commission of Palestine finalized preparations to conduct
the first phase of local council elections in the occupied West Bank. On 11 December,
Palestinians voted in competitive elections for 165 local councils in communities with
populations between 4,000 and 8,000 people.

VI. Efforts by the parties and the international community to
advance the peace process and other relevant developments
56. In its resolution 2334 (2016), the Security Council called upon all States to
distinguish, in their relevant dealings, between the territory of the State of Israel and
the territories occupied since 1967.
57. On 16 November, the Government of Belgium agreed that future treaties
between Belgium and Israel would contain the European Union territorial clause
stipulating that the treaties do not apply to territories brought under Israeli control
after 1967. It also agreed, inter alia, that it would tighten controls on goods entering
from Israel with a view to determining whether they could be treated preferentially
or not, on the basis of European Union trade agreements with Israel, depending upon
their place of origin.
58. On 6 December, the European Union and Israel concluded an agreement
associating Israel to Horizon Europe, the European Union flagship programme for
research and innovation. The agreement replicates a provision from the previous
European Union-Israel association agreement (2014–2020), in which it is stated, inter
alia, that “in accordance with European Union policy, this agreement shall not apply
to the geographic areas that came under the administration of the State of Israel after
5 June 1967”.
59. In its resolution 2334 (2016), the Security Council called upon all parties to
continue, in the interest of the promotion of peace and security, to exert collective
efforts to launch credible negotiations on all final status issues in the Middle East
peace process and within the time frame specified by the Quartet in its statement of
21 September 2010. The Council urged in that regard the intensification and
acceleration of international and regional diplomatic efforts and support aimed at
achieving, without delay, a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East
on the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference,
including the principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet
Road Map, and an end to the Israeli occupation that began in 1967. The Council
underlined that it would not recognize any changes to the 4 June 1967 lines, including
with regard to Jerusalem, other than those agreed by the parties through negotiations.

8/12

21-19017

S/2021/1047

60. On 14 October, the Middle East Quartet envoys, from the European Union, the
Russian Federation, the United States of America and the United Nations, held their
regular virtual monthly meeting. On 17 November, they met on the margins of the
meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee in Oslo. In a joint statement, the Quartet
expressed its concern regarding negative developments across the occupied
Palestinian territory, including ongoing acts of violence in the West Bank, the
advancement of new settlement units, the untenable fiscal crisis within the Palestinian
Authority and threats of violence from the Gaza Strip. The Quartet also highlighted
the need to take constructive steps to advance a two-State solution and called on all
parties to help to address the current urgent challenges through fiscal and other
reforms, as well as by avoiding unilateral steps that exacerbate tensions and
undermine the prospects for peace.

VII. Observations
61. I remain deeply concerned by the significant acceleration of Israeli settlement
expansion in the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and by the continued
consideration and advancement by Israel of plans that had been frozen or delayed for
years in highly controversial areas that are crucial for the contiguity of a future
Palestinian State, including the E1 area, Atarut and Giv‘at Hamatos. Settlements
further entrench the Israeli occupation, undermine the legitimate right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination and sovereignty, encroach on Palestinian
land and natural resources, hamper the free movement of the Palestinian people and
increase the risk of violent confrontation.
62. The promotion of plans and tenders for housing units in settlements continued
during 2021. While the number of plans advanced in Area C declined in 2021 for a
second year in a row, with a total of 4,000 housing units – a sharp drop from the 8,400
units advanced in 2020 – the number of tenders announced in 2021 spiked to 3,300,
nearly double that of 2020. In East Jerusalem settlements, the number of housing units
advanced also declined for a second year, from some 700 units in 2020 to 550 in 2021.
However, the strategically located Har Homa E plan was advanced and, if
implemented, would help to create a contiguous built-up area of Israeli settlements
along the southern perimeter of occupied East Jerusalem. Similarly, the
announcement of tenders for East Jerusalem settlements declined sharply in 2021 to
some 300 units, compared with 1,700 in 2020, but 80 were in the sensitive area of
Giv‘at Hamatos.
63. I call on Israel to put a stop to all settlement activities immediately. Israeli
settlements in the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, have no legal
validity and constitute a flagrant violation of international law and United Nations
resolutions. They undermine the prospect of achieving a two -State solution by
systematically eroding the possibility of establishing a contiguous, independent,
sovereign and viable Palestinian State.
64. I am extremely concerned by the significant rise in settler-related violence
against Palestinians and their property. In 2021, settler violence resulting in injury
and/or property damage reached its highest level since 2017. So far in 2021, 5
Palestinians have been killed by live ammunition by settlers, while 583 have been
injured in settler-related violent incidents, the highest figure recorded in five years. I
am particularly disturbed by reports of armed settlers carrying out attacks inside
Palestinian communities, sometimes in the proximity of Israeli security forces, and
of Israeli forces attacking Palestinians alongside settlers. Settlers are rarely held
accountable for these attacks, increasing the level of threat to Palestinians and their
property. Attacks continue despite reports of some steps being taken by the Israeli

21-19017

9/12

S/2021/1047

authorities to address the issue. Israel, as the occupying power, has an obligation to
protect Palestinians and their property there.
65. I remain deeply concerned by the continued demolitio ns and seizures of
Palestinian structures, which have included internationally funded humanitarian
projects. For the second consecutive year, demolitions are approaching the worrying
level of 2016, which was the highest since the United Nations began syste matically
recording them in 2009. As at 6 December, the Israeli authorities had demolished 835
Palestinian structures for lack of building permits in the occupied West Bank,
including East Jerusalem. In 2020, and now in 2021, there was a 40 per cent increa se
over the average annual rates of demolition over the past decade. The number of
people displaced so far in 2021 is 1,044, the highest since 2016. Israeli authorities are
increasingly using military orders in Area C to execute demolitions or confiscation s
without, or with very little, prior notice, further limiting opportunities for legal
recourse. In 2021, 56 per cent of the structures demolished or confiscated were the
result of military orders, compared with approximately 30 per cent between 2018 and
2020.
66. I welcome the advancement of plans for some housing units for Palestinians in
the occupied East Jerusalem neighbourhood of Issawiya and in Area C, which include
some pre-existing units that will no longer be subject to demolition. I urge Israel to
continue to regularly advance such plans and to issue building permits for all
previously approved plans for Palestinians in Area C and East Jerusalem to help to
meet critical housing needs.
67. I remain disturbed by the possible eviction of some Palesti nian families from
their homes in the Shaykh Jarrah and Silwan neighbourhoods of occupied East
Jerusalem. I call on the Israeli authorities to end the demolition of Palestinian property
and the eviction and displacement of Palestinians, in line with the co untry’s
obligations under international humanitarian and international human rights law and
to approve plans that would enable those communities to build legally and address
their development needs. Demolitions and forced evictions entail numerous human
rights violations and raise concerns about the risk of forcible transfer.
68. I remain gravely concerned by the continuing violence, terrorist attacks and
incitement to violence against civilians, which exacerbate mistrust and undermine a
peaceful resolution to the conflict. I reiterate that the violence must stop, and all
perpetrators must be held accountable.
69. I am particularly appalled that children continue to be victims of violence,
arrested in large numbers and held for prolonged periods of time, including in military
detention. So far in 2021, at least 341 Palestinian children have been arrested in the
occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem – more than double the number in the
same period in 2020. Equally disturbing is the fact that many of th ese children report
persistent patterns of ill-treatment during arrest and detention as well as lack of due
process. I reiterate my call for Israel to uphold international juvenile justice standards,
including the use of detention as a measure of last resort and for the shortest
appropriate period of time, and to end the administrative detention of children and
prevent all forms of ill-treatment in detention. I reiterate that children must never be
the target of violence or put in harm’s way.
70. I am troubled that there are serious concerns that Israeli security forces use
disproportionate and excessive force against Palestinians, in particular by using live
ammunition, resulting in deaths and injuries. In 2021, in the occupied West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, Israeli security forces killed 72 Palestinians, including 17
children, and injured at least 1,047 others with live ammunition compared with 23
Palestinians killed and 154 injured by live ammunition in 2020. The spike notably
occurred in the context of increased clashes during the period comprising the
10/12

21-19017

S/2021/1047

escalation in Gaza in May. I reiterate that security forces must exercise maximum
restraint and use lethal force only as a last resort, when it is strictly unavoidable, in
order to protect life. Israel must carry out thorough, independent, impartial and
prompt investigations into all instances of possible excessive use of force.
71. The fate of two Israeli civilians and the bodies of two Israel Defense Forces
soldiers held by Hamas in Gaza remain an important humanitarian concern. I call on
Hamas to provide information on their status, as required by international
humanitarian law.
72. I also remain concerned by the continued Israeli practice of holding the bodies
of killed Palestinians, totalling 91, including 1 woman and at least 9 children. I call
on Israel to return withheld bodies to their families, in line with its obligations u nder
international humanitarian law.
73. I remain concerned by the multiple instances in which officials used dangerous
and hateful rhetoric with the potential to raise tension and spark violence. Terrorism,
violence and incitement must be clearly condemned and unequivocally rejected by
all, never celebrated or amplified.
74. I reiterate the call for the status quo at the holy sites in Jerusalem to be upheld
in line with the special and historic role of Jordan as custodian of the Muslim and
Christian holy sites in Jerusalem.
75. I am concerned about the shrinking space for civil society in Israel and the
occupied Palestinian territory. Israel designated six Palestinian NGOs as terrorist
organizations, several of which receive a significant portion of their funding from
Member States. The legal implications of the designation are wide -ranging and add
to increasing pressures on civil society organizations across the occupied Palestinian
territory. Since the Israeli announcement, the United Nations has continued to engage
with Israeli authorities, the designated NGOs and donors to obtain more information
about the allegations and their implications.
76. I am also concerned by the increase in restrictions by Israel and the Palestinian
Authority on the rights to freedom of expression, peaceful assembly and association.
So far in 2021, Israeli security forces have arrested 64 people in relation to the
exercise of those rights, including 19 human rights defenders. This raises serious
concerns of arbitrary detention. In occupied East Jerusalem, organizations were
searched or closed, and events prevented from taking place on the basis of allegedly
conducting activities sponsored by the Palestinian Authority, an act criminalized
under Israeli law. Meanwhile, Palestinian security forces have detained at least 101
people, including 10 women, seemingly in relation to their exercise of freedom of
peaceful assembly, expression and association; the number also includes at least 11
human rights defenders, 4 of whom are women. The Israeli and Palestinian authorities
have an obligation to respect freedom of expression, association and assembly and to
facilitate and promote an enabling environment for civil society to function in the
occupied Palestinian territory without discrimination.
77. I note that, while the trial for the killing of Nizar Banat is ongoing, members of
his family have been subjected to threats, house raids, arrest and detention, raising
concerns that they are being intimidated. I appeal to the Palestinian author ities to
ensure the protection of members of the Banat family and of witnesses in the case. I
call on the Palestinian authorities to put in place measures to ensure that freedom of
expression is protected.
78. The deterioration of the security and socioeconomic situation across the
occupied Palestinian territory is worrying. It is essential that the parties avoid
unilateral steps, reduce flashpoints and violence across the occupied Palestinian
territory, solidify the cessation of hostilities and support eco nomic development in
21-19017

11/12

S/2021/1047

the Gaza Strip. Concerted efforts by the parties are required to maintain calm,
strengthen Palestinian institutions and restore hope, or there is a risk of plunging into
another deadly escalation of violence.
79. The Palestinian Authority is facing a financial crisis. Economic figures for 2020
and forecasts for 2021 and beyond demonstrate the gravity of the situation. In 2020,
per capita gross domestic product declined by 13.5 per cent in the occupied West
Bank and by 15 per cent in the Gaza Strip. I was encouraged by the engagement
between Israeli and Palestinian officials, including at the meeting of the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee in Oslo. However, more significant steps by all parties are
urgently needed to shore up the economic and institutional stability of the Palestinian
Authority, including through the implementation of necessary reforms.
80. I urge Member States to continue and to increase their valuable support to
UNRWA to safeguard access to critical basic services for the millions of refugees
serviced by the Agency. UNRWA remains indispensable for regional stability and
must have the resources necessary to fulfil its mandate.
81. I note that the security situation in Gaza remains fragile. For any durable
stability, movement into and out of, and access to and from, Gaza must be further
improved, including access for Palestinian workers to the Israeli labour market and
supply lines of medical goods, relevant equipment and materials, while taking into
account security concerns in line with Security Council resolution 1860 (2009). Only
by fully ending the debilitating closures in line with the resolution can there be hope
that the humanitarian crisis will be sustainably resolved. I reiterate that the Gaza
Reconstruction Mechanism remains best placed to enable the entry and accountable
delivery of items and materials for projects and private sector development. While
constructive measures initiated during the reporting period are enc ouraging and
welcome, further steps are required to meet the needs in Gaza.
82. It is critical that Egyptian-led intra-Palestinian reconciliation efforts continue.
The United Nations stands firm in its support for the efforts of Egypt in this regard. I
call on all Palestinian factions to redouble efforts to ensure the reunification of Gaza
and the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, under a single, democratic, national
government. Gaza is, and must remain, an integral part of a future Palestinian State
as part of a two-State solution.
83. It is essential to follow through on verbal commitments with concrete actions
that will demonstrate the collective resolve to achieve a two -State solution. I urge
Israelis, Palestinians, regional States and the broader in ternational community to take
practical steps that will enable a return to the path leading towards meaningful
negotiations and, ultimately, peace. The Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process is actively engaged in advancing these efforts with his counterparts in
the Middle East Quartet, key regional partners and Israeli and Palestinian leaders.
84. I remain committed to supporting Palestinians and Israelis in resolving the
conflict and ending the occupation in line with relevant United Natio ns resolutions,
international law and bilateral agreements in pursuit of achieving the vision of two
States – Israel and an independent, democratic, contiguous, viable and sovereign
Palestinian State – living side by side in peace and security within secur e and
recognized borders, on the basis of the pre-1967 lines, with Jerusalem as the shared
capital of both States.
85. I express my deep appreciation to the Special Coordinator, Tor Wennesland, for
his outstanding service in what remains a challenging context. I also pay tribute to all
staff working under difficult circumstances in the service of the United Nations.

12/12

21-19017
