S/PV.7176

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7176th meeting

Thursday, 15 May 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Oh Joon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Republic of Korea)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. De Antueno
Ms. King
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Gálvez
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Lamek
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein
Mrs. Kazragienė
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Laro
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Tatham
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 2 May 2014 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2014/314)

14-33212 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1433212*

S/PV.7176

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 2 May 2014 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2014/314)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and
Serbia to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Ioannis Vrailas, Deputy Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2014/314, which contains a letter dated
2 May 2014 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council, transmitting the
forty-fifth report of the High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
I now give the floor to Mr. Inzko.
Mr. Inzko: As we stand ready to commemorate
the one hundredth anniversary of the outbreak of the
First World War and the tragic loss of life and suffering
that followed, our continued commitment to our shared
goal of irreversible peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina is
more important than ever. Our continued commitment
is important to the country, its people and the wider
region, but it is also important for the affirmation of the
inviolable values and principles of peace, coexistence,
mutual respect and the sanctity of sovereign States that
we hold so dear.
If ever there was a year for us to learn from the
mistakes of the past and to remind ourselves that what
happens to Bosnia and Herzegovina is important far

2/24

15/05/2014

beyond its borders, that year is 2014. It is precisely
because of this that I would like to take this opportunity
to express my support for the French-led efforts to mark
the hundredth anniversary of the First World War in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, which I hope will be used not
to promote division and conflict but to reflect on the
importance of peace.
(spoke in French)
I especially want to thank France and its Ambassador
to Bosnia and Herzegovina, Roland Gilles, for his
positive and visionary approach to commemorating
the centenary of the Sarajevo assassination. In this
context, I welcome the initiative taken by France and
its centennial mission, which has devoted great energy
to sending a message from Sarajevo built around the
theme of reconciliation. On the initiative of France,
we shall together send a message of brotherhood and
peace to the world on 28 June. This noble message will
be reinforced by the concert for peace to be given in
Sarajevo by the Vienna Philharmonic Orchestra that
same day.
(spoke in English)
Sadly, in the six months that have elapsed since
I was last here, the actions and behaviour of some of
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s elected officials and political
leaders suggest that they have learned little from the
mistakes of the past. The same old mistake — putting
the interests of a privileged political class before those
of the country and its citizens — continues to be made.
Not once, not twice but over and over again. I say this
because the status quo and the current way of doing
politics in Bosnia and Herzegovina are so very clearly
working for just a chosen few — those who are in power
or close to power.
Conversely, it is simply not working for the
average citizen in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The lack
of urgency to reach the healthy compromises that are
in the interests of the overwhelming majority of the
people of the country and are clearly necessary to take
the country forward is becoming ever more difficult
to understand and impossible to defend. Entirely
predictably, the political situation has continued to
deteriorate. A snapshot of the past six months tells us
all we need to know.
First, progress on Euro-Atlantic integration has
ground to a halt despite the commendable efforts of
the European Union and NATO. What is the reason?

14-33212

15/05/2014

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Yet again, Bosnia and Herzegovina’s political leaders
were unable to reach an agreement on changes that are
required to implement the European Court of Human
Rights judgement in the Sejdic-Finci case, which is
a condition for the country to move forward towards
European Union candidacy and ensure the equality of
all citizens. Similarly, a lack of progress on military
property continues to prevent Bosnia and Herzegovina
from activating its membership action plan with NATO.
Secondly, despite notable increases in exports, the
overall economic situation remains very difficult, with
the entities relying on external budgetary support to
pay the bills. Unemployment now stands at 44 per cent.
Thirdly, the legislative output of the State
institutions continues to fall well short of the needs of
the country, with more new laws being rejected than
are adopted.
Fourthly, many verdicts of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Constitutional Court, which are final
and binding under the terms of the Peace Agreement,
remain unimplemented. As a result, for example, voters
in Mostar continued to be denied the right to elect their
local Government, which should have happened in
2012.
And as if all this were not enough, challenges to the
Peace Agreement became ever more frequent and direct
as the reporting period progressed. Senior politicians
from Republika Srpska have sought to exploit the
deeply worrying events in Ukraine to promote their
own separatist agendas, and have repeatedly called
for and predicted the end of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Calls for a referendum on secession have similarly been
repeated time and time again.
I have made it clear repeatedly that the Dayton
Peace Agreement does not allow for the entities to
secede. The international community must continue
to say clearly that our commitment to the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina is
absolute. That is exactly what the 28 Foreign Ministers
of the European Union did in April.
Regrettably, I am obliged to inform the Council that
once again the challenges to the Peace Agreement in the
reporting period included not only statements, but also
actions. In April, the Republika Srpska Government, at
entity level, adopted Government decisions to regulate
issues related to residence in response to the blockage
of amendments to the State-level law in the upper house

S/PV.7176

of the State Parliament. However, residence is regulated
by the State in all countries of the world and it must
continue to be regulated by the State, not at the entity
level. As the Peace Implementation Council Steering
Board has long made clear, we cannot have the entities
taking unilateral action in this way.
Unfortunately we also saw the Federation entity
authorities acting unilaterally last year in a way that
compromised the single economic space of the country,
although thankfully that issue is now moving towards
a solution. I also regret to inform the Council that the
Republika Srpska authorities continue to refuse to
cooperate with me and my Office, as required under
annex X of the Peace Agreement, by refusing to provide
documents when they are requested to do so. The
President of the Republika Srpska has boasted publicly
that there would be no cooperation with my Office.
Sadly, positive developments have been few and
far between, but there have been some. The State
Parliament finally managed to adopt the necessary
technical amendments to enable elections to be held
as required in October. It also adopted a welcome new
law on public procurement in line with European Union
standards, and there have been important steps taken
towards the full establishment and functioning of the
Federation’s Constitutional Court. There has also been
some welcome progress with the State-level electricity
transmission company TRANSCO. Furthermore, as I
mentioned earlier, the fact that exports increased last
year by 7 per cent is welcome news.
The regional situation and relations between the
country and its neighbours also continue to improve.
In this regard, Serbian Prime Minister Vučić’s
groundbreaking and confidence-building visit to
Sarajevo two days ago was another significant and
indeed welcome step towards reconciliation.
Nevertheless, I am increasingly concerned that the
country is in danger of falling into a vicious downward
cycle of spiteful tit-for-tat politics that it will be difficult
to emerge from. Bosnia and Herzegovina has now been
on a downward trajectory ever since the April package
of constitutional changes was narrowly rejected in
2006. Eight years is a long time for a country to be
going the wrong way. As my Office has long warned,
the country cannot continue to go on in this way
indefinitely without serious consequences.
While nobody could predict exactly when there
would be a public backlash against the ongoing failure

14-332123/24

S/PV.7176

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

of politicians to put citizens first, it was only a matter
of time before it occurred. That is what took place at
the beginning of February, when we saw large-scale
protests. Central to the demands of the protesters was
that the authorities should finally get serious about
dealing with the mounting economic and social problems
facing ordinary people and the rampant corruption
gripping the country. Regrettably, the protests turned
briefly violent on 7 February and significant damage
was done to a number of public buildings in Sarajevo,
Tuzla, Zenica and Mostar, with notable numbers of
police officers and some demonstrators being injured,
but thankfully without any loss of life. Peaceful protests
continued thereafter, including some in Republika
Srpska.
The response of the political class was mixed. While
some politicians understood the clear message of those
protesting, others sought to misrepresent the protests
as ethnically motivated or organized from outside the
country. That was simply not the case. Democracy is
not just a matter of holding elections every four years,
it also happens in between. In that respect, the peaceful
protests and civic gatherings known as plenums
represent a positive step forward in strengthening
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s democracy. That new civic
engagement is in a sense a sapling and, as we all know,
even the tallest of oaks has to start to grow somewhere.
What is now required is for the sapling to be nurtured
and supported by us for as long as it takes. In this
election year, it is especially important that the growth
in activism continue in the form of greater participation
in all aspects of the election process, from the selection
of candidates to discussions of concrete issues to voting
on election day.
We are now less than five months from the next
general elections, which I believe will be the most hotly
contested elections since the Dayton Peace Agreement
was signed in 1995. I cannot hide my concern about
the challenges that face us before election day. I am
particularly concerned that in the coming months the
ongoing controversy over residency and voting rights
could lead to disputes on the ground, especially in
municipalities across the Republika Srpska. That is a
scenario that all involved must do everything in their
power to avoid. It is especially important that no one
be discriminated against on the basis of ethnicity or
because they are returnees. I am similarly concerned
that the election campaign will once again be dominated
by attempts to raise inter-ethnic tensions as a means

4/24

15/05/2014

to divert attention from the real problems facing the
country.
What Bosnia and Herzegovina badly needs to
see in the forthcoming election campaign is a frank,
robust and action-oriented public debate on how
rampant corruption, exceedingly high unemployment
and, of course, the lack of progress on Euro-Atlantic
integration are going to be urgently overcome by the
incoming Government after the elections. We need to
hear more about plans to reform the economy and create
jobs, which are in the vital interests of all citizens of the
country regardless of ethnic group.
The demonstrations we have seen are a clear
wake-up call for the political establishment in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, but also for the international
community. As one of my predecessors pointed out
recently, if we go on doing what we are doing we will go
on getting what we are getting. After the next elections,
therefore, there is going to have to be a fundamental
change in the way politics is conducted in Bosnia and
Herzegovina so as to focus on the needs of all citizens,
not just on the appetites of a chosen few.
Similarly, the international community’s approach
will need to evolve, and it must do more to factor in the
specificities of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s history, its
post-war settlement and the risks to its future stability.
With that in mind, let me take this opportunity to express
my very strong support for the robust policy direction
laid out by the Foreign Ministers of the European Union
in their conclusions of 14 April, which I have already
mentioned. I should also like to highlight the excellent
cooperation and coordination that exists between
European Union Representative Peter Sørensen and
me, as well as between our offices on the ground.
Clearly, our job in Bosnia and Herzegovina is not
yet complete. This is the time to reaffirm our vision
of a united and reintegrated Bosnia and Herzegovina
that is the lynchpin of a peaceful and prosperous
region. This is the time to regroup and to recalibrate
our approach. This is the time to stand together
united in support of the values and principles I spoke
about at the beginning of my statement. That means
supporting those within the country who are ready to
work together to reach the healthy compromises that
are necessary to take the country forward. It means
that we must stand firm against those who seek to sow
division and disintegration. And it also means that we
re-examine our approach while preserving the tools

14-33212

15/05/2014

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

that have ensured the peace, including the European
Union military mission with an executive mandate.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has come a long way since
1995, but there is still some way to go. Let us make sure
that we continue to give the country the support it still
needs to complete its long journey to lasting peace and
stability.
The President: I thank Mr. Inzko for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to welcome Mr. Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina. However,
once again, we must note that his report (S/2014/314,
annex), which we have studied carefully, reveals a trend
with regard to Bosnian Serbs, that is, they are blamed
for all the political ills in Bosnia and Herzegovina, with
a downplaying of the adverse impact of the Muslim
Croatian clashes in the country and an ongoing denial
of the legitimate rights of Bosnian Croatians under the
Dayton Agreement. We reject that unilateral and harsh
approach. In order to have an objective picture of what
is taking place in the country, we would recommend
that Council members also read the eleventh report of
the Republic of Serbia to the Secretary-General and the
Security Council, in which the commitment of Bosnian
Serbs to international law and the letter of Dayton is
clear.
We call on the High Representative to act consistent
with the “5+2” programme agreed in 2008 by the Peace
Implementation Council Steering Board, which sets out
conditions for drawing down the protectorate in Bosnia
an Herzegovina. Unresolved problems in that regard,
as well as other fundamental questions for the future of
the country, should be resolved by Bosnians themselves
through inclusive dialogue and on the basis of the
consent of all constituent peoples. The task of the High
Representative is to promote those efforts and find
common denominators, not focus on a Euro-Atlantic
agenda, domestic affairs or the country’s decisions on
international affairs.
We agree with the appropriateness of improving the
Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina in accordance
with the ruling of the European Court of Human Rights
in the Sejdić-Finzi case. A compromise decision on
that issue is possible if it is arrived at in an inclusively
manner. However, we cannot agree with the broad

S/PV.7176

interpretation of the Court’s ruling in an attempt to
use it as a pretext to reopen the question of the entire
Dayton structure. We note that, in contrast with the
well-articulated position of the Republika Srpska on
the issue, to date representatives of the Federation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina have been unable to agree on a
single approach — mainly owing to the unwillingness
to take into account the legitimate interests of Bosnian
Croats.
We are closely following developments in the
domestic political situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
which is of course being impacted increasingly by the
general elections scheduled for October. At the same
time, see no reason for dramatizing the situation, as the
report of the High Representative does.
There are concerns about the situation in the
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, but the High
Representative for some reason does not dwell on
that and instead focuses his main criticism on Banja
Luka. Moreover, when protests arose in February 2014
in Bosnian-populated areas of the country — some
of which resulted in violence, including the seizing
and burning of administrative buildings and the
forced resignation of cantonal authorities — the High
Representative shifted the blame to the Republika
Srpska and Croatians. It has to be acknowledged that
Serbian entities are essentially free of social unrest.
That is due to the active cooperation between the
Government, unions and employers, as well as the
timely, successful measures taken to resolve business
issues and encourage the private sector.
The mass protests that took place in February were
a manifestation of the far-reaching crisis in the Muslim
Croatian entities. While the unrest was due to the
worsening socioeconomic situation, the main reason
goes far deeper: the absence of a balanced multi-ethnic
policy at the federal level, ignoring the legitimate rights
of Croatians and the failure to resolve ongoing tensions
among the main Bosnian parties. All of that has an
adverse impact not just on the Federation, but also the
whole country. We are convinced that the usefulness
of external supervision of the situation, along the lines
of the Office of the High Representative, has run its
course. The crisis in the Federation is just an additional
argument for the need to draw down the personnel
and for an inclusive internal dialogue to resolve the
country’s problems. There is no need to create artificial
reasons to retain the apparatus.

14-332125/24

S/PV.7176

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Unfortunately, the High Representative was again
silent concerning the alarming fact that members
of the military opposition in Syria are being helped
by mercenaries who are citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which potentially threatens stability in
that country and region. Here we welcome the efforts
of Sarajevo to strengthen criminal accountability for
fighters and illegal armed groups outside the country
and their accomplices.
Overall, since the devastating armed conflict ended
in 1995, Bosnia and Herzegovina has achieved concrete
results. I do not agree with Mr. Inzko’s conclusions in
the report that the February protests demonstrated the
fragility of the security situation. Quite to the contrary,
the vast majority of the population, authorities and
law enforcement have demonstrated their ability to
act in a legitimate manner. We hope that the High
Representative, our partners in the Security Council
and the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation
Council together will uphold the need for dialogue
between the Bosnian parties in the run-up to the October
elections. The way forward for the peace process should
continue to be the transfer of responsibility to Bosnians
themselves.
Mr. De Antueno (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I thank the High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his briefing and
the report on the implementation of Peace Agreement on
Bosnia and Herzegovina (S/2014/314, annex).
Argentina has previously reaffirmed its support
for the Dayton Agreement and for the defence and
preservation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. These are conditions that,
together with respect for the rule of law, we believe are
essential to lasting peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
However, it seems to be ever more necessary for a critical
evaluation to be undertaken of the current approach of
the international community so that the country can be
effectively supported to achieve irreversible progress.
The demonstrations that took place in various cities
throughout the country in February were an expression
of the frustration citizens feel and should serve as a
warning. The lack of meaningful and concrete measures
to implement the remaining requirements of the five
objectives and two conditions for the closure of the
Office of the High Representative has been a constant
in recent reports received by the Council. Likewise,
we continue to hear reports of continuing challenges

6/24

15/05/2014

to the powers of the central State by the entities and on
the non-enforcement of decisions of the Constitutional
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We remain concerned by reports referring to
statements by senior officials of Republika Srpska
promoting the dissolution of the State of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and challenging the basic provisions
of the General Framework Agreement for Peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the territorial integrity of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. At the same time, it remains
impossible to hold local elections in the city of Mostar
because of the inability to implement the 2010 ruling of
the Constitutional Court on the city’s electoral system.
This prevents progress in the implementation of the
ruling of the European Court of Human Rights in the
Sejdic-Finci case.
There have been repeated calls on the political
leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to step up their
efforts to reach an agreement on the implementation
of the Constitutional Court ruling. That would ensure
respect for the rule of law, allow elections to be held
in Mostar and promote renewed efforts to achieve an
agreement allowing for the effective protection of the
rights of non-constituent peoples, as the efforts of the
international community in this regard seem not to
have attained their objectives.
Positive developments include the adoption of
amendments to the law governing the issuance of
identification numbers for citizens, which ended a
political and institutional crisis that lasted several
months. Significant progress was made in unblocking
the process of delayed appointments to the Federation
Constitutional Court and its vital national interest
panel. In this regard, we highlight the good offices of
the Office of High Representative.
However we are concerned that it has not yet been
possible to reverse the overall negative trend and resume
the progress that was being made in early 2012. It is
ever more necessary to achieve a deeper understanding
of the underlying causes for the lack of progress.
Only in that way will the international community be
able to adapt its approach, continue working together
with Bosnia Herzegovina and offer its support more
effectively.
Finally, Argentina wishes to reiterate once again
its support for the work of the Office of the High
Representative in implementing the civilian aspects
of the Dayton Peace Agreement and its efforts to help

14-33212

15/05/2014

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Government entities to comply with the terms of the
peace agreement and the State Constitution. We believe
it is necessary to continue to provide the Office the
sufficient resources and political support to fulfil its
mandate under the Dayton Peace Agreement.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I would like to thank
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, for presenting the forty-fifth report on
the implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement
in Bosnia and Herzegovina (S/2014/314, annex). We
applaud his continued efforts over the past five years
in ensuring the full implementation of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace.
Rwanda is concerned by the continued deterioration
of the political situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina at
the national and states levels alike. The main concern
for us is the increasing rhetoric by senior officials of
Republika Srpska, including President Milorad Dodik,
predicting and advocating the dissolution of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the independence of the Republika
Srpska, as well as the attempt to link the situation in
Ukraine as a motivating factor for the future secession
from the State. We recall that the self-determination of
any State within the country would be in violation of
the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina as well as
of the General Framework Agreement for Peace. We
urge the authorities in the Republika Srpska to refrain
from any negative rhetoric and to engage constructively
in efforts towards national unity and reconciliation.
The immediate consequence of such rhetoric is a
lack of the political will that would be fundamental to
reaching an agreement on many legislative proposals.
Those include legislation related to State and defence
property, which is important for making progress in
the implementation of the outstanding objectives of
the “5+2” agenda as prerequisites for the closure of
the Office of the High Representative. The current
stalemate in the political situation is an impediment for
the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities to reach their
Euro-Atlantic integration goal, and we hope that the
benefits of such integration will be a driving factor for
overcoming the gridlock.
Despite positive economic growth and improvement
of the foreign trade balance in 2013, the economic
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina is still dire, with
a very high unemployment rate, at almost half of the
active population, a sharp decrease in foreign direct
investment and serious fiscal challenges. All political

S/PV.7176

actors must show resolve, solidarity and a sense of
responsibility to improve the economic situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The demonstrations that were held in February
in several cities of the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, mainly in Mostar, resulting from
frustration over the socioeconomic situation, were an
indication that local official needs to strengthen the
fight against corruption. However, it is regrettable that
what should have been a peaceful demonstration turned
violent, causing injuries to a number of police officers,
protestors and journalists. We strongly condemn the
destruction of public property, and in particular the
burning of the presidency building. In that regard, we
reiterate our support for the European Union military
mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which will continue
supporting the local authorities in preserving peace and
safety for the local population.
In the meantime, we are disappointed that no
tangible action has been taken by domestic authorities
and political parties to implement the 2011 ruling of
the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court on
the current electoral system in Mostar. We call on all
political actors to assume their responsibility and to end
the crisis and to enable the election for a functioning
city council.
We welcome the appointment of two new judges to
the Federation’s Constitutional Court, and we hope that
the appointment of the remaining ninth judge will take
place in the near future. In that respect, we encourage
the relevant authorities to complete the establishment
of a functional, vital, national interest panel within the
Court, ahead of the October general elections so as to
ensure the smooth and timely formation of the postelection Government.
With regard to the ruling of the European Court of
Human Rights in the Sejdic-Finci case, we commend
the efforts made by senior European Union officials
to find a lasting solution. We encourage the political
leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina to redouble their
efforts in order to reach an agreement on a constitutional
amendment that provides equal political rights for
all the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina, including
minorities.
Next month, as we commemorate the centenary
of the First World War and the attack in Sarajevo, as
mentioned by Mr. Inzko, we also recall that next July
the world will commemorate the twentieth anniversary

14-332127/24

S/PV.7176

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

of the genocide against the Bosniaks in Srebrenica,
committed only one year after the genocide against
the Tutsi in Rwanda. We Rwandans believe that paying
tribute to the victims and survivors of that tragedy
should begin by fighting against the deniers of the
genocide. We therefore call upon all political actors
in the country to assume responsibility and to avoid
questioning the decision of the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia in the Kristić case and to
work towards healing, reconciliation and the economic
empowerment of the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan): I
would like to begin by thanking High Representative
Valentin Inzko for his briefing to us this morning and
for his forty-fifth report to the Council (S/2014/314,
annex).
Listening to the High Representative and reading
his report is sobering. While there are some positive
developments highlighted, particularly where the people
are concerned at the municipal level, like the formation
of plenums soon after the February protests, much of
the enmity that existed in Bosnia and Herzegovina
before and during the war still remains. That is most
evident at the level of senior officials, especially those
who argue, with increasing vigour, for the dissolution
of the State.
The Bosnian War was a war that at least three of us
at this table experienced firsthand. It was a cruel war
that achieved absolutely nothing, in which for most of its
duration a mechanized army inflicted massive violence
against a largely defenceless civilian population. It was
as pathetic as it was criminal — a war which brought
inexcusable pain to the Bosnian people and in which
the victims who survived it suffer still. It was a war
that wounded everyone somehow, and in which the
battlefields were not the streets of Sarajevo, Mostar or
Tuzla, but rather, to borrow from Denis Mukwege, the
battlefields over which the war in Bosnia were fought
were the very bodies of the victims themselves: the
rapes, the enforced pregnancies, the torture and all that
killing. And for what? For one ethnicity or another?
My delegation has never heard of a human value called
ethnicity. Or was the war waged because, as we were
told then, those prosecuting it were the real victims
once? If every people believed they were justified
in breaking customary international law because of
crimes committed against their parents, grandparents
or forebears, the Council would remain in permanent
session and the world would be ungovernable.

8/24

15/05/2014

We concede that the oppression and persecution
of any people today ought to be resisted by those very
same people and that resistance ought to be lawful too.
No one would dispute that. But citing an oppression
that simply does not exist or that existed some 50, 60 or
hundreds of years agom, is no basis today for adopting
policies laden with obstruction and division, the effect
of which can only ultimately imperil peace.
There are still enough Croats, Serbs and Bosniaks
in Bosnia and Herzegovina who want nothing more
than a life where they can prosper together in something
like normal circumstances. They want to be part of the
European Union. They know that further division would
be bad for them and that if left unresolved, the present
state of political polarization does not augur well either.
As we saw dramatically at the beginning of the year,
what they want most is functional Government.
We agree with the High Representative. The
international community must look deeper into why it
is the tensions persist and what could be done to reverse
the gradual deterioration of the political condition. The
General Framework Agreement for Peace provides
no legal basis for secession by the Republika Srpska,
and so every effort must be invested to forge a serious
discussion on the historical narratives and about the
reckoning required before a deeply felt reconciliation
becomes possible.
Twenty years ago, the Council met urgently, almost
every day, on the crisis in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Now, two decades later, we must begin to wake up and
pay closer attention again to the problems facing this
important country, knowing full well what the ultimate
consequences could look like if the steady deterioration
were to remain unchecked.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I wish
to thank High Representative Inzko for his briefing
and for his tireless efforts in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The United States continues to support his mandate and
commends his work to encourage the Government of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to advance on a broad range
of issues related to the General Framework Agreement
for Peace. We remain steadfast in encouraging
Governments at all levels to focus on key priorities,
including capitalizing on positive civic engagement,
ensuring that general elections go forward as planned in
October, enacting reforms necessary for Euro-Atlantic
integration and refraining from disturbing secessionist

14-33212

15/05/2014

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

rhetoric. Today, I would like to touch briefly on each of
those four issues.
In February, thousands of protesters in cities across
Bosnia and Herzegovina joined together to express
dissatisfaction with the lack of long-term economic
and political progress in the country. Protesters noted
grievances about unemployment, corruption and other
social concerns. We regret that protests briefly turned
violent, resulting in injuries and damage to buildings,
and that some political actors attempted to use the
protests to discourage public discourse and to stoke
ethnic tensions. The United States recognizes that both
peaceful protests and democratic institutions, such as
plenums, can serve key roles. They allow the public to
express views that political leaders should listen to and
respect. We hope that Bosnian citizens will continue
active peaceful engagement in advance of and beyond
the October general elections.
Furthermore, we commend the Government
for adopting necessary amendments to the election
law. We hope that election preparations will move
forward smoothly. As preparations progress, we call
on politicians and political parties to campaign on
concrete proposals for economic and political reforms,
instead of attempting to distract the public with divisive
nationalist rhetoric.
The politicization of the regulation on residency
has been yet another concern in the lead-up to elections.
Although there is a need to amend existing legislation,
the rights of returnees and the freedom of movement of
all citizens must be respected. Attempts to address those
issues unilaterally at the entity level and to block the
functioning of State-level institutions are unacceptable.
In addition to holding general elections throughout
the country, authorities are to hold local elections in
Mostar no later than October. In that regard, we hope
that political parties and institutions will meet their
obligations to implement the ruling of the Bosnian
Constitutional Court on the electoral system for Mostar.
Looking beyond elections, we hope Bosnia and
Herzegovina will again focus on key reforms for EuroAtlantic integration, which the United States continues
to view as the surest and most expeditious path to the
country’s long-term stability and prosperity. As the
High Representative notes in his report (S/2014/314,
annex), authorities failed to make any concrete progress
on the outstanding “5+2” objectives and criteria. We
also share his concern over the Republika Srpska’s

S/PV.7176

lack of compliance with its obligation to provide the
High Representative with timely access to officials,
institutions and documents.
Despite efforts by senior European officials,
Bosnian leaders failed to reach a final agreement on
implementing the European Court of Human Rights
decision in the Sejdic-Finci case, a key requirement for
European Union (EU) integration. A defence property
solution, which is also a “5+2” requirement, remains
the condition for activating Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
NATO membership action plan.
Finally, the United States strongly supports the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as guaranteed by the Dayton Peace
Accords. We strongly condemn recent statements
calling for Republika Srpska’s secession. Any action
taken by Republika Srpska towards the dissolution of
Bosnia and Herzegovina would violate Dayton as well
as the Bosnian Constitution. Secessionist statements
are nothing more than attempts to distract the public
from the economic and political stagnation of the past
four years.
We continue to support the EU-led peacekeeping
force Operation Althea and the NATO headquarters in
Sarajevo. We believe those institutions are essential in
sustaining a safe and secure environment in Bosnia,
provide essential capacity-building to the Government
and provide reassurance across ethnic lines that the
international community is committed to Bosnian
stability.
We are optimistic about the future of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and will continue to work with the
Bosnian Government to encourage progress and to
improve the lives of its citizens and to advance its path
to Euro-Atlantic integration.
Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I would like to
join others in welcoming High Representative Valentin
Inzko back to the Council and to thank him for his
comprehensive and objective report (S/2014/314, annex).
The United Kingdom strongly supports the work of the
High Representative and his ongoing commitment to
ensure the implementation of the Dayton Peace Accords
against significant political and security challenges.
The United Kingdom shares the High Representative’s
deep concern over the ongoing situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The country’s development has been
brought to a halt by economic and political stagnation.

14-332129/24

S/PV.7176

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

There continues to be no substantive progress towards
European Union and NATO membership and there
has been a worrying increase in secessionist rhetoric
and civil unrest. The violence and protests that broke
out in February in several major cities in Bosnia
and Herzegovina — like others, we regret that those
briefly turned violent — were a clear demonstration
of the population’s deep dissatisfaction with the
country’s current situation. That should be a wake-up
call for Bosnia and Herzegovina’s leaders and for
the international community. We must now focus on
turning that difficult moment into an opportunity for
all the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina. That requires
a unified international response that sets out a new
commitment to a broader agenda in the country.
For their part, Bosnia and Herzegovina’s leaders
need to engage fully with domestic grievances, in
particular those centred on socioeconomic issues. As
the High Representative has said, that is a fundamental
change in the political dynamics that is very necessary.
The political space needs to be filled with a genuine
commitment to promoting the interests of Bosnian
citizens, not with divisive nationalist rhetoric.
We support the High Representative’s view
that an engaged and proactive civil society is vital
for the country’s democratic future. Both Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s politicians and the international
community should continue to engage with those
domestic voices for change. A strong sense of local
ownership will be the key to delivering those aspirations
for reform.
We share the High Representative’s concern
regarding the recent increase in divisive rhetoric from
politicians in Bosnia and Herzegovina seeking to
manipulate the protests into an ethnic issue. Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s leaders should be in no doubt that
the international community is unwavering in our
commitment to the territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a sovereign and united country. In that
context we welcome the constructive approach taken
by Bosnia and Herzegovina’s regional neighbours,
including the Prime Minister of Serbia’s visit to
Sarajevo on 13 May and his clear affirmation of the
Dayton Agreement and Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
territorial integrity.
The United Kingdom calls on all signatories to the
Dayton Agreement to abide by their commitments. It is
entirely unacceptable that the authorities in Republika

10/24

15/05/2014

Srpska have failed to cooperate with the Office of the
High Representative. Bosnia and Herzegovina’s leaders
are obliged to cooperate with the High Representative
and the international organizations and agencies set
out in the Dayton Peace Accords and provide them
with the necessary access to officials, institutions and
documents in order to let them carry out their mandate.
The United Kingdom strongly supports the efforts
of the European Union (EU) and NATO to help the
country make progress on its Euro-Atlantic path and
work towards delivering the “5+2” conditionality
that would enable a closure of the Office of the High
Representative. But it is clear that we are not there yet.
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s leaders need to demonstrate
that they are genuine partners for reform. The country
has a clear route towards EU and NATO membership,
which will provide the proven framework for peace,
security and regional cooperation. The United Kingdom
is fully supportive of that goal and will do everything it
can to facilitate progress. But Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
leaders need to work together with their own citizens to
create real change and make progress on the country’s
Euro-Atlantic future.
In that regard, we strongly support the role of
EU Special Representative Peter Sørensen, who has
put together a package of measures to drive reform
in the country. The United Kingdom endorses those
initiatives, such as the May conference on a compact
for growth. The EU Special Representative will play a
vital role in re-energizing the development of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We commend his continued close
and collaborative working relationship with High
Representative Inzko.
We are deeply concerned by the fragility of
the political and security situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The United Kingdom shares the High
Representative’s assessment that the European
Union-led peacekeeping force Operation Althea
continues to play a central role in supporting Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s own efforts to maintain a safe and
secure environment. We will therefore support the
retention of that vital asset when its mandate comes up
for renewal later in the year.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I also thank
the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina
for his briefing. I align myself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union. I will
concentrate on three points.

14-33212

15/05/2014

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

First, the Bosnian people clearly demonstrated their
discontent in February. As Mr. Inzko has highlighted,
the demonstrations expressed the growing mistrust of an
elite that has, to date, failed to create functioning State
institutions, meet its people’s needs or provide prospects
for the future. Regrettably, the protest turned briefly
violent, but luckily resulted in property damage only.
However, it called into question institutional viability.
It showed that Bosnians wish to have their voices heard
and will recognized in creating a trustworthy political
class with integrity. That is the basic lesson to be drawn
from the citizens groups known as plenums that were
created following the February demonstrations.
We support a peaceful expression of the emerging
political awareness, through strong civic participation
in October’s general elections. As we look forward,
the electoral campaign must enable those desiring
to lead Bosnia to prove that they are able to meet
the expectations of all Bosnians, particularly in the
socioeconomic sphere.
February’s demonstrations have proved that
Bosnians — some of whom never knew the country
of Yugoslavia — today desire a new future. We must
endeavour, together, to provide them with long-term
prospects.
The prospect of European integration offers the
only viable way forward for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and that prospect should act as a catalyst for the
transformation of the country. We reiterate our
commitment to seeing Bosnia and Herzegovina join
the European Union as a united and sovereign country
that enjoys full territorial integrity. That hope is widely
shared by the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina, for
whom the European Union has never lost its appeal. We
want to see that mutual desire translated into reality.
The European Union has a full role to play in the
socioeconomic area in particular. In launching the
initiative to promote growth and employment, the
European Union is involved in two ways in Bosnia and
Herzegovina: by intervening directly in response to the
economic needs of the population; and by supporting
the country’s authorities to take the necessary reform
measures to allow the emergence of a sustainable
economy. However, it remains true than the leaders of
Bosnia and Herzegovina will need to undertake reforms
in the future to make their country more functional.
Finally, while the European Union mission,
Operation Althea, retains a residual ability to support

S/PV.7176

the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the European
Union must intervene primarily in the area of ​​capacitybuilding to allow the Bosnian security forces to operate
independently.
The framework inherited from Dayton remains the
framework for action by the international community
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The High Representative,
Mr. Inzko, who is the guarantor of the peace accords,
has our full support, and we commend his impartial
work to support the emergence of a State that is united
and responds to all of the aspirations of the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We recall that all parties have
an obligation to cooperate with him and his services
under the very terms of the agreements, in particular to
provide him with the required documentation.
We also call on all the constituent parts of Bosnia
and Herzegovina to put an end to all nationalist
rhetoric and stop any action that divides the country.
Our message is clear: there can be no questioning of
the territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The future of Bosnia and Herzegovina requires
increasingly close cooperation between its constituent
entities. Intercommunal reconciliation is crucial to
consolidating the sense, by all parties, that they belong
and have a shared history and destiny. It is in that
spirit of reconciliation that France is involved in the
commemoration of the First World War in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, to which Mr. Inzko referred earlier.
Ms. King (Australia): I would like to thank the
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his comprehensive briefing.
We continue to believe that the Office of the High
Representative has an important role to play in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Mr. Inzko’s briefing today has
reminded us of the utility of the various strands of his
important work, and we thank him for his efforts.
Australia reaffirms its support for the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We remain convinced that that is necessary to ensure
peace and stability in the country and the broader
Western Balkans region. We renew our calls on all
political leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina, especially
in Republika Srpska, not to undermine the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The lead-up to the twentieth anniversary of the
Dayton Peace Agreement next year is an opportunity
to reflect on how far Bosnia and Herzegovina has come
since the end of the tragic civil war. Over the past 19 years

14-3321211/24

S/PV.7176

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

of peace, Bosnia and Herzegovina has transitioned from
a post-conflict society to one that is looking towards
European Union accession. Its governance institutions
are now meeting regularly. Consequently, the Office of
the High Representative has been able to take a lesser
role in the domestic affairs of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Nevertheless, significant challenges remain.
We share Mr. Inzko’s assessment that Bosnia and
Herzegovina has not progressed as far and as fast as it
could have, due to the inability of its leaders to agree
on important political and economic reforms. Over the
past six months, Bosnia and Herzegovina has not moved
forward on its declared path of Euro-Atlantic integration.
Yet, in our view, that will be vital to the country’s longterm prosperity and stability. The lack of agreement on
a coordinating mechanism with the European Union is
obstructing Bosnia and Herzegovina’s progress towards
European Union integration. The country’s political
leaders must resolve that impasse. The implementation
of the Sejdic-Finci ruling remains essential to ensuring
equality for all citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and that they are able to take part in shaping their
country’s future. The lack of progress on the status of
military property blocks the activation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s NATO membership action plan.
In December, the Peace Implementation Council
Steering Board noted again the failure of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to address the remaining objectives and
conditions for the closure of the Office of the High
Representative. We call on all political actors in the
country to work productively to reach the compromises
necessary to advance that process.
The emergence of direct-democracy forms of
civic engagement, as embodied in recent plenums, was
a positive development. We were concerned by the
brief outbreak of violence in February, which marred
otherwise peaceful demonstrations. However, Australia
is supportive of the right of the citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to peacefully express their frustration with
the socioeconomic situation, the levels of corruption
and the high unemployment rates. That type of civic
engagement has the potential to be a powerful tool to
focus the political debate on the necessary governance
and socioeconomic reforms.
Australia also welcomes the fact that the situation
in the country remains generally calm, and we renew
our appreciation for the role played by the European
Union military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina in

12/24

15/05/2014

supporting a safe and secure environment. We would
also like to note the continuing importance of the work
done by the Ministry of Defence and the armed forces
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to control and manage
the country’s ammunition and weapons, including
aging and surplus material. With the support of the
international community, including NATO and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the disposal of that material contributes directly to
security and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Bosnia and Herzegovina can continue on a path
towards integration with Europe, as its neighbours
have done, or it can fall further behind. While the
international community has an important role to play,
it is up to the leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to enact
the reforms necessary to achieve a stable, peaceful and
prosperous future for its citizens.
Mr. Gálvez (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome
the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Valentin Inzko, and thank him for his report
(S/2014/314, annex) and his important work for peace
and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We would like to start by expressing our regret that
the implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement
remains a daily challenge because of the differences
between the political parties, the political stalemate, the
failure to implement the rulings of the European Court
of Human Rights and the negative and secessionist
rhetoric of Republika Srpska, which should be
denounced by the international community. Those acts
undermine national cohesion between the different
ethnic communities in the country, hinder national
reconciliation and delay the country’s progress towards
Euro-Atlantic integration. In that respect, we call on
the country’s political class to shoulder their agreed
responsibilities and work in a spirit of reconciliation
to deal with the challenges facing the country. A
fundamental change is needed in the political class,
as Mr. Inzko stated. In that context, Chile reiterates
its support for the Dayton Peace Agreement, the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and respect for the rule of law at the
national and international levels.
We are concerned about the deteriorating situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which highlights the
failure to make progress in the implementation of the
Dayton Peace Agreement, which was signed 19 years
ago. The violent demonstrations in early February in

14-33212

15/05/2014

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

several major cities were, above all, a call for elected
officials and political parties to change course in order
to effectively support the country’s progress. It was
a call on the political class to focus its energy on the
interests of the people.
We appreciate the efforts of the High Representative
and we support the important work he carries out to
strengthen the rule of law, comply with the rulings of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia,
facilitate reforms to ensure national prosperity and
oversee the return of displaced persons in the country.
However, the lack of progress on the five objectives
and two conditions for the closure of the Office of
the High Representative is an indication of Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s lack of commitment to the future.
We urge the leaders of all parties involved to work
constructively to break the impasse.
We support Bosnia and Herzegovina’s efforts to
overcome its past. We underscore the progress that has
been made, such as the amendments to legislation that
regulates the issuance of citizen identification numbers,
which were finally adopted and which allow citizens
to once again receive those numbers from the central
State. We also urge all political leaders to refrain from
negative rhetoric and do their utmost to achieve genuine
integration and national reconciliation.
I would like to conclude by reiterating the firm
commitment, which my country has demonstrated
since the beginning, to the process of moving towards
a stable Bosnia and Herzegovina that is committed to
defending its territorial integrity in a politically stable
State and with institutions that work to serve its people,
in particular with regard to job creation for youth, in
peace and prosperity.
Chile participated in the United Nations Mission
in Bosnia and Herzegovina with police personnel and
continues to work within the European Union-led force
Operation Althea. It has thereby maintained 10 years of
uninterrupted Chilean military presence there.
We call on the international community to maintain
its commitment to support the aspirations of the people
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to a peaceful and prosperous
Euro-Atlantic future. We also wish to support initiatives
aimed at national reconciliation. In that connection, it is
important to provide the necessary resources to ensure
that the mandate under the framework of the Dayton
Agreement of 1995 is fulfilled.

S/PV.7176

Finally, I want to reaffirm our support and
commitment to the Office of the High Representative,
which must continue to receive the political support and
resources necessary to carry out its important work.
Mrs. Kazragienė (Lithuania): We warmly welcome
Mr. Valentine Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, to the Security Council, thank him
for his report (S/2014/314, annex) and reiterate our
support to him.
Lithuania associates itself with the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union.
Almost 20 years ago, the Dayton Agreement ended
the three-and-a-half-year-long Bosnian war. At the
time, we had a vision of a united, stable, prosperous,
multi-ethnic Bosnia and Herzegovina. Today Bosnia and
Herzegovina is lagging behind its neighbours and other
countries in the region. The political will of the leaders
of the country to find consensus on compelling issues
is crucial. Sound political will is already evidenced in
the region, such as Croatia’s recent accession to the
European Union and the ongoing Belgrade-Pristina
dialogue stipulating the progressive steps of Serbia and
Kosovo towards the European Union. We commend
neighbouring countries for their political support to
Bosnia and Herzegovina and for their readiness to
engage in regional cooperation, including, and most
importantly, on economic cooperation.
In April, the European Union sent a strong message
to the political allies of Bosnia and Herzegovina calling
for collective responsibility. The European Union also
reassured it of its engagement and support. Broadening
the European Union agenda clearly indicates that the
European Union does not intend to retreat or reduce
its presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina. However, the
future of the country is in the hands of its people and
its political leaders. Like the representative of Jordan,
we have not heard of the universal human value of
ethnicity either.
We commend the decision of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s Central Election Commission to
announce the holding of general elections in October.
We urge the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
actively participate in the elections and to choose
leadership that will take on the responsibility of
charting a path towards irreversible progress in the
country. There should be no place for disrespectful or
divisive rhetoric throughout the electoral campaign and
in general.

14-3321213/24

S/PV.7176

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

We are concerned about increasing statements from
a number of Republika Srpska officials challenging
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as stated in the report under discussion
today. Lithuania reaffirms its commitment to the
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a
sovereign and united country.
Much remains to be done to foster economic
development in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as the country
has the highest rate of youth unemployment — 59 per
cent — the lowest rate of economic activity, the highest
level of social assistance and the lowest foreign direct
investment per capita in the region. The socioeconomic
protests that started in February are a reflection of that
frustration. The lack of economic growth is detrimental
to restoring confidence between political leaders and
society. Without the rule of law, good governance
and anti-corruption measures, economic growth will
be inconclusive and stagnate further. We urge the
competent authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to launch reforms to strengthen the legislative and
regulatory framework.
There is also an urgent need to create a functioning
State structure that would enable Bosnia and
Herzegovina to be a credible partner. The Dayton Peace
Agreement was a necessary tool to end the worst war in
Europe since the Second World War. The fact that the
country has proven capable of determining its future in
a safe and secure environment is a major achievement
for the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The international community, with its substantial
political and financial commitment, has played an
important role in supporting reforms in the country.
The achievements should be sustained and built upon.
Again, all responsibility lies with the political leaders
of the country.
I wish to recall here resolution 2123 (2013), which
calls on Bosnia and Herzegovina’s political leaders
to refrain from divisive rhetoric and make further
concrete and tangible progress towards European Union
integration, including by implementing the European
Court of Human Rights ruling in the Sejdić-Finci case.
We support the Office of the High Representative
in fostering initiatives for more inclusive dialogue
among all ethnic communities, including at the local
level. We believe that the new leadership will be
committed to translating the legitimate concerns of the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina into legislative and

14/24

15/05/2014

fully implemented initiatives to launch structural and
institutional reforms, including the strengthening of the
rule of law, anti-corruption and financial accountability
measures and protecting human rights. It is critical
that the international community remain committed to
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The interests of States — not
individuals — must prevail in the decision-making
process, which will lead the country to political stability
and economic welfare.
Finally we reiterate that, as long as the authorities
of Bosnia and Herzegovina fail to implement the
standing requirements necessary for the closure of the
Office of the High Representative, the Office has an
important to play.Lithuania also stands ready to engage
in discussions, together with regional and international
partners, on a possible recalibration of the approach
towards the mandate of the Office.
Mr. Wang Min (China): I
Representative Inzko for his briefing.

thank

High

China welcomes the positive progress achieved
by Bosnia and Herzegovina in enhancing national
reconciliation, promoting economic development and
building and strengthening the rule of law. Meanwhile,
we note that Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to face
complications and difficulties in achieving sustainable
economic and social development and lasting peace
and stability in the country, and that it continues to
need support and assistance from the international
community.
China respects the independence, sovereignty,
national unity and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
China also respects the right of the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to decide the future of their
country, and supports the right of all the country’s
ethnic groups to live in peace, harmony and common
development. We hope that all ethnic groups will work
on behalf of the long-term interests of their country,
take practical measures to strengthen the outcome of
the political process, resolve their differences through
dialogue and cooperation, and implement the Dayton
Peace Agreement in a comprehensive manner with
a view to achieving greater progress in all areas of
State-building.
The question of Bosnia and Herzegovina is
extremely complex and sensitive. The international
community should take a balanced and prudent approach

14-33212

15/05/2014

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

by fully respecting the leadership and ownership of
the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and commit
itself to playing a positive role in promoting unity and
cooperation among all the ethnic groups of the country.
China supports High Representative Inzko in his efforts
to fulfil his mandated activities in an appropriate and
constructive manner and to continue to play a positive
role in promoting the political process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
China welcomes the assistance provided by
the International Monetary Fund in maintaining
the financial and economic stability of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. China is prepared to join the international
community in its ongoing efforts to make its due
contribution to the peace, stability and development of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
too thank the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Valentin Inzko, for his briefing and
commitment.
Luxembourg associates itself with the statement to
be made by the observer of the European Union.
The High Representative has painted a bleak
picture of the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
negative trend of recent years has continued. Economic
performance remains below the country’s potential.
Inter-institutional deadlock persists. Statements
made by Republika Srpska leaders questioning the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina have become more frequent. Bosnian
politicians have failed to implement the reforms
necessary to move the country forward on the path
to European Union membership, even though such
membership is the stated objective of the leaders of the
country and desired by the vast majority of Bosnians.
The question of military property, which has been
pending for years, continues to prevent any progress
in the implementation of the NATO membership action
plan. Much remains to be done in the fields of the rule
of law, the fight against corruption and the protection of
human rights. Of particular importance in that regard
is the implementation of the judgement of the European
Court of Human Rights in the Sejdic-Finci case in order
to ensure the equality of all citizens before the law.
Luxembourg shares the concerns expressed by
the High Representative, but we must not stop there.
We must look forward; hence the importance of the
ongoing concrete and multifaceted support that the

S/PV.7176

European Union provides to the institutions and citizens
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. This support focuses on
the rule of law, institutional reform with a view to the
establishment of efficient governance, the maintenance
of order and security, and economic reforms. The
events that took place in February in several several
Bosnian cities reflect the impatience of citizens calling
for an improved socioeconomic situation. All citizens,
especially the young, require new opportunities. The
political leaders of the country must create them.
The international community is ready to actively
support the efforts of the Bosnians. We welcome in this
respect the launch of the Compact for Jobs and Growth,
to take place on 26 and 27 May in Sarajevo with the
support of the European Union. The Compact is intended
to assist the institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
define concrete structural socioeconomic reforms to
boost the economy and stimulate job creation in the
short and medium terms.
We appeal to the political leaders of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to start listening to the public and to meet
the legitimate concerns of citizens in dialogue with
civil society. We share the hope expressed by the High
Representative that the increased civic engagement
embodied by the plenums — the civic groups that
formed as a result of the events that took place early
this year — will lead to greater accountability on the
part of Bosnian leaders at the local and national levels.
The prospect of the general elections in October should
encourage policymakers to intensify their efforts to
address the grievances of citizens.
It should be noted that the security situation
remained generally calm over the past six months.
Polls show that the vast majority of Bosnians feel safe.
The European Union Force has not had to intervene to
restore peace. That represents a trend to be welcomed.
Let me conclude by emphasizing that separatist
rhetoric intended to sow division has no place in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Luxembourg reaffirms its deep
conviction that the future of Bosnia and Herzegovina as
a sovereign, united, stable, prosperous and multiethnic
State is within the European family, like its neighbours.
We know that this belief is shared by the international
community, the countries of the region and the vast
majority of Bosnian citizens. Bosnia and Herzegovina
can count on the continued support of Luxembourg to
help realize its European destiny.

14-3321215/24

S/PV.7176

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

15/05/2014

Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I thank High Representative
Inzko for his briefing. I also commend him for the
diligent manner in which he has carried out his mandate.

the competence of the central Government and do not
comply with the provisions of the General Framework
Agreement for Peace.

Nigeria notes with concern the limited progress
made in implementing the Dayton Peace Agreement, the
frequent calls of the President and officials of Republika
Srpska for secession from Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and the public attacks against key State institutions.
We share the concern of the High Representative over
statements made by public figures. Promoting secession
could have a destabilizing effect on the country. Such
divisive rhetoric is inimical to national cohesion and
could indeed have negative consequences for the peace
and stability of the region.

We are pleased to note that more active engagement
by citizens has led to greater accountability on the part
of the Government and has encouraged the political
class to refocus its energies on serving the interests
of citizens. As the High Representative said in his
briefing, that has the potential of deepening democracy
and fostering good governance in the country.

Another threat to the cohesion of Bosnia and
Herzegovina is the use of constitutional blocking
mechanisms at the State level to prevent the country
from making progress, and then exploiting that to
justify calls for the dissolution of the country. Political
leaders, especially at the State level, must understand
that the country’s Constitution precludes the possibility
of secession. We urge them to refrain from calling for
the dissolution of the country. We support efforts to
strengthen the State at the national level while preserving
the rights and prerogatives of all communities.
We note with concern the other challenges to the
General Framework Agreement for Peace, mentioned
in the report before the Council (S/2014/314), including
the blocking of the functioning of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s central institutions, challenges to the
competencies of those institutions, challenges to the
single economic space in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
challenges to national judicial institutions. We urge
political leaders in Republika Srpska to cooperate with
the central Government and refrain from taking steps
that would challenge the constitutional authority of the
central Government and relevant central institutions. It
is necessary for leaders at the State level to appreciate
the limits of power at that level.
We call for more support for the revised strategy
for the implementation of annex VII of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace, which addresses
issues of non-discrimination, non-segregation and
inclusiveness. Nigeria would like to see all the citizens
of Bosnia and Herzegovina accorded equal status
across the country regardless of their ethnicity. We
therefore urge political leaders to refrain from adopting
residency laws at the entity level that are solely within

16/24

As Bosnia and Herzegovina approaches the
general elections in October, we are concerned that
the Constitution grants only ethnic Bosniaks, Serbs
and Croats the right to contest in presidential and
parliamentary elections. That curbs the political rights
of the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina who do not
belong to those three ethnic groups and effectively
shuts them out of elective office. In the interest of
inclusiveness, we would like to see that law changed
so that all citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina can
participate freely as candidates in elections.
Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having organized this
important follow-up meeting on Bosnia and Herzegovina.
I also thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his briefing and for his
report (S/2014/314, annex).
Bosnia and Herzegovina emerged as a result of one
of the deadliest European crises since the fall of the
Berlin Wall. In spite of the adoption, in December 1995,
of the General Framework Agreement for Peace, whose
overall goal was to consolidate peace and establish
a tripartite governing system in order to preserve
territorial integrity, challenges continue to persist all
these years later. Bosnia and Herzegovina finds itself in
a situation in which the growing popular frustration and
disatisfaction, the rise of nationalism, the legislative
stalement at the federal and local levels, the challenges
in holding of general elections in October and the
delay in achieving objectives and conditions set by
the the Office of the High Representative threaten the
foundations of the nation State.
First, with regard to the demonstrations that began
in February in Tuzla, which then spread to Zenica,
Mostar, Sarajevo and elsewhere, we deplore the violent
turn of the protests and the resulting injuries and major
damage to property. We nevertheless commend and
welcome the protesters’ initiative in setting up plenums

14-33212

15/05/2014

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

as vehicles for dialogue in which to air complaints,
thereby illustrating their capacity to organize and
their desire to engage for the public good. Owing to
the nature of their complaints — which called for
reducing the salaries and privileges of elected officials
and reviewing privatization and socio-economic
reforms — the plenums have come to serve as
genuine and responsible interlocutors when it comes
to development, and that in a country in which the
unemployment rate exceeds 40 per cent. That type of
participation assures the basis for democracy in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. The country’s leaders should take
advantage of those achievements and turn them into an
element of national consensus.
We believe that diversity is an a crucial aspect
in building the nation State. Acts of exclusion and
discrimination linked to the conflict in the Balkans are
supposed to be resolved through the Dayton Agreement.
We deplore the fact that the new situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is marked by major political differences.
We also deplore the secessionist and pro-independence
rhetoric, which poses a serious threat to the country’s
unity and stability. We condemn such acts and call on
political actors to respect the territorial integrity of the
country.
Chad welcomes the planned holding of general
elections in October, in connection with which the
Parliament set up an inter-agency working group
in November 2013 to develop a law and prepare for
the elections in the country. We also commend the
efforts made by the federal Government to continue to
function regularly and to pursue its efforts in drafting
and adopting new laws in an unstable and fragile
institutional context. The inability of State institutions
to function normally owing to infighting saps the
willingness to address political, legal and economic
issues. We encourage the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to undertake economic reforms likely to
contribute effectively to addressing the social situation
in the country and fomenting good governance.
In conclusion, my delegation reiterates its support
for the efforts of the Office of the High Representative
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We urge the international
community, and the Security Council, the European
Union and NATO in particular, to redouble their efforts
to provide Bosnia and Herzegovinca with the necessary
assistance to consolidate national unity and strengthen
its institutional capacity for the sake of peace and
stability.

S/PV.7176

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the Republic of Korea.
My delegation welcomes to the Council High
Representative Valentin Inzko. We appreciate his
briefing.
While we acknowledge recent positive developments
such as the appointment of Constitutional Court
judges, it is disappointing that the lack of agreement
among political actors continues to have a negative
impact on the overall reform process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We are also concerned that the ongoing
political gridlock has undermined the country’s
progress towards Euro-Atlantic integration and fanned
economic hardship, producing high unemployment.
The protests that started in early February obviously
attest to the frustration of the people. Another worrying
trend is the increased divisive rhetoric challenging the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country.
Commitment to the unity of Bosnia and Herzegovina
as one sovereign country is the very foundation of the
Dayton Peace Agreement. We reiterate our full support
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Given the current lack of ownership by political
stakeholders, the plenums that emerged as a platform
for civil society are a welcome development. We hope
that new form of constructive political discourse can
help to enhance accountability in the politics of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We also call for more dialogue
among all political stakeholders with a view to bringing
about concrete reforms, including the long-overdue
implementation of the Sejdić- Finci ruling. We hope
that the elections in October will provide momentum
with which the country can move forward towards a
more equitable democracy.
Before I conclude, I would like again to express our
full support for the efforts of the High Representative.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
Ms. Čolaković (Bosnia and Herzegovina): We
would like to reiterate that the security situation in
the country remains calm, peaceful and stabile. The
European Union (EU) military mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina continues to play an important role in
supporting our efforts in dealing with threats that could

14-3321217/24

S/PV.7176

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

undermine a safe and secure environment, in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions. In
addition, we take this opportunity to reiterate our
appreciation to those Member States that participate in
the EU-led force in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
With regard to the functioning of the highest State
institutions, the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina
has been meeting regularly. Bearing in mind that
Bosnia and Herzegovina has moved from being a
host country to one that now participates in United
Nations peacekeeping operations, as well as in NATO
operations such as the International Security Assistance
Force, we would like to highlight that the Presidency
has adopted decisions on extending the participation
of Bosnia and Herzegovina in international operations
in Afghanistan, on peacekeeping operations in the
Democratic Republic of Congo and on the contribution
of troops to the United Mission in Mali.
As to the references in paragraph 30 of the report
that the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina was
unable to agree on situation in Ukraine, I would like
to clarify the following. While we deeply appreciate
the role of the High Representative in overseeing
the implementation of the agreement without being
responsible for the evaluation of foreign policy
decisions, I want to remind the Security Council that
the Presidency is responsible for conducting the foreign
policy of the country and makes decisions by consensus
on all foreign policy issues according to the Constitution
of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Furthermore, I would like to remind the Security
Council that my country is fully determined to promote
a peaceful resolution of the conflicts in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. In that regard, the Presidency issued a
statement on 6 March that called on all the parties to the
dispute in Ukraine to refrain from the use of force and
to immediately engage in political dialogue to resolve
the situation in the interests of peace and regional and
global stability.
We believe that involving women in conflict
prevention and mediation and deploying women
protection advisers to United Nations peacekeeping and
special political missions are crucial to building and
reinforcing peace. We have been working on additional
efforts to advance that issue and have adopted a
policy whereby one third of candidates nominated for
peacekeeping missions must be women.

18/24

15/05/2014

The Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina also continued to convene on a regular
basis, adopting new laws and sets of amendments to
existing legislation. Those included the 2014 State
budget, the public procurement law and amendments
to the law on the electricity transmission company and
amendments to the law on money laundering and the
financing of terrorist activities. The work plan of the
Council of Ministers for 2014 was also adopted, as were
a framework budget for the period 2014 to 2016 and a
partnership action plan for NATO for the same period.
As in all other countries of the world, we have our
own challenges. We face difficult economic crises and
bitter austerity measures with negative implications on
all aspects of human life. In that connection, we would
like to inform the Council that protests against poor
economic conditions took place in several major cities
of the country on 7 February. The Council of Ministers
held two sessions with the relevant State-level law
enforcement agencies to discuss how best to improve
the provision of security for the institutions of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
However, the challenges we face will not
discourage us from fighting for better respect of human
rights and a better life for our citizens. We see a need
to work on eliminating all serious obstacles in order to
achieve the noble goal of universal respect for human
rights. Without sustainable progress on the protection
of all human rights, especially economic and social
rights, including strengthening the rule of law and
anti-corruption and financial accountability measures,
there is no sustainable development and security. All
those components are mutually reinforcing. In that
regard, we welcome the European Union’s readiness to
support initiatives to improve economic governance,
strengthen competitiveness and stimulate economic
growth in my country.
Peaceful societies are the basis for sustainable
development. That is the reason that we are dedicated
to working for the future, which means more work
on political will and the allocation of resources in
order to ensure the implementation of strategies and
programmes for development. In addition, there is also
the issue of the accountability and ensuring quality of
life for our citizens, especially women, girls and youth,
in dignity with equal opportunities, including access to
health services, education and meaningful employment.
In addition, we would also like to inform the
Council that the Parliament of Bosnia and Herzegovina
14-33212

15/05/2014

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

and the House of Peoples have adopted amendments
to legislation that regulate the issuance of citizen
identification numbers. In accordance with the
provisions of the election law of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
we expect the Central Election Commission of Bosnia
and Herzegovina to announce this month the holding of
general elections to take place in October.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has made significant
progress towards European integration despite all
the complexities present within its society. Genuine
commitment to the European path has been our
highest priority. In that regard, we would like to take
this opportunity to commend the European Union’s
increased engagement and heightened role in our
country, including the enhanced presence by the
combined European Union Special Representative and
its delegation.
My country remains a potential candidate for
European Union membership. The Stabilization
and Association Agreement between Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the European Union was ratified in
2011 but has not yet entered into force. However, the
Agreement’s trade-related part came into force upon
its signing and has been successfully implemented ever
since 2008 in all its domains.
Nonetheless, political dialogue aimed at finding
solutions for all open questions has continued so
that the Agreement can come into force. That would
enable the country to submit a credible application for
European Union membership. We strongly believe that
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s progress along the European
Union’s enlargement path is also in the interests of all
European Union member States. Therefore, serious
and progressive engagement by the European Union
is important to helping our country to facilitate the
implementation of the necessary reforms on our path
towards a European future. Such engagement would
also be a constructive way of resolving the outstanding
difficulties and fostering the dynamic of the integration
process.
We are also making additional efforts necessary
for completing the “5+2” agenda, which is obligation
for the closure of the Office of the High Representative
and for the resolution of all outstanding issues. The
implementation of the Sejdic-Finci judgment of the
European Court of Human Rights also remains to be
addressed.

S/PV.7176

The International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia has played an important role in the
prosecution of those responsible for serious violations
of international law on the territory of the former
Yugoslavia. The Tribunal is supposed to serve as a
constant reminder that there is no impunity for such
serious crimes. We still insist on our common goal
to investigate the crimes that were committed and to
adequately prosecute the perpetrators of those crimes,
regardless of their ethnicity. In that light, Bosnia and
Herzegovina continues its constructive cooperation
with the Tribunal. Considering that the Tribunal will
soon complete its mandate, further processing of war
crimes will have to be transferred to national judicial
systems.
As regional cooperation also plays an important
role, we are certain that the protocol on the exchange
of evidence and information on war crimes, signed
between the Offices of the Prosecutors of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Serbia and Croatia, will serve as an
impetus towards strengthening communication and
enhancing coordination among the Offices. My country
remains dedicated to further promoting and increasing
regional cooperation, which is in the common interest
of the countries in the region.
The implementation of the existing human rights
instruments, sustainable return and local integration
of refugees and internally displaced persons (IDPs)
remains the priorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
continue good cooperation between partner countries in
the framework of the Sarajevo process on refugees and
IDPs, and see that the comprehensive and coordinated
return of refugees and IDPs throughout the region is
crucial to lasting peace.
Regarding the initiative launched by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) in the past year and renewed recently, on
eventually declaring the termination of refugee status
for the refugees from Bosnia and Herzegovina, we
believe that the UNHCR decision to terminate that
status needs to be further discussed, especially bearing
in mind the effect of such a decision on the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Such determination on the
part of the UNHCR would most likely have an impact on
the situation of those groups, for which the conditions
to return to their pre-war homes have not been met.
Annex VII of the Dayton Peace Agreement guarantees
to all refugees from Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as

14-3321219/24

S/PV.7176

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

internally displaced persons, the right to return to their
pre-war homes.
The current figures from UNHCR provide strong
evidence that the parties to annex VII have not yet
created the conditions necessary for the voluntary
return of refugees and IDPs to their pre-war homes.
Therefore, we strongly believe that the proposed
declaration of cessation of refugee status jeopardizes
the realization of the objectives of the revised strategy
for the implementation of annex VII of the Dayton
Peace Agreement. For those reasons, I would like to
inform the Council that my country does not support
the decision to terminate refugee status in 2014, but
insists that consideration of the cessation of refugee
status be postponed until 2017, the time of the expected
completion of the regional housing programme as well
as other programmes currently under way.
We are aware that States bear the primary
responsibility to respect and ensure the human rights
of individuals within their territories. we are fully
committed to addressing all forms of violence against
women and girls, including sexual violence in conflict.
the protection of women in conflict situations and
ending impunity remain our utmost priorities. we have a
track record of definitive action to implement resolution
1325 (2000), and we were the first country in SouthEast Europe to develop a comprehensive national action
plan for its implementation. With the aim of improving
the overall situation of female victims of rape, we have
made efforts to finalize the process of developing a
second action plan for the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), which contains important provisions for
survivors of conflict-related sexual violence.
This year, Bosnia and Herzegovina presented a
candidate for the Committee on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW).
If elected, our candidate will place her priorities on
prevention and on raising awareness of those most
important issues. She will continue fighting prejudice
and impunity. My country attaches great significance
to its candidature and hopes thereby to advance the
CEDAW agenda.
We are making additional efforts to resolve the
remaining border and property issues with neighbouring
countries. Regional cooperation and good-neighbourly
relations form an essential part of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s process of moving towards the European
Union. We continue our active involvement in regional
initiatives and have further developed our bilateral
20/24

15/05/2014

relations with other enlargement countries and
neighbouring European Union member States. Regional
cooperation is one of the foreign policy priorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the entire region. It is
an important element in the implementation of the
Dayton Peace Agreement and indicates the scope of my
country’s foreign policy. My country is committed and
dedicated to the development of friendly relationships
with its neighbours, to the processes of European
integration, and to the resolution of outstanding issues
in the European spirit.
In spite of the positive developments in the country,
we are aware of the stand-off in the political process. It
is necessary to develop a positive atmosphere that will
foster constructive political dialogue leading towards
the resolution of the outstanding issues. All changes in
Bosnia and Herzegovina must be based on the rule of
law. Therefore, the full implementation of the Dayton
Peace Agreement is imperative.
In conclusion, I would like to remind the
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation
that, in accordance with the Constitution of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bosniaks are one of the three constitutive
peoples and that referring to them as Muslims is not in
accordance with our Constitution.
The President: I now give the floor to the Deputy
Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations.
Mr. Vrailas: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU). The candidate country
Montenegro and Ukraine align themselves with this
statement.
I join other speakers in welcoming High
Representative Valentin Inzko back to the Council and
would like to reassure him of our continued support.
Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to face
challenges that arise largely from the lack of political
will on the part of the political leaders of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to look beyond their narrow ethnic and
party interests and to work out compromises necessary
to move the country forward in a number of areas of key
importance. The country is increasingly lagging behind
others in the western Balkans region, particularly as
regards domestic, political and economic reforms and
progress towards the European Union. The prolonged
political stalemate and the absence of positive
momentum in the domestic reform process lead to the
further weakening of an already fragile economy and
14-33212

15/05/2014

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

put a heavy burden on the socioeconomic standing of
the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In February 2014, disillusioned citizens of Bosnia
and Herzegovina engaged in public protests, expressing
their discontent with the deteriorating socioeconomic
situation and with the inability of the country’s political
leaders to work out and implement relevant solutions.
The protests that spread across the country should be
seen as a wake-up call, rung by the Bosnians themselves
to their political leaders and to the international
community. We continue therefore to call on the leaders
and politicians of Bosnia and Herzegovina to engage in
dialogue with their citizens.
The lack of progress in implementing necessary
political and economic reforms, the continued use of
divisive rhetoric, and deeply rooted divisions among
political parties continue to cause considerable
headwinds for the efforts of those who want to see
Bosnia and Herzegovina as a united, stable, viable,
multi-ethnic and prosperous State, cooperating
peacefully with its neighbours and irreversibly on track
towards European Union membership. We therefore
urge the country’s political leadership to overcome its
divisions and to undertake the reforms necessary to
move the country forward in its EU integration process.
In light of necessary socioeconomic reforms and
citizens’ discontent, the European Union has now
broadened its political dialogue with Bosnia and
Herzegovina in order to place more emphasis on the
socioeconomic and rule of law agenda. Over the past
six months, the European Union has continued its
strong engagement to anchor Bosnia and Herzegovina
on the EU path. We believe that it is important that
all of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s obligations under the
Interim Agreement on trade and trade-related matters be
fulfilled as a matter of priority. The Sejdic-Finci ruling
embodies the principle of ethnic non-discrimination,
which is at the core of the values promoted by both
the European Union and the United Nations. The
implementation of the ruling remains a requirement for
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s progress towards the EU.
The EU Foreign Affairs Council discussed the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina on 10 February. It
expressed concern, but also noted that developments in
the country showed a need for Bosnia and Herzegovina
to keep the focus on the EU agenda, and for the
European Union to broaden its political dialogue with
the country. In April, the Foreign Affairs Council
adopted conclusions that supported the broadening of

S/PV.7176

the EU agenda and engagement towards the country.
The Council reaffirmed the messages delivered by
High Representative/Vice-President Ashton during her
visit to Bosnia and Herzegovina on 12 March, urging
political leaders to provide an immediate response to
the grievances of the public, particularly as regards the
socioeconomic agenda.
To facilitate this, the European Union, in
coordination with key international financial
institutions operating in Bosnia and Herzegovina, is
putting forward an initiative called the Compact for
Jobs and Growth, which aims at assisting the authorities
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to undertake key reforms in
this regard. The initiative will be launched at the Forum
for Prosperity and Jobs on 26 and 27 May in Sarajevo.
It is of key importance that the institutions of Bosnia
and Herzegovina engage constructively in these efforts.
Also, as announced by Commissioner Füle during
his visit to Sarajevo on 17 February, the European
Commission will further strengthen its efforts to
assist Bosnia and Herzegovina to improve economic
governance, to facilitate the country’s capacities in
absorbing EU pre-accession assistance, and to achieve
progress in the fight against corruption. Some of the
concrete initiatives in this regard were also further
elaborated at a conference of the European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development on 24 February in
London.
Beyond these challenges, which require immediate
attention, it is becoming increasingly evident that the
efficiency and functionality of the institutions of Bosnia
and Herzegovina in general need to be significantly
improved, not only in order to build the capacities
required in context of EU accession, particularly as
regards the coordination among various levels of
governance, but also to ensure the sustainability and
continuity of democratic and social reforms undertaken
since 1995. In this sense, the Council reaffirmed its
determination to actively and intensively engage in
support of this process, in close coordination and
cooperation with its main international partners.
It is our expectation that.the progress made by the
rest of the region, and in particular the progress towards
the normalization of relations between Serbia and
Kosovo, the accession negotiations with Montenegro
and the steps undertaken by other countries in their
EU accession processes, will stimulate renewed reform
efforts, generate a sense of urgency among the country’s
leaders, and offer reassurance to its citizens.

14-3321221/24

S/PV.7176

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

The recent entry of Croatia into the European Union
has made Bosnia and Herzegovina a direct neighbour of
the EU, with a joint land border that is 1,000 kilometres
long. This provides both the European Union and Bosnia
and Herzegovina with the opportunity to additionally
strengthen our mutual relationship and enhance crossborder cooperation. The role of neighbours cannot
be overestimated — living by example, showing
the positive effects of EU-related reforms, engaging
positively and sending the right messages.
Since September 2011, the European Union has
consolidated its presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and is fully engaged in supporting Bosnia and
Herzegovina in all EU-related matters. Our EU Special
Representative/Head of Delegation is also offering the
EU Force Commander local political guidance.
The European Union continues to accompany
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s progress in the security
field. The February events exposed a number of
challenges in the area of law and order, particularly as
regards cooperation, coordination and interoperability
among various law enforcement agencies. The EU is
already engaging in this regard, with its international
partners, to assist the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in resolving these issues. EUFOR Althea
remains primarily focused on capacity-building and
training, while retaining the capability to contribute
to the deterrence capacity of the authorities of Bosnia
and Herzegovina if the situation so requires. The
European Union will keep the operation under regular
review, including on the basis of the situation on the
ground, with a view to making progress in establishing
conditions conducive to the delivery of its mandate.
The European Union, in line with the Foreign
Affairs Council conclusions of April, reaffirms its
unequivocal commitment to the territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a sovereign and united
country. The European Union also reiterates its
unequivocal commitment to Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
EU perspective. In this regard, it condemns as
unacceptable secessionist and divisive rhetoric and
ideas.
In the context of the overall EU strategy for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, we look forward to continuing
discussions with the international community on the
reconfiguration of the international presence, in the
appropriate forum, and call on the authorities of Bosnia
and Herzegovina to meet the outstanding objectives
and conditions for the closure of the Office of the High
22/24

15/05/2014

Representative. In this regard, the European Union
reminds the leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina of the
need to fully cooperate with the Office of the High
Representative and to provide the Office with the access
necessary to officials, institutions and documents to
carry out their mandate.
The European Union remains ready to provide the
necessary assistance to boost the. progress towards
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s European integration. It is
this approach that will take the country forward on its
reform agenda, towards stability and development, on
its path to the European Union.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Croatia.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): I would like to join other
speakers in welcoming High Representative Inzko
and express our thanks for his briefing and report
(S/2014/314). I would also like to extend our appreciation
for the personal efforts he has been investing in carrying
out his difficult mandate.
Croatia aligns itself with the statement just delivered
by the observer of the European Union, but I would like
to add several remarks in my national capacity.
The importance Croatia attaches to the territorial
integrity, stability and functionality of Bosnia and
Herzegovina is of the highest degree. We firmly believe
that a stable and functional Bosnia and Herzegovina
is essential for the stability and prosperity of SouthEast Europe and beyond. The Dayton Peace Agreement
created a specific political system based primarily on
ethnic representation, which rests on genuine equality
between three constitutive peoples. This equality is a
prerequisite for the stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
However, a complicated institutional set-up created
by Dayton is often exploited by political elites, resulting
in the present political and institutional stalemate. The
protests in Sarajevo and other cities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina earlier this year were a clear expression
of citizens’ frustration with the disfunctionality of the
system and the deteriorating socioeconomic situation
in the country. These events were a direct consequence
of the lack of progressive steps taken by political elites
and an indication that Bosnia and Herzegovina must
embark on the reform processes in order to ensure
stability and prosperity. Otherwise, the country might
face further destabilization, including along ethnic
lines.

14-33212

15/05/2014

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

We encourage the political leaders of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to rise above their narrow ethnic interests
in the upcoming election campaign. The citizens of
Bosnia and Herzegovina deserve a fresh perspective
that incorporates the recognition and fulfilment of their
social and economic needs.
We share the High Representative’s concern
and condemnation of those in Republika Srpska
who continue to challenge the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
secessionist and divisive rhetoric by the President and
other high officials of Republika Srpska is completely
unacceptable.
In order to achieve our common goal — a stable,
functioning and prosperous Bosnia and Herzegovina — we
need to come up with a realistic strategy that takes into
account the situation on the ground. The clear prospect of
European Union membership constitutes beyond doubt
the best stability and security framework within which
Bosnia and Herzegovina can achieve steady progress.
The European Union accession process serves as the
best blueprint for State-building reforms, strengthened
administrative capacities and good governance — all of
which Bosnia and Herzegovina is in dire need of.
We encourage the leaders of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to find the necessary political will to
implement the Sejdic-Finci ruling and to pursue other
reforms, including those in the military sector.
Envisioning a tailor-made approach for Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s European integration process is
essential. We should consider identifying concrete
deliverables, beyond the Sejdic-Finci ruling, that
would keep the country’s integration process tangible
and feasible. That should not mean lowering the
criteria, but helping Bosnia and Herzegovina meet all
of them. The fundamental logic of such an approach is
in its conditionality. The pace and progress of Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s integration in the European Union
should be directly linked to the pace and progress of its
political, legal and administrative reforms, and every
substantial bit of progress should be equally rewarded.
Croatia stresses the importance of the continuous
high-level engagement on behalf of the European Union
and the international community. At the same time, we
expect to see the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina
engage constructively in the recent initiatives by the
European Commission, the European Union Special
Representative in Bosnia and Herzegovina and some

S/PV.7176

member States, the aim of which is to give impetus to
the European Union integration process, which is now
lagging behind.
We support all initiatives aimed at improving
economic and social cohesion, the active engagement
of civil society and youth, and institution-building
capacities and their functionality and efficiency.
Let me conclude by reiterating the readiness of
Croatia, as the only European Union member State that
directly borders Bosnia and Herzegovina, to continue
to cooperate closely with our neighbour on all issues
and to provide Bosnia and Herzegovina with strong
and continuous political and technical support in the
process of its European Union integration. We remain
conscious of all the legitimate needs and rights of Croats
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. They are the smallest of the
three constituent people in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
but of course they remain equally important. We will
continue to extend our support to them.
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s troubled history is, at
present, unfortunately often much more a source of
tensions and disputes than the springboard for a better
future. That is all the more reason to intensify our joint
efforts in extending to Bosnia and Herzegovina all the
support and assistance required.
On a positive note, just a few days ago, we witnessed
the return of the famous Sarajevo City Hall to its old
glory, after it was devastated during the siege of the city
in the 1990s. The restoration of that iconic building,
which is the symbol of Sarajevo, should be a harbinger
of the better days that await that important European
country.
Finally, on a much more informal note — and a
positive one as well — I would like to wish Bosnia and
Herzegovina every success in the upcoming World Cup
in Brazil. That is a small but telling example of how
Bosnia and Herzegovina can be successful on the world
stage when it gets its act together.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Serbia.
Mr. Milanović (Serbia): First of all, I would like
to welcome His Excellency Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
thank him for his report to the Council (S/2014/314,
annex).
Serbia considers Bosnia and Herzegovina one of its
closest partners. As a guarantor of the Dayton Peace

14-3321223/24

S/PV.7176

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Agreement, Serbia continues to be firmly committed
to respect for the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and considers that all key
decisions regarding the future of the country should
be agreed among all its political actors. We support
all agreements reached by the entities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina aimed at promoting the well-being of all
three constituent peoples.
Home to 1.5 million Serbs, Bosnia and Herzegovina
is also our third-largest economic partner. Two days
ago, the Prime Minister of Serbia, Mr. Aleksandar
Vučić, made his first official visit abroad — to Sarajevo.
Surely, that visit is a clear reflection of the importance
that Serbia attaches to its relations with Bosnia and
Herzegovina and its entities and of my country’s
commitment to promoting those relations at the highest
possible level and on the basis of good neighbourliness.
My country fully supports Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
European integration and the cooperation between
the two countries within that process. In that context,
we point out in particular the importance of the
commission for the implementation of the action plan
of the memorandum for cooperation in the field of
European integration, the first meeting of which was
held in Sarajevo on 5 June 2013, with the next one
expected to take place in the first half of 2014.
We share the interest of Bosnia and Herzegovina
in exchanging experiences on the fulfilment of the
Copenhagen criteria and its readiness for coordination
on the road towards the European Union. We are
ready to help Bosnia and Herzegovina on that road
and share with it the experience gained with respect
to the technical membership conditions that Serbia has
fulfilled.
Serbia calls for an intensification of regional
cooperation. It considers that a politically and
economically stable region of South-East Europe is
one of the basic preconditions for its own economic
development. In particular, my country is interested in
promoting cooperation within the Central Europe Free
Trade Agreement, in signing in the coming period a
memorandum of understanding on third markets and
in the initiative by Bosnia and Herzegovina on the
establishment of a consortium of Bosnian and Serbian
companies after the signing of that memorandum.
In the field of economic cooperation, which is one of
the most important components of bilateral cooperation,
Serbia is interested in promoting business, investment,

24/24

15/05/2014

trade and military-economic cooperation. Of particular
importance in that process is the role played by the Joint
Commission for Economic Cooperation, the expected
joint meeting of the Government of the Republic of
Serbia and the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the forthcoming visit of President Nikolić
to Bosnia and Herzegovina and the meeting of the
Interstate Border Commission. The resumption of the
work of the Interstate Council for Cooperation would
also be welcome.
In good faith and with a view to mutual interests,
Serbia continues to cooperate with Bosnia and
Herzegovina in addressing all outstanding issues,
which are significantly reduced in number now, in
direct contacts and talks without intermediaries. Those
issues include demarcation, refugees and missing
persons, and the process of succession.
We share the concern of High Representative
Inzko regarding the recommendation by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
to lift the refugee status of refugees from Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the region. Serbia has not accepted
the recommendation of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees of 4 April
2014 because it has a negative effect on the protection
of refugees and is detrimental to the implementation
of the Regional Housing Programme and the process
of reconciliation. Alongside with Bosnia and
Herzegovina, we have continually pointed out that the
recommendation is premature.
As the country with the largest number of refugees
in the region, Serbia calls for the adoption of lasting,
just and sustainable solutions that will address
the needs and respect the rights of long-displaced
vulnerable populations. In that context, in cooperation
with Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Montenegro,
we have worked hard on addressing refugee issues
and, in particular, implementing the Regional Housing
Programme. We have invested every possible effort in
reaching reconciliation and promoting development
and stability in the region. To achieve these goals, my
country will continue to support the overall development
and progress in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

14-33212
