General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

60

tives of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of
Peace,
Considering that all other foreign mil!tary presence in the
area, whenever it is contrary to the obJect1ves of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace and the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United_Nations,
gives even greater urgency to the need to tak~ pr~ct1cal steps
towards the early achievement of the ob_1ect1ves of the
Declaration,
Considering also that the creation of a zone of peace in
the Indian Ocean requires the active participation of and full
co-operation among the littoral and hinter!and States, the
permanent members of the Security Council and the ma~or
maritime users to ensure conditions of peace and secunty
based on the purposes and principles of the Charter as well
as the general principles of international law,
Considering further that the creation of a zone of peace
requires co-operation and agreement among the _State_s ?f
the region to ensure conditions of peace and secunty w1thm
the area, as envisaged in the Declaration of the Indian Ocean
as a Zone of Peace, and respect for the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the littoral and hinterland
States,
Calling for the renewal of genuinely constructive efforts
through the exercise of the political will necessary for the
achievement of the objectives of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace,
Deeply concerned at the danger posed by the grave and
ominous developments in the area and the resulting sharp
deterioration of peace, security and stability which particularly seriously affect the littoral and hinterland States, as
well as international peace and security,
Convinced that the continued deterioration of the political
and security climate in the Indian Ocean area is an important
consideration bearing on the question of the early convening
of the Conference and that the easing of tension in the area
would enhance the prospect of success being achieved by
the Conference,
I. Takes note of the report of the Ad Hoe Committee
on the Indian Ocean 30 and the exchange of views in the
Committee;
2. Regrets that the Ad Hoe Committee has failed to
reach consensus on the finalization of dates for the convening, during 198 l, of the Conference on the Indian Ocean:
3. Emphasizes its decision to convene the Conference
at Colombo as a necessary step for the implementation of
the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace,
adopted in 197 l ;
4. Emphasizes also, in pursuance of that decision and
in consideration of the political and security climate in the
Indian Ocean area, its decision to request the Ad Hoe Committee to continue its efforts for the necessary harmonization
of views on the remaining issues related to the convening
of the Conference;
5. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to continue its
work on the necessary harmonization of views on the relevant issues, including those set forth in paragraph 4 above.
and to make every effort to accomplish the necessary preparatory work for the Conference, including consideration
of its convening not later than the first half of 1983;
6. Renews the mandate of the Ad Hoe Committee as
defined in the relevant resolutions;
7. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to hold further
sessions in 1982 of a total duration of six weeks, including
the holding of a meeting at a venue outside New York to
be decided upon;
30

Ibid., Thirty-sixth Session. Supplement No 29 (A/36/29)

8. Requests the Ad Hoe Comm!ttee to. submit to the
General Assembly. at its second special s~ss1on devoted _to
disarmament and at its thirty-seventh session, reports on its
work and on the implementation of the present resolution;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to r~nder all necessary assistance to the Ad Hoe Committee, mcluding the provision of summary records.
91st plenary meeting
9 December /98/

39/91.

World Disarmament Conference

The General A.1.1c111hl_\·.
Recalling its re,olutions 28:n (XXVI) of lo December
1971. 2930 (XXVII) of 29 November I972. 3183 (XXVIII l
of 18 December 1973. 32(10 (XXIX) of 9 December 1974.
3469 ( XXX) of 11 December 197.'i ..1 I/ I90 of 21 December
I976, 32/89 of 12 Decemher I977 ..1.~109 of 14 December
1978. 34/81 of I I December I 979 and 3.'i/1.'i I of 12 December 1980.
Reiterating its conviction that all the peoples of the world
have a vital interest in the success of disarmament negotiations and that all States should be in a position to contribute
to the adoption of measures for the achievement of this goal.
Stressing anell' its conviction that a world disarmament
conference. adequately prepared and convened at an apprnpriate time. could provide the realit.ation of such an a11n
and that the co-operation of all nuclear-weapon Powers
would considerably facilitate its attainment.
Taking note of the report of the Ad Hoe Committee on
the World Disarmament Conference. 11
Recalling that. in paragraph 122 of the Final Document
of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly. ' 2 the
tirst special session devoted to disarmament. it decided that.
at the earliest appropriate time. a world disarmament conference should be convened with universal participation and
with adequate preparation.
Recalling that. in paragraph 2.1 of the Declaration of th~1980s as the Second Disarmament Decade. contained in the
annex to its resolution 3.'i/46 of 3 December I980. the General Assembly considered it pertinent also to recall that in
paragraph 122 of the Final Document it had stated that at
the earliest appropriate time a world disarmament conference should be rnnvened with universal participation and
with adequate preparation.
Further recalling that the subject of the possible convening of a world disarmament conference ~as be~n in-_
eluded in the draft agenda for the second special session ot
the General Assembly devoted to disarmament. 1-1 to be held
from 7 June to 9 July 1982.
1. Notes with satisfaction that in its report to the General
Assembly the Ad Hoe Committee on the World Disarmament Conference stated, inter alia, the following:
"Having regard for the important requirements of a
world disarmament conference to be convened at the earliest appropriate time, with universal participation and
with adequate preparation, the General Assembly may
wish to decide that. after its second special session devoted to disarmament, a world disarmament conference
would take place as soon as the necessary consensus on
its convening has been reached": 14
" /hid .. Supplt•mem ll'o 28 (Ai.,(,/28).
'-' Resolution S- I 012.

"0/jiual Records o( 1h,· General A1.1<•mhh-. Thi rt, ,i,1h S,·.1Sio11 . .'i111>
r>lement No . .JC) ( A. 36!..\9 and Corr. 11. para. I 8
"/hid .. Supplnnent No. 28 IA/.,6128). para. In.

III.

2. Renews the mandate of the Ad Hoe Committee;
3. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to maintain close
contact with the representatives of the States possessing
nuclear weapons in order to remain currently informed of
their attitudes, as well as with all other States. and to consider any possible relevant proposals and observations which
might be made to the Committee. especially having in mind
paragraph 122 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly:
4. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to report to the
General Assembly at its second special session devoted to
disarmament and at its thirty-seventh ses~ion:
f"'c:cides to include in the provisional agenda of its
tt :.. y-seventh session the item entitled ··world Disarmament Conference·'.
9 I st plenarv meeting
9 December /9XI

36/92.

Review of the implementation of the recommendations and decisions adopted by the General Assembly at its tenth special session
A

UNITED NATIONS PROGRAMME OF FELLOWSHIPS ON
DISARMAMENT

The General Assembly,
Recalling its decision, taken at the tenth special session,
the first special session devoted to disarmament, to establish
a programme of fellowships on disarmament, 35
Recalling also its resolution 35/ 152 A of 12 December
1980, in which it requested the Secretary-General to make
adequate arrangements relating to the programme for 1981
in accordance with the guidelines approved by the General
Assembly at its thirty-third session,
Expressing its satisfaction at the fact that Governments,
particularly those of developing countries, have continued
to manifest serious interest in the programme,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of the United Nations programme of
fellowships on disarmament for 1981, 36
I. Decides to continue the United Nations programme
of fellowships on disarmament;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to make adequate
arrangements relating to the programme for 1982 in accordance with the guidelines approved by the General Assembly at its thirty-third session;
3. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its second special session devoted to
disarmament a report containing an assessment of the United
Nations programme of fellowships on disarmament since
its inception in 1979;
4. Commends the Secretary-General for the diligence
with which the programme has been conducted;
5. Expresses its appreciation to the Governments of the
Federal Republic of Germany, Hungary and Sweden for
inviting the fellows to their capitals to study selected activities in the field of disarmament, thereby contributing to the
fulfilment of the over-all objectives of the programme, as
well as providing additional information sources and practical knowledge for the fellows.
91 st plenary meeting
9 December /98/

B
REPORT OF THE DISARMAMENT COMMISSION

The General Assembh,
Having considered the report of the Disarmament
Commission, 37
Emphasizing again the importance of an effective followup to the relevant recommendations and decisions adopted
at the tenth special session of the General Assembly. the
first special session devoted to disarmament.
Considering the important role that the Disarmament
Commission has played and the significant contribution it
has made in examining and submitting recommendations
on various problems in the field of disarmament and in the
promotion of the implementation of the relevant decisions
of the tenth special session,
Recalling its resolutions 33/71 Hof 14 December 1978,
34/83 H of 11 December 1979 and 351152 F of 12 December
1980,
I. Takes note of the report of the Disarmament
Commission;
2. Notes that the Disarmament Commission was not
able to conclude its consideration of the items on its agenda;
3. Requests the Disarmament Commission to continue
its work in accordance with its mandate, as set forth in
paragraph 118 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly, 38 and to continue consideration of the items included in the agenda of its session
in 1981 and, to that end. to meet for a period not exceeding
four weeks during 1982;
4. Requests the Disarmament Commission to submit a
substantive report on its work to the General Assembly at
its second special session devoted to disarmament, to be
held from 7 June to 9 July 1982;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Disarmament Commission the report of the Committee on
Disarmament,w together with all the official records of the
thirty-sixth session of the General Assembly relating to disarmament matters, and to render all assistance that it may
require for implementing the present resolution;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "Report of the Disarmament Commission'·.
91 st plenary meeting
9 December !9XJ

C
WORLD DISARMAMENT CAMPAIGN

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, in the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly. 38 the first special session
devoted to disarmament, it stressed the importance of mobilizing world public opinion on behalf of disarmament.
Recalling its resolution 35/ 152 I of 12 December 1980.
in which, for the achievement of that purpose, it requested
the Secretary-General to carry out a study on the organization and financing of a World Disarmament Campaign
under the auspices of the United Nations,
Having examined the study transmitted by the SecretaryGeneral as an annex to his report of 17 September 1981, 40
,-, 0//icial Records o( 11,,· (;c11era/ A.11<·111hlr. Thirrr-si,rh s,,.1.1io11. Sul'1'inne111 No. 42 iA/36/42)

Resolution S-10/2
''0ffical Records o( the ( ll'llt'ral it,.,t'mhlr. Thirtr-.,ilth Session ..\up/J/emenl No. 27 (A'36: 27l
,,. A 1t,;4'i8
h

1

'·' Resolution S- I0/2, para. I 08.
'" A/36/606.

61

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

1
