S/PV.8919

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8919th meeting

Tuesday, 7 December 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Abarry. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Niger)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Huitfeldt
Mr. Kuzmin
Ms. King
Mr. Ladeb
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield
Mr. Pham

Agenda
Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-37559 (E)
*2137559*

S/PV.8919

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

climate emergency, conflict over scarce resources and
forced displacement. That serves to underscore the
importance — which I know the Council has discussed
many times — of putting the climate emergency front
and centre on the Council’s agenda.

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Filippo Grandi, United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Grandi.
Mr. Grandi: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
invitation. I am very honoured to be able to have this
opportunity during the Niger’s presidency. I apologize
for not being able to be there in person to address the
Security Council.
This is an opportunity, from the perspective of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR), to highlight the role that the Niger
has played over the past few years. It is a very exemplary
role in terms of addressing forced displacement. As a
country with limited resources in the middle of a very
troubled area, the Niger is always ready to host people
in distress, in a good spirit of solidarity. I am talking
about both people coming from neighbouring countries
and people evacuated from Libya.
Just to remind everyone, more than 11,000 more
refugees arrived in the Niger from northern Nigeria just
last month — bringing to 600,000 the total population
of refugees and internally displaced persons (IDPs) in
the Niger.
Like in many other developing countries — and
I would like to remind everyone that 90 per cent of
the world’s 84 million refugees and displaced persons
find themselves in developing countries — people in
the Niger face a perfect storm as the consequences
of the coronavirus disease pandemic, climate change
and conflict come together, often creating situations
of forced displacement, which in themselves create
additional challenges.
For example, the Sahel is the place where it is most
obvious that there is a direct correlation between the
2/22

07/12/2021

With such challenges, which of course are present
as well in other parts of the world, the multilateral
system has probably never been as important. Yet,
sadly, as we all know, the international system seems
to be more prone to failure than ever before. And
international failure has many faces. It includes
instability and insecurity, which are issues the Council
deals with every day, but also famine, disaster and the
collapse of States, which, again, the Council hears very
much about.
But it also includes forced displacement, which is
one of my main messages today. This continues to draw
attention, although perhaps a bit more intermittently
and, in particular, if I may say, when it affects
countries in the global North. That is when it hits the
headlines and attracts attention, although it is always a
consequence of all other failures. Forced displacement
also continues to be subjected to political manipulation
and, many times, to generate overblown reactions. Very
recently, we saw a mix of all those elements in the crisis
that developed on the border between Belarus and some
European Union countries.
Failure and inaction have other consequences as
well. For example, they compel us humanitarians to
work in situations that are increasingly uncertain and
that expose us to very difficult dilemmas. International
failures compel us to engage with all types of
interlocutors, including some that are not recognized
internationally. More and more, we speak about dealing
with “de facto” authorities in many countries —which,
of course, we do. As humanitarians, we speak to
whomever is in control of the areas in which we have
to operate.
But the types of situations in which we are finding
ourselves create limitations to our very work. Such
situations are also very often made more complicated
by political difficulties, the existence of sanctions
and other restrictions to the necessary dialogue and
engagement. That prevents the finding of solutions
and often aggravates humanitarian needs and makes
them more protracted. As has frequently been the case,
that leaves humanitarians to work alone in the face
of the difficulties and challenges, amid an increasing
21-37559

07/12/2021

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

set of expectations that humanitarians can “solve”,
while in reality it is becoming even more difficult to
“save” — which is our primary responsibility.
Think of Myanmar. Think of Yemen. Think, to a
certain extent — where we have seen this lately, but
hopefully we will emerge from it — of the Sudan and
other places. Most starkly, we see such a situation in
Afghanistan. I would like to recall, as the Council
probably knows already, that there are 39 million
people in Afghanistan, 23 million of whom face
extreme levels of hunger. But they are also facing
other humanitarian challenges, such as a lack of
housing, poor health and a lack of clean water, as well
as a host of protection challenges. Of course, forced
displacement also continues to be an important feature
of the humanitarian situation in Afghanistan, with an
estimated 3.5 million people displaced by conflict, and
700,000 in recent months alone, especially just before
15 August. I saw that myself when I visited Afghanistan
in September. I also saw humanitarian agencies
stepping up. Just to give a sense from our perspective,
each week my organization, UNHCR, is able to reach
60,000 displaced persons with concrete assistance. The
same goes for other humanitarian agencies.
As Council members know, we are proud of the
choice we made in August to stay and deliver, because
that has also allowed us to engage the Taliban on the
very important issue of rights — the rights of women
and girls and the rights of minorities — on which
limited progress has occurred. But I think we need to
continue to note that progress and build on it and try to
push that those agendas further.
I have one word of warning that Council members
will have heard before. Humanitarian agencies, in
spite of the work that we do and are doing, cannot
replicate the role of States. We cannot save economies.
We cannot make societies fully functional. We are
not a replacement for real engagement and political
solutions. I fully understand the complexities of the
situation. I appreciate the work that is being done, with
the cooperation of many countries represented here,
to try and find a way forward to ensure services, cash
flow and the functioning of society of the economy.
But I wish to join colleagues who have already
warned the Council many times that slow progress
around this fundamental issue is very risky at this
point. From my perspective — the perspective of the
refugee organization — I have to report that, although

S/PV. 8919

it is certainly not dramatic and not yet a major symptom
or a major consequence, we have seen an initial sign,
an uptick, of Afghans trying to leave the country in
recent weeks. We firmly believe, and I said this many
times, that a deeper and more and more widespread
implosion of states and of the economy will almost
inevitably trigger a much bigger outflow of Afghans to
neighbouring countries and even beyond.
Of course, meanwhile, I can assure the Council
once more that we will continue to use what is now a
relatively safer space — safer than before — prevailing
in the country. Just to give one example, we estimate
that about 150,000 internally displaced persons have
actually returned to their homes following the 15 August
change in authorities. We will continue to meet urgent
needs, prepare for winter and try to prevent that major
outflow, and we will continue to need humanitarian
resources. If I may make a very specific appeal to
the Security Council, we need the widest scope for
humanitarian exception for the sanctions regime in
order to be able to function properly.
Finally on Afghanistan, I would ask the Council
not to forget that it is important to keep a supportive
eye on its neighbours and step up the support that
is provided to them. Iran and Pakistan have hosted
Afghan refugees for generations. They continue to host
millions, and enhanced aid and resettlement places are
in order at this difficult time and in the uncertainty of
what may happen next in terms of outflow.
Another outcome of what I hold to be an international
failure and that I want to bring to the Council’s attention
today is the increasing politicization of humanitarian
and, specifically, refugee work. I am not naive. I have
learned through many years of working on this issue
that we must be able, as humanitarian and refugee
workers, to navigate very intricate political issues.
What I fear more, or more specifically, is the paralysis
of humanitarian action that is generated by conflicting
political agendas interfering with that action. This
increasingly prevents us from helping people as much
as we should be able to.
The situation of Syria presents some such features.
The humanitarian situation inside the country, which I
visited in October, is worsening as a result of conflict,
lack of resources, the effects of sanctions and the
political and economic crisis in nearby Lebanon. What I
have observed is queues for bread and fuel, for example,
that have not been seen in Syria for a long time, and a

21-375593/22

S/PV.8919

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

very severe lack of services and access to livelihoods,
especially outside Damascus. Once again, I appreciate
the very complex politics around this situation, but I
am also concerned that the slow progress — I think we
cannot call it otherwise — towards political solutions
is increasingly condemning millions to very hard lives.
Yes, while I understand that reconstruction, in
the full sense, must wait for a political agreement, it
is important that what we define as “humanitarian”
encompass at least the basic needs in the spirit
recognized in resolution 2585 (2021). It is important
that this apply to all Syrians, whoever controls the area
where they live, including, by the way, those who choose
to return, be they internally displaced persons — and
many internally displaced persons, for one reason or
the other, have made the choice to return home — or
returning refugees. Of course, many fewer refugees
than IDPs have returned home, but those who do make
that choice — and there are some who do — must
be helped.
I know that this has always been a very controversial
issue, but I wish to reiterate my point. The objective here
is to remove the obstacles that prevent or discourage
people from returning, but removing those obstacles,
as I have discussed in Damascus and in many other
capitals, will require international corporation — the
cooperation of Syria, of course, first and foremost, in
removing the security, legal and human rights obstacles
that may prevent people from returning, but also the
cooperation of donors in ensuring that at least basic
humanitarian support is provided to those returning to
their communities. We must bear in mind, of course,
that this has to happen in parallel with the continuation
of support to the countries in the vicinity that are still
hosting almost 6 million Syrian refugees, and Lebanon
in particular.
Finally, I would like to make a point that I have
made many times but that I would be remiss if I did
not repeat here today. This is a point that is even more
directly related to the Security Council’s core work.
The point is that the apparently growing inability of
the international community to make and build peace
obliges us humanitarian and refugee organizations to
work more and more in situations of active conflict and
rampant crisis, with rising expectations, once again, of
what we can deliver but in circumstances that in reality
offer decreasing possibilities to actually deliver.
4/22

07/12/2021

Yemen, Libya and others are cases in point.
Perhaps the most significant example of this situation
today is Ethiopia, which Council members know
very well. For 13 months now, we have struggled to
deliver aid to people in danger amidst two sides that
are fixated on a military outcome but have been so far
unable to achieve it and have not heeded the Council’s
appeals for political negotiations. This has created
some of the worst possible humanitarian contexts in
the world. Council members know the statistics. Some
20 million people — up to a fifth of the population of
that very large country — are estimated to be in need.
That is true in Tigre, of course, but also increasingly
in other regions like Afar, Amhara and beyond. At
least 4 million of those people — one-fifth of those
in need — are internally displaced. Access has been
very erratic, inadequate and often dangerous. In that
context, humanitarian organizations — including
United Nations agencies, my own organization and me
personally — have been unfairly accused by all sides of
taking sides.
There have been phases in those 13 months in which
we have been able to step up. For Council members’
information, as they probably know, at UNHCR
we have been focusing particularly on situations of
displacement — internal displacement and refugees — in
Ethiopia through protection, the distribution of aid and
the quest for solutions, for example moving people to
safer areas. But I have to report that, after the start of
the October offensive, the latest round of fighting and
now the counter-offensive that we have observed in the
past few days, we are actually very quickly sliding back
in the limited gains that we made in terms of access and
delivery of health.
Many of my colleagues have come to the Security
Council to speak about Ethiopia. I would like to join
their cause in stressing some very important points.
First of all is the need to impress upon the parties
that they need to respect the neutrality of United Nations
humanitarian organizations and non-governmental
organizations working in the humanitarian field and
ensure their safety, including that of national staff of
all ethnic origins, which has been an issue, as Council
members know. It is important that access not only
be granted — much has been said and many words
have been spent on that — but also be allowed for the
enablers of humanitarian operations, such as the use
of cash and the availability of fuel. Otherwise, access
alone will not be sufficient.
21-37559

07/12/2021

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

Of course, from my perspective, a very special
appeal is not to lose sight of the refugee angle. For
decades, Ethiopia has been host to very large refugee
populations — approximately 800,000 — from most
neighbouring countries. As is known, those most at risk
at this point are the Eritreans who have been severely
impacted by the conflict both in Tigray and in urban
centres throughout the country. I make a special appeal
for the protection of those groups to continue and to be
granted without, of course, forgetting — and that may
be an indication of things to come in the future — that
there are already about 60,000 Ethiopian refugees in
the Sudan, with more having arrived in recent days. We
hope that it will not be necessary but, just to let Council
members know, we are preparing contingency plans for
not only more displacement inside Ethiopia, but also for
the arrivals of more refugees in countries neighbouring
Ethiopia, some of which, as is known, are undergoing a
crisis of their own.
I will conclude with a couple of general points.
From what I said, and I could provide many other
examples, forced displacement continues to be driven
by conflict and prices, of course mixed, as I said,
with many other factors. I have just returned from 10
days in Mexico and Central America, and I could see
how those complex factors intersect with each other,
creating incredibly difficult phenomena of human
mobility. As I have already said many times today, we
at UNHCR understand very well the complexity of
political solutions. That is why the Council works on
those political solutions.
We spare no effort in continuing to deliver
humanitarian aid, often in very difficult circumstances.
However, responding has become very expensive. The
Security Council knows that the United Nations Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs recently
issued a global appeal, asking for $41 billion for almost
200,000 people in severe humanitarian need. This very
morning here in Geneva, I appealed to the UNHCR
donors for $9 billion for 2022 for 84 million people who
are refugees or displaced around the world.
I can assure Council members that we continue
to be as creative as we can in our responses. The
global compact on refugees and the pledges that were
subsequently made at the Global Refugee Forum have
been invaluable. We are multiplying the channels of
response and support, and we continue to develop new
and innovative partnerships with the private sector,
international financial institutions and development

S/PV. 8919

actors. Much of that has been truly transformational,
which is very important because lives continue despite
the lack of political solutions. People continue to
need help. They cannot wait. Saving lives cannot wait
for political solutions to happen. But, without those
solutions, without stopping and reversing conflict and
violence and without establishing those all-important
foundations of peace, the efforts that we humanitarians
make will remain very fragile and millions will
continue to be exposed to great insecurity, uncertainty
and fear. I am afraid that a failure to find solutions will
contribute to more complex and less manageable human
mobility. That challenge is clearly evident in many of
the countries of Council members.
My final invitation is to reflect on that I have said.
Once a year. I have the privilege of briefing this very
important organ. It is an opportunity to ask Council
members to reflect on all that as they navigate the very
complex challenges of peace and security and as they
strive, as I hope they do, to be united and coherent in
that pursuit.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Grandi for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
I call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway.
Ms. Huitfeldt (Norway): First of all, let me thank
the High Commissioner for his very important briefing
to us today. Sadly, the high numbers and the grave
situations that he highlighted are not new to us, but that
does not make them any less serious.
I took note of several of his statements, for example
when he underlined the number of refugees in the world
living in developing countries. When people leave
everything behind to escape from conflict and natural
disasters, they often become internally displaced or
they seek refuge in neighbouring countries, adding
strain to already fragile communities, with many
finding shelter in the refugee camps managed by the
United Nations and others. Others end up in dangerous
situations at the mercy of ruthless smugglers or become
unwilling pieces in international power politics. On
top of that, the pandemic has made the situation for the
most vulnerable even worse.
Let me be clear — we must all help. I believe
that we should first help those who are in the most
vulnerable situations. For Norway, that means refugees

21-375595/22

S/PV.8919

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

and internally displaced persons, living in camps
and settlements. However, we know that helping and
responding to humanitarian needs will not, in itself,
tackle the root causes of displacement. We need
political will. There is a new momentum created by
the High-level Panel on Internal Displacement. Let us
use that momentum to strengthen our efforts to find
solutions to internal displacement. I believe that we,
as an international community, must do three things to
address displacement.
First of all, we must focus on prevention. Too often
we act too late, with devastating effects on people and
communities. We must aim our efforts at preventing
situations that force people to flee. That means focusing
on armed conflict, climate change and poverty.
Secondly, we must strengthen the links among our
humanitarian, development, peacebuilding and human
rights work. For our part, that is reflected in Norway’s
strong commitment to the principles of the nexus. That
approach is now being put to the test in Afghanistan.
Humanitarian and development actors need to work
closely together to avoid a humanitarian catastrophe. If
we fail, 20 years of development gains will be at risk.
Thirdly, we must recognize that there are complex
links among climate change, natural disasters,
vulnerability and displacement. We need better, more
reliable information and data on climate and security
risks. The work of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in the Sahel is
an encouraging example of how to address those links.
We know that the impacts of modern warfare on
the civilian population are devastating. The risk is
particularly high when armed conflicts take place in
densely populated areas. All parties to conflict must
comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian law. They must ensure the protection of
civilians. Strengthening the protection of civilians will
reduce forced displacement, and I urge everyone to
recognize the connection between those two.
Norway is a strong supporter of UNHCR and the
tremendous work it does for the most vulnerable among
us. It can count on our continued support for its work to
improve the situation for those who are forced to flee
and support for host communities. The challenges are
enormous, but we have no other option than continuing
to work better together to prevent, protect and support.
6/22

07/12/2021

Mr. Tirumurti (India): Let me begin by thanking
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees for
his briefing. I would also like to welcome the presence
of Her Excellency the Foreign Minister of Norway.
India’s humanitarian response to the refugee issue,
particularly those facing persecution, has always
been driven by the ideals of compassion and empathy.
Throughout history, India has been a land of refuge
for those who have faced persecution in foreign lands.
Zoroastrians and Jews, when faced with persecution
centuries ago, found a ready home in India. If not for
India, the Zoroastraian faith may not have survived.
Now, both are very much part of India’s proud
pluralistic culture and heritage. For many of the refugee
communities in India, but for India’s protection and
nurture, they may have lost their heritage, culture and
even language.
In contemporary history, India’s hospitality and
assistance for refugee communities from neighbouring
countries are well recorded and appreciated. Be
it with respect to the Tibetans or our brothers and
sisters from Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Afghanistan
and Myanmar, India has always responded with
compassion and understanding. When West Pakistan
unleashed genocide on East Pakistan, India hosted
millions of refugees and saved them from massacre.
India’s humanitarian response to the issue of refugees
from Bangladesh was one of the most sophisticated
and empathetic in contemporary history. That may
well have represented one of the first instances of the
United Nations concept of the responsibility to protect.
If judged by today’s standards of human rights and
international humanitarian law, the perpetrators should
have received a drastically different fate.
Today, India is host to a large number of refugees
and our programmes to assist them are managed entirely
from our own resources. India has clearly demonstrated
at all times abiding commitment towards the principles
of international law in protecting refugees. That has been
deeply appreciated by the previous United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, who is now the SecretaryGeneral. I hope the current High Commissioner shares
those sentiments. India is also committed to facilitating
dignified, safe and sustainable return of refugees to
their homelands.
On another note, India has also assisted refugees
elsewhere, notably through its long-standing partnering
with the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
21-37559

07/12/2021

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). India
continues to remain supportive of UNRWA’s role in
human development and the delivery of humanitarian
services. We have enhanced our contribution further
in recent years. India’s Minister of State for External
Affairs participated in the recent UNRWA Ministerial
Conference in Brussels and renewed India’s commitment
to continuing to contribute $5 million to the Agency in
2022 as well.
The High Commissioner, in his briefing earlier,
updated the Council on the refugee crisis across the
world and the challenges associated in handling them.
We note with concern the surge in the number of refugees
and internally displaced persons under the mandate of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR), which has reached over
91 million people. The magnitude of the problem is
indeed worrisome. India appreciates the efforts made
by UNHCR in helping refugees in various countries. In
that regard, let me make following observations.
First, preventing armed conflicts, countering
terrorism, building and sustaining peace by facilitating
sustainable development and good governance will
prevent people from being forced to leave their
homelands. We cannot have States following policies
that exacerbate conflicts, on the one hand, and then
refusing to tackle refugee influx on the other.
Secondly, the primary duty and responsibility of
protecting and assisting internally displaced persons is
that of the State concerned. International action should
remain within the bounds of the concept of sovereignty,
which should not be diluted in any manner. Such action
should therefore be taken only at the request of the
country concerned.
Thirdly, the refugee issue is a global challenge, and
no country alone can resolve it. We must continue to foster
a global perspective that promotes the collaboration
and participation of all Member States and relevant
stakeholders, in line with relevant international law.
India supports the central role of the United Nations in
dealing with refugee issues. A multilateral platform is
always more effective than small groups in building a
global consensus and encouraging united action.
Fourthly, we firmly believe that the principles of
humanity, impartiality and neutrality must be upheld
in dealing with refugee matters. That is crucial to
maintaining the credibility of the international refugee
protection mechanism. Member States and UNHCR

S/PV. 8919

must remain committed to the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and avoid the
politicization of humanitarian work.
Fifthly, the coronavirus disease pandemic has
exacerbated existing humanitarian challenges and
refugees are highly exposed to the socioeconomic
impact of that crisis. Humanitarian aid has become more
important than ever. Member States should provide
non-discriminatory and equitable medical services
to refugees and take them into account in national
pandemic response strategies. We need empathy more
than ever.
In conclusion, India remains committed to the
humanitarian protection of refugees. We also believe
that this humanitarian endeavour must be consistent
with welfare objectives and national security. We
strongly believe that determined action, solidarity and
multilateralism are needed more than ever to address
the refugee issue.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I thank Mr. Grandi,
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
for his comprehensive briefing and determined
efforts. We remain strong supporters of his work and
mandate — politically as well as financially. Since
2001, we have supported the agency with operational
grants and direct contributions in order to help alleviate
specific humanitarian crises around the world.
Despite the Secretary-General’s call for a global
ceasefire, new conflicts and crises have erupted and
some old ones have deepened and escalated in the world
this year, including in Ethiopia, Myanmar, Afghanistan
and in and around Gaza. An unprecedented number
of people around the world are being forced from
their homes, and the delivery of humanitarian aid has
become more important than ever.
We are deeply concerned about a dire humanitarian
situation in Afghanistan. At the beginning of the
year, the situation in Afghanistan was already one of
the worst in the world. Now it could even be called
catastrophic. More than 22 million people are in need
of humanitarian assistance. Estonia, together with other
European Union members, pledged almost $800 million
in humanitarian assistance as part of the flash appeal.
We commend the scaled-up emergency response of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) in Afghanistan, particularly
in anticipation of the harsh winter season, in order

21-375597/22

S/PV.8919

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

to provide essential assistance to more than 60,000
internally displaced persons (IDPs) over the winter.
We are also deeply concerned about reported
widespread sexual and gender-based violence and other
forms of violence and abuse in Libya and Ethiopia, as
well as child recruitment and use in Yemen and Mali.
We must prioritize our responses to those specific
challenges, including by stepping up efforts to prevent,
mitigate and respond to sexual and gender-based
violence against refugees and internally displaced
persons and support their access to sexual and
reproductive health services, as well as mental health
and psychosocial support.
Among persons on the move, women and girls
are often most vulnerable. They also face specific
challenges in the context of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic. Therefore, we need to scale up
steps to mitigate the unprecedented social and economic
impact on refugees and other forcibly displaced people,
as well as to facilitate the equitable, safe and unhindered
delivery and distribution of COVID-19 vaccines, which
is particularly urgent in countries like Myanmar, Syria
and Yemen.
Climate change is a powerful driver of displacement
because of its impacts on persons’ livelihoods and
loss of liveability in highly exposed locations. The
World Bank’s updated Groundswell report, released
in September, finds that climate change could force
216 million people across six world regions to move
within their countries by 2050. We therefore need more
concrete actions if we are to realize commitments that
are essential for protecting vulnerable communities
around the world, including millions of refugees and
displaced people living on the front lines of the climate
crisis, from Somalia to Central America.
We need to ensure the effective return of those with
no right to stay and step up efforts to combat migrant
smuggling and trafficking in human beings. In recent
months, we have seen attempts by some States to
exploit the vulnerability of human beings for political
purposes. We condemn any attempt to instrumentalize
migrants and refugees by orchestrating their flow
across borders for political motives.
The trend in rising forced displacement has
continued this year, with global numbers now
exceeding 84 million as more people flee multiple
active conflicts around the world. Due to aggression
against Ukraine, which has lasted already 7 years, there
8/22

07/12/2021

are 1.5 million IDPs across the country. The situation
of displaced persons, in particular women, children and
elderly people, is precarious in Ukraine. Life-saving
assistance, such as temporary shelter or minimum
financial assistance, can be provided along the 20
kilometres of the contact line — but unfortunately only
in Government-controlled areas.
It has become more evident than ever that we need
digital solutions in order to improve the ability of the
international community to collectively respond to
crises. Two years ago, during the first Global Refugee
Forum, Estonia pledged to cooperate with UNHCR on
digital identification. Since then, we have been taking
steps to implement that pledge. We are sure that the
High-Level Officials Meeting, to be held in a week,
will help to identify opportunities and set priorities
going forward.
Finally, as we mark the seventieth anniversary of
the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees
this year, I would like to underline that the work of the
UNHCR is more relevant than ever in ensuring that
refugees and displaced people are fully protected by
international human rights law, humanitarian law and
refugee law.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): Let me first thank
High Commissioner Grandi for his comprehensive
briefing and for the dedicated work of his teams around
the world.
The United Kingdom is committed to a longerterm, holistic approach to refugee assistance and
protection that restores dignity and offers refugees a
viable future. To that end, the United Kingdom has
contributed over $570 million to the vital work of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) over the past five years.
I would also like to acknowledge the tremendous
generosity of host nations in opening their borders
and homes to those forced to flee. United Kingdom
funding has played a key role in helping communities
to strengthen resilience and self-reliance. For example,
the United Kingdom has provided $970 million to
support refugees in Lebanon since 2011, $424 million
to the Rohingya refugee response in Bangladesh since
2017 and $278 million to programmes in Uganda over
a six-year period.
The High Commissioner raised a number of
important themes in his presentation. I would like to
21-37559

07/12/2021

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

address three issues: conflict, climate change and the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
First, on conflict, Security Council efforts to support
political solutions to humanitarian crises are clearly an
essential part of the picture. But actors on the ground
have responsibilities too. That includes adherence
to international humanitarian law and ensuring that
any refugee returns are voluntary, safe and dignified.
It is only through demonstrated compliance with the
humanitarian principles — humanity, impartiality,
neutrality and independence — that humanitarian
actors can build the trust necessary to gain and maintain
access to displaced populations in need.
In that connection, I would like to touch upon some
regional issues.
In Myanmar, the United Kingdom has spent over
$23 million in humanitarian aid in order to support
displaced people since the military coup in February,
while backing efforts of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations, the United Nations and regional partners
to find a political solution.
In Ethiopia, as we heard, the conflict has displaced
millions. We continue to support African Union Special
Envoy Obasanjo’s efforts to find a political route to
sustainable peace.
In Syria, while we hope that refugees will ultimately
be able to return home, we agree with the Organization’s
view that conditions do not currently allow that. We
firmly believe that resolution 2254 (2015) offers a
clear path out of the conflict that protects the right of
all Syrians — one in which civil society, women and
minorities must play a role.
Turning now to conflict and climate change, as the
High Commissioner said, the devastating convergence
of these factors bears day-to-day consequences
for those forced to flee. In the twenty-sixth United
Nations Climate Change Conference, we came
together and delivered an ambitious road map to keep
global warming to 1.5°C and, in doing so, lessen the
impact on vulnerable populations, including refugees
and displaced persons. But, as we saw on our visit,
Mr. President, to your country, the Niger, the security
implications of climate are real and present.
Finally, on COVID-19, the United Kingdom has
encouraged the Security Council to be alert to the
impacts of COVID-19 on international peace and
security and to consider the ways in which COVID-19

S/PV. 8919

has created socioeconomic conditions that fuel
conflict, unrest and subsequent displacements. The
implementation of resolutions 2565 (2021) and 2532
(2020) can help to deliver equitable access to vaccines
in conflict and humanitarian settings, including to
refugees and internally displaced populations. As a
leading donor to the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access
Facility, the United Kingdom welcomes news this month
that coronavirus vaccine doses are reaching Afghan
refugees through the humanitarian buffer of last resort.
We hope to see even more refugee communities helped
by that mechanism next year, and we look to further
discussion within the Council next week.
Mr. Pham (Viet Nam) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank High Commissioner
Filippo Grandi for his comprehensive briefing, and we
express our deep appreciation for the work of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and its staff in assisting and protecting refugees around
the world.
(spoke in English)
Globally, 82.4 million people have been forcibly
displaced, a record-high number since the Second
World War. Of those, 35 million refugees are children,
1 million of whom were born as refugees. Refugees
have lived without knowing when, or even if, they will
ever return home. Some of them are likely to remain
refugees for life. Due to the pandemic, they face even
more uncertainty and hardship on a daily basis.
In that context, we highly appreciate the
generosity of host countries and wish to highlight the
following points.
First, to prevent a dramatic refugee influx, the
Governments concerned should assume the primary
responsibility for ensuring peace and security, as
well as addressing the root causes of conflict in a
comprehensive and inclusive manner. At the same time,
they should provide their people with basic needs and a
development-enabling environment. The international
community should assist those efforts, as required.
Secondly, the lives of people are the most important
asset. In the interest of each and every refugee, we call
on all relevant stakeholders to prioritize saving lives so
that no one dies crossing a border or sea. Constructive
engagement and dialogue among the parties concerned
are the most effective ways for the safe return and
reintegration of refugees.

21-375599/22

S/PV.8919

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

Thirdly, the solution to the issue and international
cooperation and assistance must be people-centred,
non-politicized and in line with the principles of
respect for the sovereignty of the countries concerned
and non-interference in their internal affairs.
Last but not least, on emerging challenges to
asylum, we would like to further emphasize the need
to ensure transparency in granting refugee status
to asylum seekers. At the same time, in decisionand policy-making, it is necessary to differentiate
between refugees and irregular migrants who migrate
for economic purposes, especially in the context of
emerging non-traditional security threats.
Viet Nam always attaches great importance to
regional and international cooperation on this matter
and upholding of international law, including the
implementation of treaty obligations. We will continue
to work with others to address this global concern in an
active and responsible manner.
Mr. De La Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, Mr. Filippo Grandi, for his insightful
briefing and for the work that he and his team do daily
for millions of people. As he shared with us today,
the outlook for refugees in the world is complex and
sensitive. We only have to look at the activities of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) in Afghanistan, Bangladesh and
Syria, to name but a few places.
It is an indisputable fact that the international
community is facing an increasing number of internal
and international displacements. While armed conflicts
and situations of widespread violence continue to be the
main cause of displacement, such as in the cases of the
Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic
of Congo, we cannot ignore the fact that other factors
are also having an increasing impact on the movement
of people, as we heard. The effects of climate change,
whether in the form of acute extreme weather events or
in gradually evolving phenomena, put greater pressures
on people. In addition to that, the coronavirus disease
pandemic and its effects on the economy and social
structures are elements that have also exacerbated
the issue.
It is clear that the combination of such diverse
factors, including poverty, requires comprehensive
responses. Each situation, of course, has its particular
complexities. For example, I mention Myanmar, where
10/22

07/12/2021

we reiterate our appeal to redouble efforts and create
the necessary conditions for refugees and other forcibly
displaced persons, particularly the Rohingya, to return
to their places of origin voluntarily.
We already heard what is happening in other
contexts, such as in the case of Syrian refugees or
Afghanistan. Some among us have certainly pointed
out to the Security Council the need to ensure that all
Afghans who wish to leave their country can do so
without any restrictions.
In Libya, where we recently heard of fatal incidents
in the Mediterranean, it is important to take measures
to protect the lives and human rights of persons seeking
international protection. In short, as we can see in other
areas, when talking about refugees it should also be
highlighted that more preventive diplomacy is required.
As the High Commissioner found during his most
recent visit to Mexico and Central America, in our
region we are not strangers to this phenomenon. In
the first six months of 2021, Mexico was the country
that received the third-highest number of requests for
asylum in the world. By the end of November, our
country had received more than 123,000 applications
for refugee status, which is an exponential growth
compared to previous years. The rate of recognition of
refugee status in Mexico exceeds 70 per cent. In that
regard, Mexico counts on the valuable collaboration of
UNHCR, for which we express our gratitude, and we
reiterate our commitment to continue working together.
We underline that for Mexico, solidarity and
regional and international cooperation are the way
to respond to asylum seekers. As is the tradition in
my country, Mexico will continue to undertake the
protection and care of refugees with responsibility
and openness.
In conclusion, I will briefly, but importantly,
mention the global compact on refugees. That is one
of the international instruments at our disposal. It
provides the international community with principles,
mechanisms and programmes of action to respond to the
influx of people seeking international protection. The
Security Council must make use of the compact, which
represents an operational framework that allows us to
effectively implement solidarity. Given the situation
that we heard described in the High Commissioner’s
briefing and the opinions expressed so far today, it
is clear that solidarity is not an option, but rather an
unavoidable duty in the face of this issue.
21-37559

07/12/2021

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Mr. Grandi for his briefing. Under the leadership
of the High Commissioner, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
has overcome numerous challenges, including armed
conflicts, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic and natural disasters, and has made
tremendous efforts to alleviate the plight of refugees
and uphold their dignity, which China appreciates.
According to UNHCR statistics, the number of
refugees and displaced persons worldwide is increasing,
reaching over 82 million. The High Commissioner
has just shared information with us that is worth our
thorough consideration. The international community
must remain committed to the spirit of humanity,
actively cooperate and mobilize resources so as to
provide refugees with the necessary protection, in
accordance with international law.
In order to resolve the issue of refugees, historical
perspectives and national realities must be taken into
account. All parties must assume their responsibilities.
Developing countries host some 86 per cent of
refugees worldwide. Countries that are capable and
accountable must help ease the stress and burden facing
developing countries.
In the context of the COVID-19 pandemic,
all countries must include refugees in their
pandemic response plans and provide them with the
necessary protection.
In addressing the issue of refugees, double standards
and politicization must be avoided. The international
refugee-protection mechanism must not be abused by
terrorists and criminals.
Armed conflicts are major drivers of refugees.
The Security Council must focus on its primary
responsibility of maintaining international peace and
security and push for a political settlement to regional
hotspot issues with a view to creating the conditions
for the return of refugees. It is imperative to ensure
humanitarian access based on respect for national
sovereignty, strictly observe the United Nations guiding
principles on humanitarian assistance, and refrain from
using the issue of refugees for political motives.
Cooperation must be seriously promoted, unilateral
sanctions lifted, and excessive pressure avoided so that
the countries concerned can receive tangible assistance
and avoid facing additional obstacles.

S/PV. 8919

The question of Palestine has remained unresolved
for over 70 years, with the lives of more than 5 million
refugees torn apart and the prospect of nation-building
lost for several generations. A comprehensive, just and
lasting solution to the question of Palestine is the only
way to end the suffering of Palestinian refugees.
Ten years ago the so-called Arab Spring led to
incessant wars in Libya, Syria and other countries,
spawning large populations of refugees. As of now,
6.7 million Syrian refugees are still stranded abroad.
That is the bitter fruit of foreign military intervention
and the imposition of democratic change. The initiators
must bear the primary responsibility for supporting the
reconstruction of the countries concerned and create
conditions for the return of refugees. At the same time,
we must also ensure that the Security Council performs
its functions properly so that history does not repeat
itself.
Africa is the continent with the largest refugee
population. China highly commends refugee host
countries in Africa for their solidarity and resilience.
Along the way, we call upon UNHCR to continue to
prioritize Africa and maintain its resource mobilization
and assistance efforts for Africa.
The war in Afghanistan has displaced tens of
millions of Afghans. Reconstruction is urgently needed
to prevent a larger wave of refugees. Cash liquidity is
crucial to Afghan economic reconstruction. We call on
the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund
to resume, as soon as possible, the normal use of the
account of the Afghan Government, disperse funds
and provide economic assistance to Afghanistan with a
view to alleviating the suffering of its people.
For people who, fleeing turbulence, crossed into
Bangladesh from Rakhine state, Myanmar, we support
UNHCR and other international relief agencies in their
humanitarian efforts and commend the efforts of the
Government of Bangladesh to improve their situation.
We hope that Bangladesh and Myanmar will conduct
bilateral consultations in a constructive political
atmosphere with a view to creating conditions for the
gradual repatriation of Rohingyas.
With regard to the refugee problem along the border
of some eastern European countries, there is a need for
dialogue and cooperation to seek a proper solution. No
matter what, the rights and dignity of those refugees
must be fully guaranteed.

21-3755911/22

S/PV.8919

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

We are gravely concerned about the reports that
Lithuanian border police are suspected of deliberately
murdering refugees and subjecting them to violence.
The authorities of Lithuania must immediately conduct
investigations, bring the perpetrators to justice and
prevent a recurrence of such incidents.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank High Commissioner Grandi for
his frank and sobering briefing on the worldwide
refugee situation. The Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) has our
unwavering support. We appreciate the dedication of
the High Commissioner’s teams and other humanitarian
workers as much now as ever. I also welcome Norway’s
Foreign Minister joining us here today.
Recently, I saw first-hand the amazing work the
UNHCR teams do on my trip to Jordan last month,
where I visited the Zaatari refugee camp, home to
nearly 80,000 Syrian refugees. What I heard and saw is
a microcosm of today’s refugee landscape of 84 million
refugees. Countries, such as Jordan, have opened their
doors with compassion to provide protection from the
Al-Assad regime’s senseless brutality. We are inspired
by and grateful for Jordan’s generosity, as well as that
of many others in the world, who have welcomed the
largest refugee population since the Second World War.
I was impressed by how UNHCR and others are
integrating the latest technology in refugee camps.
At Zaatari, I saw cash credits used at a World Food
Programme supermarket, which ensures that shopping
is done with dignity; a solar grid, which will ensure
that kids have electricity to study; and a centralized
water system run by UNICEF, which provides families
with clean water and sanitary living conditions. Those
programmes represent major progress from what I
used to see in the 1990s at the Dadaab refugee camp,
where Kenya has generously hosted refugees for more
than two decades. I hope that the standard that I saw in
Zaatari will not be an exception, but a rule for UNHCR
moving forward.
In Zaatari, I was invited into the home of Nadia,
a widow from the war in Syria. An inspiring single
mother of 11 children, Nadia shared her harrowing
story of fleeing the conflict and her years-long struggle
to rebuild her life in a refugee camp. The livelihood
programme at the camp, which we supported,
empowered her to establish a successful tailoring
business. Today I am wearing a scarf she embroidered
12/22

07/12/2021

with my name and gave me. This scarf reminds me
of our collective obligation to Nadia, and particularly
to her children. Nadia told me that she works every
day to make her children proud. She should be proud
that she makes all of us proud. Many of the children
in Zaatari have grown up knowing nothing beyond 10
years of war and displacement, but the children whom
I met still have dreams, and they still have hopes. The
international community must build programmes that
support their integration into host countries so that they
can achieve their dreams.
Finally, I heard over and over that no one felt safe
returning to Syria. They feared what might happen
if they were forced back. I promised that I would use
my platform in New York to tell the world that we
will continue to protect them and that we will remain
vigilant in ensuring that any return is safe, voluntary
and dignified.
As we work together to address the Syrian refugee
crisis, we must also unite on the situations in Venezuela,
Afghanistan and Ethiopia, to name just a few. We
continue to support United Nations agencies and other
humanitarian partners to reach Venezuelans in need
of aid, and we are working with UNHCR to promote
humane migration policies that will address the factors
driving irregular migration. After the United States
and our partners evacuated thousands of Afghans,
who feared for their lives, as part of one of the biggest
airlifts in history, we must continue to support Afghan
refugees in any way possible.
On Ethiopia, the humanitarian situation continues
to worry us. We appreciate the High Commissioner’s
point concerning protection access assistance and the
need for a political solution.
No matter where one comes from, the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic remains a serious threat
to refugees and internally displaced persons everywhere.
The work that host countries do to provide vaccines and
support is critical. For our part, in partnership with the
COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access Facility, the United
States is committed to donating 1.2 billion doses of safe
and effective COVID-19 vaccines to the world by 2022.
In 2021, we provided nearly $215 million to UNHCR
to fight COVID-19. We will continue to share doses,
scale manufacturing and invest in vaccines abroad. We
thank other Member States for their commitments and
urge everyone to further step up efforts so that we can
overcome this pandemic together.
21-37559

07/12/2021

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

America stands as a beacon of liberty and refuge
to the world’s most vulnerable. We have resettled
more refugees than any other country. In October,
President Biden raised our annual refugee admissions
ceiling to 125,000. We will always support forcefully
displaced populations, and we remain committed to the
vital work of UNHCR and its partners in supporting
those populations.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines commends the
Republic of the Niger for convening this discussion,
and we thank High Commissioner Filippo Grandi for
his sobering briefing. I also welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Norway, who joined us earlier today.
During this most challenging moment, experienced
globally though unevenly by all countries and peoples,
the work of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) provides hope
and encouragement to us all. Efforts to shelter and protect
the most vulnerable — particularly stateless persons,
refugees and internally displaced people — are critical
to the maintenance of international peace and security.
The socioeconomic dislocations triggered by
armed conflict, exacerbated by the coronavirus
disease pandemic and further magnified by the climate
crisis demand urgent, focused and well-coordinated
international action. The High Commissioner has
underscored that loudly and clearly, but it bears
repeating. Vulnerable people from Haiti, across
the Sahel and the Lake Chad basin, through the
Central African region to the Horn of Africa and in
Yemen, Syria and Afghanistan, among other places,
require a renewed multilateralism that, first and
foremost, provides urgent humanitarian assistance
and critical life-saving support; secondly, reinforces
sovereignty and restores social contracts; and thirdly,
comprehensively addresses the root causes of conflict
and insecurity wherever they persist.
Greater political will and wide-ranging multilateral
engagements are needed now, more than ever, in order
to assist conflict-affected and fragile States to cultivate
peace processes, strengthen the rule of law, rebuild
public trust, enhance institutional capacities and
advance reconciliation processes within communities
and at the national level. In that connection, the High
Commissioner underscored that UNHCR cannot
replace the necessary political will of the international
community. Furthermore, all international stakeholders,

S/PV. 8919

particularly developed countries and international
financial institutions, should accelerate their efforts
to deliver on the Sustainable Development Goals. That
must be done promptly and in line with the needs,
priorities and aspirations of the countries concerned.
It is no coincidence that the challenges of today bear
disproportionately on the most vulnerable. Indeed, the
countries that suffer the worst effects of conflict also
experience striking levels of acute hunger, mass human
displacement, recurring public health emergencies and
social and economic disruptions of the most debilitating
kind. As rampant climate change, increased biodiversity
loss and widespread environmental degradation add
further strain to those already complex and often
insurmountable situations, we must work together to
advance practical, people-centred and climate-sensitive
solutions to our peace and security, development and
humanitarian challenges.
It is imperative that all development plans, policies
and programmes be centred around the fundamental
tenets of inclusivity and equality. Vulnerable persons,
groups and nations must feature as the key contributors
and beneficiaries of international development efforts.
In all circumstances, the interests of, and implications
for, stateless persons, refugees and internally displaced
people should be fully considered. So too should
the rights and perspectives of indigenous societies,
ethnic and religious minorities, women and girls and
other marginalized groups be extensively examined
and safeguarded.
When addressing any crisis, the bedrock principles
of international law, in particular the sovereign authority
of States, ought to guide our response. Humanitarian
operations must be tethered to precepts of humanity,
neutrality, impartiality and independence. And the
return and reintegration of displaced persons should
always be conducted in a safe, voluntary, dignified and
sustainable manner.
In conclusion, it is essential that social, economic
and environmental justice serve as the primary
edicts in all efforts to maintain international peace
and security. Only through a comprehensive and
synergistic approach can we achieve the lasting peace
and security that we all deserve. We join the High
Commissioner’s plea for concerted efforts to be made
for a reversal of international failure and the paralysis
caused by conflicting political aims within the
international community.

21-3755913/22

S/PV.8919

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

To be sure, our global struggles are colossal in
both scope and magnitude. But, if we work collectively
through sincere political commitments and with a
steadfast resolve, a better future awaits all countries
and peoples and, in particular, those most exposed to
the perils of our time.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are very grateful to Mr. Filippo Grandi
for his very informative briefing.
The Russian Federation is making a significant
contribution to strengthening the international refugee
protection regime and resolving migration problems.
We are conducting large-scale humanitarian activities
in many countries around the world and are making
efforts to prevent and overcome crises. We attach great
importance to strengthening cooperation with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) as the main international body for
resolving forced migration issues. We highly appreciate
the outcome of the visit to Moscow this June by the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
Mr. Filippo Grandi. The exchange of views confirmed
the mutual interest in further strengthening cooperation
between Russia and UNHCR.
We believe that resolving large-scale migration
crises requires employing multilateral cooperation
mechanisms, with the United Nations playing a key
coordinating role. We commend UNHCR’s part in
improving the international protection of refugees and
other groups of persons under its responsibility. We note
the Office’s efforts to respond to the spread of the new
coronavirus disease. Our country supports, including
financially, the activities of UNHCR in that area.
The most effective way to resolve the issue of forced
migrants is to address the root causes that compel people
to leave their homeland. A successful solution to that
problem lies primarily in a political settlement in the
countries of origin of migrants, as well as in assisting
them in socioeconomic development, State-building
and combating terrorism. External interference in the
internal affairs of other States must be avoided. We
believe that the countries actively involved in such
interference should bear the primary responsibility
for the consequences of the mass influx of migrants
and refugees.
Of particular concern is the situation in
Afghanistan, where, according to UNHCR, the
possibility of forced migration has sharply increased
14/22

07/12/2021

amid extremely limited access to basic services. The
significantly worsening socioeconomic situation poses
the risk of mass migration of the population from that
country. We believe that the international community,
in particular the traditional Western donors that have
been present in Afghanistan for the past 20 years and
bear the primary responsibility for the events there,
should actively assist the Afghan people in rebuilding
the country and preventing forced migration.
In the context of a settlement in Syria, the priority
is to ensure the voluntary return of refugees. In that
regard, we again highlight the relevance of the Russian
initiative for the repatriation of Syrian refugees. We
believe that promoting favourable conditions for the
return of refugees and internally displaced persons
to their places of permanent residence is an absolute
priority and an important step towards achieving
long-term stabilization in Syria. We are confident that
Syrian returnees, whose socioeconomic situation in
neighbouring States is becoming increasingly difficult,
will significantly contribute to the reconstruction of
their country. We call on UNHCR to step up its efforts
to further mobilize the international community to
assist the repatriation of Syrian citizens.
We are committed to strengthening the work of
UNHCR regarding the return of internally displaced
persons and refugees to the Nagorno-Karabakh region
and adjacent areas, as stipulated in the statement
of the leaders of Russia, Azerbaijan and Armenia of
9 November 2020 concerning a ceasefire and the
cessation of all hostilities in the conflict zone. We
believe that UNHCR could provide comprehensive,
non-politicized assistance, with an emphasis on the
purely humanitarian aspect. We urge UNHCR to
continue its dialogue with Yerevan and Baku in order
to obtain humanitarian access to the region.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I want to thank Mr. Filippo
Grandi for his comprehensive briefing.
Kenya takes note of the growing number of
refugees globally as a result of protracted conflicts,
economic crises and the effects of climate change. It
is worth noting, as other Council members have, that
the overwhelming bulk of refugees globally — 86 per
cent in this case — are being hosted by developing
countries, with the least developed countries providing
asylum to 27 per cent of the global total.
While acknowledging the push factors that force
populations to flee from their homes, we are also
21-37559

07/12/2021

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

conscious of the challenges that the refugee problem
poses to host States, particularly with regard to
socioeconomic and ecological conditions. Those include
resource competition, leading to exerting stress on the
livelihoods of host communities, acute environmental
degradation and economic and security challenges.
Terrorist and militant groups have been known to
exploit refugee camps to facilitate indoctrination and
recruitment, which enable them to carry out attacks.
Refugee camps have also been captured, or have been
used, to further the criminal economies that are utilized
by militants and terrorist organizations. It is critical
that the United Nations and all humanitarian agencies
that are charged with taking care of refugee camps
make every effort to ensure that such criminality does
not occur in the camps.
Despite such challenges, throughout the years
Kenya has continued to host refugees from neighbouring
States. We remain committed to upholding the principles
of international refugee protection through the
implementation of international, regional and domestic
policy documents. In November of this year, President
Uhuru Kenyatta enacted the Refugees Act 2021, which
strengthens the management of refugees in Kenya by
consolidating the provisions of several international
legal instruments. Kenya is also committed to fulfilling
the global compact on refugees, whose four main
objectives are the easing of pressure on host countries,
enhancing refugee self-reliance, expanding access to
third-country solutions and supporting conditions in
countries of origin for return in safety and dignity.
Even as Kenya continues to host refugees from
neighbouring States in the region, we call for concerted
efforts for them to be accorded basic rights within the
confines of national laws. To that end, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) has a crucial role to play in ensuring that
radicalization and support for acts of terrorism are
eradicated from their camps. In addition, it is crucial to
reinforce the tenet that encampment is not permanent
but a preparation for suitable conditions for resettlement
once peace and normalcy have been restored.
For its part, the international community needs
to honour its obligations to support refugees, host
countries, countries of origin and all other relevant
stakeholders in the protection, assistance, integration
and eventual repatriation of refugees to their home
countries. Adequate and consistent funding, as requested

S/PV. 8919

by host countries and UNHCR, is an imperative that we
must all meet. Funding aside, the wealthiest countries,
with their high- employment economies, can undertake
a great deal more resettlement of refugees. Financing
is only one pillar of responsibility. Hosting is the other
pillar. Financing itself, as presently practised, may be
disguising deeper challenges for refugees.
I want to say that, of course, the most effective way
of dealing with the refugee problem remains addressing
the root causes of forced displacement, promoting peace
and security, supporting efforts to alleviate poverty,
reducing disaster risks and providing humanitarian and
development assistance to countries of origin, as well
as countries hosting refugees.
I am interested to learn, if we have the opportunity,
from the High Commissioner whether he has detected a
surge of refugees due to climate change and its effects.
We noticed an opinion piece of his in Al Jazeera last
month that nodded towards that possibility as the world
went to the twenty-sixth session of the Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change, but it did not have any figures or
data behind it. It would be very interesting to hear how
much he has apprehended this issue.
I also want to commend the High Commissioner
on his repeated statements over the past few years
noting that thousands of refugees and migrants suffer
extreme human rights abuses on their journeys to
the Mediterranean coast and their attempts to cross
the sea. In July, he called for more action on hosting
and relocation, and he engaged the European Union
Commission on a rights-based mechanism for refugees
from Africa and Asia. I would like to know whether
there has been any progress since July and whether
he believes that there is a realistic hope that Europe’s
refugee policies towards African migrants and refugees
will change.
Finally, the High Commissioner may not yet have
seen it, but The New Yorker magazine, published here
in New York, on 28 November, published a long exposé
entitled, “The Secretive Prisons that Keep Migrants
Out of Europe”, by Ian Urbina. The thrust of that
investigation is that a series of funding decisions to
United Nations and humanitarian agencies, as well as
to coast guard forces that have links to militias, have
been used to stop African migrants from crossing to
Europe. Does the High Commissioner have any sense

21-3755915/22

S/PV.8919

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

as to whether that scandal will come to an end any
time soon?
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): It was very good to
hear from the Foreign Minister of Norway earlier. I also
want to thank the High Commissioner for his briefing
and particularly for the warnings he delivered this
morning. As always, Mr. Grandi has been honest with
us. He tells us what we need to hear, not what we want to
hear, and that is no surprise. I think the challenges that
are faced by the High Commissioner and his staff on a
daily basis are really immense, and I want to pay tribute
to the tremendous and tireless work of all staff of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) and their implementing partners in
what is really an increasingly complex and dangerous
environment globally.
I also want to recognize the deep generosity of
the countries hosting very large refugee populations.
We recognize the strain it places on host communities
and on the refugees themselves, as we have heard this
morning. We are deeply respectful of the solidarity
those countries show on behalf of all of us, and
particularly on behalf of those of us at this table who
have the capacity to make decisions that we do not
always rise to.
Since the Security Council last heard from the
High Commissioner (S/2020/560, annex I), the number
of those forcibly displaced has increased again — a
record high of 84 million people. Conflict — and I want
to underline our collective failure to prevent or resolve
it — is the reason for that. Indeed, looking at our agenda
over the past year, it is surprising, frankly, that the
increase has not been more pronounced. In Afghanistan,
almost 700,000 people have been newly displaced over
the past year — women, girls, boys and men, joining
almost 3 million existing internally displaced persons
(IDPs) and 2.2 million Afghan refugees. That means
about 6 million Afghans are now affected, more people
than the entire population of the country I come from,
Ireland. The scale, let alone the human cost, of that is
truly shocking.
The level of humanitarian needs confronting those,
we have heard today, is seismic. The urgency of our
response must match the level of need. The Security
Council has a responsibility to act and to remove
barriers or blockages preventing the provision of urgent,
unhindered life-saving and life-sustaining aid. Many of
those fleeing Afghanistan, we know, are women and
16/22

07/12/2021

girls. They are fleeing to secure the dreams they hold
for themselves or for their daughters, fleeing a regime
that would deny them an education. Today is day 81
when Afghan girls cannot attend school. And some,
particularly those women who speak out, are literally
fleeing for their lives. It is those women and girls — their
rights, freedoms and political voices — who we need to
keep in mind in the Security Council as we determine
the future mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan.
We are also now 10 years into the devastating
conflict in Syria. Almost half of that population
remains displaced. The vulnerability and hardship
endured by those who have been internally displaced
in Syria is now exacerbated in tragic ways during
this winter period, as we see harsh winter conditions
destroying tents and schools; and, of course, we see loss
of life. That demonstrates once again — as if we needed
a reminder — the fragility of that situation and the
imperative of ensuring that help can reach those most
in need, regardless of political considerations.
In Ethiopia, too, violence and instability over the
past year have driven people from their homes, as
lives and livelihoods have been lost, with the denial of
humanitarian aid, in particular, leaving many, many
thousands of individuals with no choice but to flee.
While we have seen some welcome, if limited, access
for food aid in recent days, the Security Council must
remain united in its demand to all parties to respect
international humanitarian law and for sustained, safe,
unhindered humanitarian access.
We at this table here also have a responsibility to
prevent any further worsening of that crisis. Without
concerted action by all sides to seek a pathway to peace
supported by the region and by the Security Council,
forced displacement will surely have catastrophic
consequences for neighbouring countries and
throughout the Horn of Africa. In our view, we cannot
afford to let such a catastrophe unfold on our watch.
We have heard today the importance of addressing
the root causes of displacement. We know that
insecurity drives displacement globally, but we cannot
discount other related factors, such as hunger and
climate change. The Security Council is only starting
to fully grasp of how climate-related security risks are
impacting its mandate and the people we serve.
We thank UNHCR for meeting with the Informal
Expert Group on Climate and Security, chaired
21-37559

07/12/2021

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

by Ireland and the Niger. That meeting last month
enlightened members of the group on the interlinkages
between climate displacement and security, particularly
in the Sahel. It is vital that the Security Council
continue to draw on evidence from the field to inform
its decision-making.
As the High Commissioner told the Council last year,
when leadership fails, when multilateralism — which
we in the Security Council represent in theory — fails
day in day out, the consequences are felt by the most
vulnerable, those with the least power, by those who
quite literally have no refuge.
Ireland remains committed to an approach that is
principled and emphasizes the rights of refugees. At
the core of that is the need to protect citizens, improve
humanitarian conditions and respect international
humanitarian law. Any return of refugees and internally
displaced persons must be safe, voluntary and dignified.
Displaced persons should retain as much autonomy and
control as possible.
I conclude by emphasizing once again Ireland’s
support for the stalwart work of UNHCR, reflected
also by our pledge this morning to UNHCR for 2022, in
advocating for the worldwide protection of refugees. For
those refugees living in overcrowded refugee camps,
for those IDPs dwelling within host communities under
strain and for the families of those who have lost their
lives fleeing insecurity, we need to step up.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees Filippo
Grandi for his briefing, and I welcome the participation
of Her Excellency Ms. Anniken Huitfeldt, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Norway, in today’s meeting.
Tunisia’s views on refugees, asylum, migration
and humanitarian work are based on its adherence to
noble humanitarian principles and values and on its
commitment to the relevant international humanitarian
instrument, as well as on its experience as a destination
and transit country and our specific combination of
Arab, African and Mediterranean identities.
The African continent, the Arab region and the
Mediterranean are crisis hotspots. Moreover, their
countries and peoples bear the brunt of those crises
by hosting an increasing number of displaced people
and refugees.
The ongoing crises are becoming increasingly
complex and global due to transboundary phenomena

S/PV. 8919

and threats such as pandemics, climate change and
terrorism, against a backdrop of conflict, occupation,
transition and fragility. All these have boosted
the waves of human movement and their social,
humanitarian and security repercussions. Due to the
worsening humanitarian situation of refugees and
displaced persons, these crises call — more than
ever — for the mobilization and intensified efforts of
the international community as a whole, particularly
the Security Council.
In that connection, finding solutions to end violence
and conflict, protect lives and provide protection and
assistance to those in need is a top priority. That must be
done through a coherent and holistic approach based on
the close link between peace, security and sustainable
development and on the meaningful interaction
between the various United Nations organs and
agencies, on the basis of the principles and mechanisms
of solidarity and international cooperation and shared
but differentiated responsibility.
In that context, I would like to share the
following priorities:
First, the traditional focus on the ongoing
management of protracted forced displacement crises,
based on short-term, limited humanitarian solutions
must be replaced by an approach that addresses root
causes and finds proactive and lasting solutions to them.
That will require the Security Council to focus more on
ending conflicts as a key priority through an effective
effort supported by consensus among its members.
In that context, Tunisia has spared no effort in
supporting the peaceful settlement of the conflict in
Libya and addressing the repercussions of the situation.
In 2011, my country took in approximately 1 million
refugees and migrants who left Libya. We continue to
take all preparation and response measures within the
national emergency plan, in partnership with United
Nations agencies and civil society organizations.
Secondly, we must strengthen the development and
solidarity dimension when addressing human mobility
crises. The causes and consequences of migration and
displacement remain a humanitarian and development
issue. Through migration and displacement, people
seek a better life and the enjoyment of their human
rights and dignity. It is therefore necessary to enhance
development and solidarity among States and peoples
in order to help address the root causes of crises and
prevent human suffering, particularly on the basis of

21-3755917/22

S/PV.8919

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, Our
Common Agenda (A/75/982), the Global Compact for
Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration and the Global
Compact on Refugees.
That will require the international community to
provide sustainable support to developing and least
developed host countries through partnerships oriented
towards sustainable development, thus contributing to
building the capacities of refugee-hosting communities
and institutions to recover from crises and contain their
long-term spillover effects. Finally, we stress the need
to enhance the contribution of migration to sustainable
development by facilitating movement through safe and
orderly channels.
Thirdly, we must effectively address migration
and refugee crises in accordance with human rights
standards and the Charter of the United Nations. In the
context of addressing migration and asylum, we stress
the need to strike a balance between the imperatives of
protecting their sovereignty of States and the security
of their peoples, on the one hand, and the need to
provide relief and respect human rights, on the other.
It is also necessary to more closely monitor the trends,
developments and indicators of these migration waves
in the light of the growing terrorist threat and organized
crime activities.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the
importance of settling the issue of Palestinian refugees.
In the interests of reaching a final settlement, Tunisia
will continue to support the efforts and role of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Grandi for his briefing
and for his excellent work at the head of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR).
As we commemorate the seventieth anniversary of
the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees,
UNHCR’s mandate is now more important than ever,
and we commend the remarkable work of its entire staff.
Our action must be guided by the principle of shared
responsibility. As the High Commissioner noted, the
number of displaced persons in need of protection has
never been so high. A case in point is the Sahel, where
the situation is tragic and getting worse. Helping people
forced into exile is our duty. We must do everything we
can to support the countries that are on the front line
18/22

07/12/2021

of large-scale displacement. Only through solidarity
can we succeed in improving the plight of refugees and
displaced persons.
In that context, the implementation of the global
compact on refugees is a priority. France is actively
working to implement the commitments it undertook
at the Global Refugee Forum in 2019, notably through
asylum capacity-building programmes — in the Niger,
for example — and through its resettlement programme,
now implemented in nine countries in the Middle East
and Africa. We also nearly doubled our contribution to
UNHCR in one year, reaching $100 million this year,
including $45 million for the Afghan crisis response.
In addition, we will not compromise on the
fundamental principles of refugee return. Such returns
must be voluntary and safe. In that regard, we recall
that those conditions have yet to be met in Syria and
Burma. There are reports of serious human rights
violations committed by the regime against refugees
upon their return to Syria. Refugees will be unable
to return as long as the regime continues to threaten
their lives and deprive them of their rights, particularly
property rights. It is therefore essential that UNHCR
be able to ensure effective monitoring of returning
Syrian refugees.
We
strongly
condemn
any
political
instrumentalization of migration flows. A case in point
is the situation at the Polish-Belarusian border — it is
unacceptable to put the lives of vulnerable individuals
at risk for political purposes.
Moreover, the Security Council must create the
conditions for a sustainable resolution of these crises
in order to address the root causes of displacement.
Insecurity and massive human rights violations are
the primary causes of displacement. Whether, for
example, in Syria or Burma, only political solutions
will make it possible to durably stabilize the situation
where displacement takes place and to overcome the
challenges linked to the displacement of people.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement as the representative of the Niger.
I heartily thank Mr. Filippo Grandi, United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, for the scope and
excellence of his briefing, as well as for his tireless
advocacy on behalf of refugees as well as host countries,
many of which face enormous challenges. That is the
case with my country, the Niger, which is nevertheless
one of the most generous in that regard.
21-37559

07/12/2021

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

S/PV. 8919

Mr. Grandi was right to say it: saving lives cannot
wait for political solutions. That is certainly true in
the Sahel region, which faces a deterioration in the
security situation. That is the reason that the Niger
calls for a long-term solution to the refugee crisis in
the Sahel — and elsewhere — above and beyond a
humanitarian approach. From our perspective, such
a solution should be based on a holistic, multilateral
approach focused on development and peacebuilding.
In that regard, and as Mr. Grandi also mentioned, the
international community should redouble its efforts to
restore peace while also ensuring that resources are
available for displaced communities and their hosts. In
other words, we must save lives. It is the countries and
communities with the least resources that continue to
bear the greatest burden when it comes to providing
protection and caring for forcibly displaced people.
They should be better supported by the rest of the
international community.

Another advantage of that initiative is that
it strengthens social cohesion and affords better
coordination between the local population and the
displaced persons, as well as the effective restoration
of governance in those areas where it was not present
before.

We would also recall the Niger’s proactive role
in fostering conditions conducive for the voluntary
and sustainable return or relocation of refugees from
Libya in dignity and security. My country has extended
its memorandum of understanding with the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) in order to expand the space for those
refugees and asylum seekers until 2022.

Secondly, we would like to underscore the need
for appropriate strategies to reduce and manage risks
linked to climate change, given that the degradation
of the environment and natural catastrophes have
been increasingly accentuated, driven by refugee
movements.

Above and beyond the voluntary and dignified
return of refugees from Libya, the Niger has committed
itself, in coordination with Nigerian officials, to do
everything possible to create security and material
conditions for the repatriation of refugees from Borno
state fleeing Boko Haram atrocities. We encourage our
partners to join us in that new initiative so as to make
it possible for those people to return home — but above
all to ensure that their children do not become a lost
generation owing to a lack of education.
For those who cannot return to their countries,
especially refugees from the Tillaberi region, west of
the Niger, my country, working in cooperation with
UNHCR and partner countries, has contributed to
the process of their integration by moving refugees
and displaced people from camps to innovative host
communities where they will not only be able to enjoy
freedoms and fundamental rights such as education
and health care, but will also be able to be independent
and participate actively in the economic life of the
communities in which they live by having a chance
to work.

At this point in my statement, I should like to echo
the following points.
First, it is essential that stateless persons and people
who have been forcibly displaced should be included
in all national responses to sexual and gender-based
violence and violence against children. The onset of
the coronavirus disease pandemic has also unleashed
a shadow pandemic, namely, one involving that type of
violence. We encourage UNHCR to ensure that those
people do not continue to live in insecurity, but also
that they have access to appropriate education and
health care.

Thirdly, I would like to reiterate the Niger’s
commitment and that of its armed forces to protect
civilians in the challenging context of combating
terrorism, as well as to ensure the need for humanitarian
and development assistance to meet the needs of
affected populations.
In conclusion, the Niger is resolutely committed to
overcome the changes linked to statelessness and the
significant risk that poses in terms of human rights,
development and security. In cooperation with UNHCR,
my country has begun an ambitious project — known
as the administrative census for development with a
humanitarian focus — as proof of its commitment to
also address the issue of statelessness.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to Mr. Grandi to respond to the
comments and questions.
Mr. Grandi: I thank you, Mr. President, for your
statement in your national capacity, as it links up very
well the various elements raised in the discussion. That
is no surprise for, as we said already, your country is

21-3755919/22

S/PV.8919

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

facing the outcome of many overlapping challenges.
You therefore have a very clear sense of how those
challenges intersect and aggravate the problem of
forced displacement. Thank you, as well, for raising
the issue of statelessness, which is another important
dossier for my organization.
I would also like to thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Norway for being present at this meeting. I
will begin my comments by picking up on some of the
points she made.
First of all, I would recall that the majority of the
84 million displaced people around the world — about
two thirds — are internally displaced persons. The
renewed focus on addressing situations of internal
displacement in the report of the Secretary-General’s
high-level panel is therefore very welcome. Even more
welcome is the report’s sharp focus on solving internal
displacement. Solutions to internal displacement
are sometime the same, but sometimes differ, as the
solutions to refugee issues. There are many points of
contact, though, which is why I have made the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) available in the follow-up to the report to
contribute in particular, besides our own institutions
functions in respect of protection for internally
displaced persons, to the search for solutions to internal
displacement.
The Foreign Minister as well as almost everyone
else, myself included, raised the link between the
climate emergency and displacement. It is a very
complex link, ranging from immediate displacement
due to natural disasters, which are compounded by
climate change, to more complex causal chains — for
example, due to conflict that is itself caused by climate
change. As in the Sahel, for instance, resources become
scarce, communities enter into conflict with each
other and that causes displacement. From the Council’s
perspective, I would certainly encourage focusing
increasingly on that link between climate, conflict and
displacement, as we see that chain of causes becoming
a pattern in many parts of the world. It requires urgent
attention.
The representative of Kenya asked whether we
have data. I must be honest that I refrained from putting
forward figures, which would inevitably be estimates
as well as difficult to compare with each other. One
can count the people who are displaced by a flood, a
hurricane or a drought. But that is only one impact of
20/22

07/12/2021

climate on displacement. To quantify globally is more
complex and more on a case-by-case basis. But there
are patterns that we are studying, together with many
of our partners, on which we as UNHCR have a role to
play as experts on the protection of the displaced and
on the search for solutions. We are very keen and very
engaged in that respect.
Many speakers also mentioned the pandemic.
Indeed, we have been very engaged in responding to
the impact of the pandemic on displaced populations
and their hosts. There is a health aspect that continues
to be important. Refugees and displaced persons are
mostly in countries that are still undervaccinated,
if I may use that term. I have had pressing appeals
from countries such as Uganda, Iran and Bangladesh
that have very promptly included many refugees on
their soil in vaccination campaigns but do not have
enough vaccines or logistical capacity to vaccinate and
therefore struggle under the additional responsibility of
vaccinating host populations. I therefore make a strong
appeal for them to be considered with special regard
when countries that help others when vaccinations are
rolled out.
But the main impact of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) on those populations and their hosts
has been on the social and economic front. There,
we are engaged in very interesting and important
conversations with the World Bank, and even with the
International Monetary Fund and many Member States,
on how we can ensure that social safety nets that are put
together in each country to offset the economic impact
of lockdowns include populations on the move. That
is politically sensitive in many places, but it is very
important. Otherwise, those populations will feel the
impact of COVID-19 for even many more years than
populations that are not on the move.
I offer thanks in that respect to some countries
represented on the Council. In particular, I would
thank Ireland and Kenya for making statements that
link together all these complex causes and inform our
response to this crisis, as humanitarian agencies, and
their response as custodians of peace and security in
relation to that.
Let me move on to a few of the geographical issues
or specific issues that have been raised, starting with
Afghanistan. Just to be very clear, I think we can look
at Afghanistan as a sequencing of steps that need to be
taken. The absolute priority now is the humanitarian
21-37559

07/12/2021

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

response, which goes largely through humanitarian
organizations like ours. I have already spoken about
that. Some have spoken about the evacuations of people
who would be at risk after 15 August. I think the focus
now has to be really on preventing an avoidable major
refugee outflow due to the collapse of State structures.
That is really what needs to be the priority. This is
the appeal I have heard from neighbouring countries,
Turkey and countries of the region.
Efforts must be made in that respect, first through
the transitional arrangements that many speakers have
mentioned and that are being discussed at the moment
among the World Bank, the United Nations and some
other State stakeholders. But I think — and we need
to be frank about this — that ultimately the Taliban,
which is in control of the country today, and the
international community in its entirety need to find
a modus operandi, coexist with each other and take
the necessary step for that to happen. The Taliban, of
course, must deliver on the all-important issues of the
rights of women, women at work and minorities, and the
international community must support the functioning
of the State, which must be ensured — all of this, for
the sake of the Afghan people. It is politically delicate,
but I think that if we do not have the full trajectory
ahead of us clear in our mind, we will inevitably always
stop at solutions that cannot be truly definitive for a
stable, future for the country.
Some speakers mentioned Myanmar, which I did
not refer to in my opening remarks. Of course, we are
concerned about the situation in the country. Violence
against civilians has caused fresh displacement and is
likely to cause more. Political difficulties make it more
complex for us to interact with those in control of the
country. As Council members may imagine, UNHCR is
particularly worried about the situation of the Rohingya
minority in the west of the country, in Rakhine
state, and about the increasing lack of prospects and
opportunities for the 1 million Rohingya refugees in
Bangladesh, which continues to bear a very significant
burden in hosting this population. I therefore appeal for
that situation not to be lost from the international radar
screen.
The Ambassador of Kenya asked very important
questions also in respect of European refugee policies
and the situation at the doorstep of Europe. I assume
that he was referring in particular to the situation in
Libya. I have a few points to make in response to that.

S/PV. 8919

First of all, naturally, we and I personally need to
continue to be engaged in dialogue with the European
Commission and European Union member States
on the future of their asylum policies. This is a very
complex discussion. The European Commission has put
forward a very important proposal — a migration and
asylum pact — that is still being discussed by European
countries. Unfortunately, that discussion continues to
encounter very difficult political obstacles, but it is clear
that Europe must continue to have a welcoming policy
in respect of those in need of international protection. It
also needs to develop more strategically its interaction
with countries of origin and transit regarding the
people who reach Europe from Africa, the Middle East
and other parts of the world. The compact includes a
very important external component, which we have
encouraged Europe to continue to pursue. We remain
available to facilitate that particular discussion.
Clearly, we are worried about push-backs that
are happening at the European external borders, and
we are particularly worried by the situation in Libya,
where the limited progress that has occurred through
work by the UNHCR, the International Organization
for Migration and other organizations to extract people
from detention centres remains very precarious in the
fragile political situation of Libya. We are engaging
the Libyan Government in dialogue on these matters.
We hope that the political process can advance through
the election towards more stability for the country.
Without that stability, it will be very difficult to also
engage on the complicated issue of how to deal with
migratory flows, including the flows of people in need
of protection through Libya and towards Europe. But
that discussion also should not be allowed to drop from
the radar screen in the complex debate about Libya. I
have concerns about the situation there.
Many remarks were made about Syria. If I can be
frank, I appreciate the fact that the Irish Ambassador
noted that I sometimes say things that perhaps are not
exactly what everybody would like to hear. But I shall
be frank — I still hear controversy and disagreement
regarding the complex issue of Syrian refugees and
their return. I would invite States to have a more open,
concrete and substantive debate on these important
issues.
Neighbouring countries are hosting almost
6 million people. In some of those countries,
particularly Lebanon, the situation has become very
difficult. I am encouraging donor countries to continue

21-3755921/22

S/PV.8919

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

to support and even increase support to the countries
hosting Syrian refugees until the solution for this crisis
is found, but at the same time I think that we must
also have a frank discussion about creating conditions
for return — a discussion that should encompass
everybody. Everybody has responsibilities, as I said
in my opening statement. Syria has responsibilities in
putting in place conditions with respect to security,
legal issues and access of UNHCR to areas of return, as
does the donor community in supporting those returns
when they happen safely and voluntarily.
This is an important discussion, and I would really
hope that we can have it. We are ready to facilitate it,
separate from politics, to the extent that that can happen,
because it is about the fate and the future of millions of
people from a country that has been impacted severely
by conflict for the past 12 years.
There was a brief mention by the representative of
the Russian Federation of Nagorno-Karabakh. I would
reassure the Russian Federation and everybody else that
we are engaged in a difficult dialogue with the parties
to that conflict in order to be able to implement the task
that we were given by the ceasefire agreement more
than a year ago in order to ensure the safe, voluntary and
sustainable return of all those displaced in more than
30 years of conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan.
That dialogue between those parties has not been easy.
We have made some progress and are very grateful to
Russia for facilitating the dialogue. We will continue to
engage in that respect.
There was one more specific issue raised by some
speakers — the issue of finding a solution to the plight
of Palestinian refugees. As members know, that used
to be my responsibility when I was the Head of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), and I am therefore
very grateful to those who have made a plea for that
discussion to continue. It is not my responsibility
anymore. It is not the responsibility of UNHCR, but I
will gladly convey members’ interest and support to my
UNRWA colleagues.
I wish to make a few more points before I close.
One is to offer my appreciation for the support that has
been expressed by some speakers. The representative
of India, for example, expressed strong support for
multilateral action in terms of refugee responses. I can
assure him that I really appreciate what India has been

22/22

07/12/2021

doing and saying, and as I said earlier, I am always
ready to travel to New Delhi to discuss this further
with his Government. I also express full support for
what the Kenyan Ambassador said about what is being
done in Kenya — a very complex issue — and my
full assurances that UNHCR remains very vigilant
on the issue of law and order linked to the presence
of refugees. That is, of course, the responsibility of
the host countries, but as with Kenya, we are always
ready to mobilize resources, if need be, to support
the action of the host country to ensure that law and
order are not destabilized by the presence of refugees,
possible tensions with host communities or, worse, the
infiltration of undesirable elements through refugee
camps and other settlements. That is something that we
need to remain very vigilant about.
Finally, this morning, as some speakers have
mentioned, I participated in the annual pledging
conference to UNHCR. We asked for $9 billion, as I
said earlier, for our activities for next year. I am glad
to say that we got initial pledges — and these are just
initial pledges — of over $1 billion this morning. That
is the highest level of initial pledges that we have ever
received in our history, so I am very grateful for that
and would like to encourage in particular those who
have spoken about their own financial contributions to
continue, going forward, to make such contributions
as flexible, unearmarked and multi-year as possible in
order to help us face the complex challenges we have
talked about.
Next Tuesday, I have convened in Geneva the Highlevel Officials Meeting. Some speakers have mentioned
that. This is two years after the Global Refugee Forum
and two years before the next refugee forum, as
stipulated by the global compact on refugees. I hope
that it will be an opportunity to reflect on many of those
themes. I will welcome the contributions of Council
members and other Member States, and hope that it
will be a good opportunity to renew our commitment
to helping countries hosting large numbers of refugees,
and in particular those that have the misfortune of
having left everything behind and taken the road to
exile, so that they can be protected and solutions can be
found to their plight.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Grandi
for his participation, responses and comments.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

21-37559
