General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

40

Noting that the Conference has called for universal
adherence to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons,
Recognizing the necessity of effective international
safeguards in order to ensure that the peaceful applications of nuclear energy will not lead to further proliferation of nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive
devices,
Underlining the important role of the International
Atomic Energy Agency in implementing international
non-proliferation policies in connexion with the peaceful uses of nuclear energy,
Concerned that the nuclear-arms race continues unabated,
Recognizing that various appropriate means are neccessary to meet the security concerns of non-nuclearweapon States,
1. Urgently calls for determined efforts by all nuclear-weapon States:
(a) To bring about the cessation of the nucleararms race;
( b) To undertake effective measures in the direction of nuclear disarmament;
(c) To find an early solution to the difficulties in
reaching agreement to discontinue all test explosions
of nuclear weapons for all time as a step towards the
realization of these objectives;
2. Emphasizes the particular responsibility of the
two major nuclear-weapon States in this regard;
3. Stresses the urgency of international co-operative
efforts in appropriate forums to prevent the further proliferation of nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive
devices;
4. Recognizes that States accepting effective nonproliferation restraints have a right to full access to
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and underlines the
importance of all efforts to increase the availability of
energy, particularly for the needs of the developing
countries of the world;
5. Requests the International Atomic Energy
Agency to accord high priority to its programme of
work in these areas;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-third session an item entitled "Implementation
of the conclusions of the first Review Conference of
the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons and establishment of a preparatory
committee for the second Conference".

Noting with appreciation the report of the SecretaryGenera134 submitted to the General Assembly in response to the aforementioned resolution,
Reaffirming its conviction of the urgent necessity
that the States permanent members of the Security
Council, as well as any other State with comparable
military expenditures, carry out reductions in their military budgets,
Reaffirming also its conviction that part of the resources thus released should be utilized for social and
economic development, particularly that of the developing countries,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral and to the Group of Experts on the Reduction
of Military Budgets which assisted in the preparation
of the report;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to make the necessary arrangements for the report to be issued as a
United Nations publication and widely distributed;
3. Invites all States to communicate to the Secretary-General before 30 April 1977 their comments with
regard to matters covered in the report and, in particular:
(a) Their views and suggestions on the proposed
standardized reporting instrument contained in the report;
( b) Any information they may wish to convey on
their military expenditure accounting practices, including a description of methods currently in use;
( c) Suggestions and recommendations concerning
possible practical approaches for the further development and operation of a standardized reporting system;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare, with
the assistance of an intergovernmental group of budgetary experts appointed by him, a report containing
an analysis of the comments provided by States pursuant to paragraph 3 above, in the light of the suggestions contained in the above-mentioned report, 34 as well
as any further conclusions and recommendations;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to distribute that
report not later than 31 August 1977;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-second session the item entitled "Reduction
of military budgets".

98th plenary meeting
14 December 1976
31/88.

96th plenary meeting
10 December 1976
31/87.

Reduction of military budgets

The General Assembly,
Recalling that in its resolution 3463 (XXX) of 11
December 1975 the General Assembly, inter alia, requested the Secretary-General to prepare, with the assistance of a group of qualified experts, a report containing an analysis and examination in concrete terms
of issues regarding a system of international measurement, reporting and comparison of military expenditures,

Implementation of the Declaration of the
Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as
a Zone of Peace, contained in its resolution 2832
(XXVI) of 16 December 1971, and recalling also its
resolutions 2992 (XXVII) of 15 December 1972,
3080 (XXVIII) of 6 December 1973, 3259 A (XXIX)
of 9 December 1974 and 3468 (XXX) of 11 December 1975,
Reaffirming its conviction that concrete action in
furtherance of the objectives of the Declaration would
:1 4 A/31/222/Rev. l

E.77.l.6).

( United Nations publication, Sales No.

III.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

4.1

be a substantial contribution to the strengthening of international peace and security,
Noting the resolution adopted at the Fifth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries on the subject of the Indian Ocean Peace
Zone Proposal, 35
Deeply concerned that there has been an escalation
of the military presence of the great Powers conceived
in the context of great Power rivalry in the Indian
Ocean, and believing therefore that the implementation
of the purposes and objectives of the Declaration of
the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace has acquired a
new urgency,
Regretting that, despite repeated invitations, certain
great Powers as well as certain major maritime users
of the Indian Ocean have not so far found it possible
to co-operate with the Ad Hoe Committee on the Indian Ocean and the littoral and hinterland States of
the Indian Ocean,
1. Takes note of the report of the Ad Hoe Committee on the Indian Ocean, 36 in particular section II
thereof concerning the consultations entered into by
the littoral and hinterland States of the Indian Ocean
in pursuance of paragraphs 3 and 4 of General Assembly resolution 3468 (XXX);
2. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee and the littoral
and hinterland States of the Indian Ocean to continue
their consultations with a view to formulating a programme of action leading to the convening of a conference on the Indian Ocean;
3. Invites once again all States, in particular the
great Powers and the major maritime users of the Indian Ocean, to co-operate in a practical manner with
the Ad Hoe Committee in the discharge of its functions;
4. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to continue its
work and consultations in accordance with its mandate
and to submit to the General Assembly at its thirtysecond session a report on its work;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
render all necessary assistance to the Ad Hoe Committee, including the provision of summary records.
98th plenary meeting
14 December 1976

everyone, would contribute to the reduction of the
nuclear-arms race and to the further relaxation of international tension,
Also convinced of the need for again exerting every
effort to achieve an international agreement on the
cessation of all types of nuclear-weapon tests,
Noting that during the thirty-first session of the General Assembly proposals have been made and relevant
documents submitted with a view to finding a compromise basis for a generally acceptable understanding regarding the supervision of compliance with such an
agreement,
Believing that the conclusion between the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of
America of treaties on the limitation of underground
nuclear-weapon tests and on underground nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes contributes to the creation of favourable conditions for the cessation of all
nuclear-weapon tests,
Taking note of the note by the Secretary-General31
stating that twenty-six non-nuclear-weapon States are
ready to participate in the negotiations with a view to
reaching agreement on the complete and general prohibition of nuclear-weapon tests,
I. Again calls upon all nuclear-weapon States, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 3478
(XXX), to proceed as soon as possible with negotiations on the conclusion of a treaty on the complete
and general prohibition of nuclear-weapon tests with
the participation of non-nuclear-weapon States;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to render such
assistance as may be necessary for the negotiations and
to transmit to the group referred to in paragraph 1
above all documents relating to the consideration by
the General Assembly at its thirty-first session of the
item entitled "Conclusion of a treaty on the complete
and general prohibition of nuclear-weapon tests";
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-second session the item entitled "Conclusion
of a treaty on the complete and general prohibition
of nuclear-weapon tests".
98th plenary meeting
14 December 1976

31/89.

31/90.

Conclusion of a treaty on the complete
and general prohibition of nuclearweapon tests

Strengthening of the role of the United
Nations in the field of disarmament

The General Assembly,
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3478 (XXX) of 11 December 1975, in which it called upon all nuclear-weapon
States to enter into negotiations, not later than 31
March 1976, with a view to reaching agreement on
the complete and general prohibition of nuclear-weapon
tests, with twenty-five to thirty non-nuclear-weapon
States participating in such negotiations,
Deploring the fact that such negotiations have not
yet begun,
Convinced that the early cessation of nuclear-weapon
tests, including underground tests, everywhere and by
35 A/31/197, annex, p. 124.
36 Official Records of the General Assembly,

Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 29 (A/31/29 and Corr.I and 2).

Recalling its resolution 3484 B (XXX) of 12 December 1975, in which it decided to carry out a review
of the role of the United Nations in the field of disarmament,
Noting that the Ad Hoe Committee on the Review
of the Role of the United Nations in the Field of Disarmament has carried out the task entrusted to it by
the General Assembly in the aforementioned resolution,
Having considered the report of the Ad Hoe Committee, which contains, inter alia, a set of agreed proposals with regard to the following subjects: 38
ar A/31/228.
38 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 36 (A/31/36), para. 18.
