A /73/PV.83

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-third session

83

rd plenary meeting
Wednesday, 22 May 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Garcés . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ecuador)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like to
draw the attention of the General Assembly to draft
resolution A/73/L.86, which has been distributed in
connection with agenda item 29, entitled “Advancement
of women”.
Members will recall that the General Assembly
concluded its consideration of agenda item 29 at its 55th
plenary meeting, on 17 December 2018. In order for the
Assembly to take action on the draft resolution before it
today, it will be necessary to reopen the consideration
of agenda item 29.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen consideration of agenda item 29?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Spanish): Members
will also recall that, at its 3rd plenary meeting, on
21 September 2018, the General Assembly decided to
allocate agenda item 29 to the Third Committee. In order
to enable the Assembly to take action expeditiously on
the draft resolution, it will be necessary to consider
agenda item 29 directly in plenary meeting and proceed
immediately to its consideration.

May I take it that the Assembly wishes to consider
agenda item 29 directly in plenary meeting and proceed
immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided (decision 73/504 B).
Agenda item 29 (continued)
Advancement of women
Draft resolution (A/73/L.86)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kenya to introduce draft
resolution A/73/L.86.
Ms. Mwangi (Kenya): My delegation has the
honour to address the General Assembly on agenda
item 29, entitled “Advancement of women”, to
introduce draft resolution A/73/L.86, entitled “Twentyfifth anniversary of the Fourth World Conference on
Women”, for the Assembly’s consideration.
Twenty-four years ago, in September 1995, tens of
thousands of women from all over the world gathered in
Beijing to establish a clear set of commitments for gender
equality and the empowerment of women and girls. The
resulting document was the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action, which identified 12 critical areas
of concern. Governments made specific commitments
to ensure that no woman or girl would be left behind
in their economic, social and political development,
among other areas.
The year 2020 will mark 25 years since that
landmark conference. It will also be a year for reviews

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-14879 (E)

*1914879*

A/73/PV.83

at the national, regional and global levels in order to
assess how far we have come in the pursuit of gender
equality and the empowerment of women and girls
everywhere. The draft resolution aims to commemorate
that historic world conference by convening a highlevel meeting on the margins of the Assembly’s general
debate at its seventy-fifth session. As members may
be aware, the draft resolution is a follow-up to the
Economic and Social Council’s recommendation in
its resolution 2019/9, which called on the General
Assembly to convene such a meeting.
Kenya remains committed to gender equality and
the empowerment of all women and girls. We thank
all delegations for their constructive engagement and
overwhelming support during the informal consultations
on the draft resolution. The draft resolution currently
has 103 sponsors and is still open for sponsorship. We
look forward to its successful adoption and count on all
members for their continued support.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): The following statement
is made in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly.
Under the terms of paragraph 1 of draft resolution
A/73/L.86, in order to celebrate the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the Fourth World Conference on Women
and thereby accelerate the realization of gender equality
and the empowerment of all women and girls, the
General Assembly would decide to convene a one-day
high-level meeting of the Assembly on the margins of
the general debate of the Assembly at its seventy-fifth
session, and that the outcome of the high-level meeting
would take the form of a Chair’s summary.
Pursuant to the request contained in paragraph 1, and
following consultations with the technical secretariat,
as it stands, it is not defined whether the proposed
one-day high-level meeting would be held prior to, or
in parallel with, the general debate. Furthermore, the
number of meetings required to service the one-day
high-level meeting is not defined. In the absence of
modalities for the meetings, it is not possible at the
present time to estimate the potential cost implications
of the requirements for conference services.
Upon decisions on the modalities, format and
scope of the meetings, the Secretary-General would
2/26

22/05/2019

submit the relevant costs for the requirements, in
accordance with rule 153 of the rules of procedure of
the General Assembly. Furthermore, the date of the
meetings would have to be determined in consultation
with the Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management.
Accordingly, the adoption of draft resolution
A/73/L.86 would not give rise to any budgetary
implications under the programme budget.
A copy of the statement I just read out will be made
available on the PaperSmart portal.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolution A/73/L.86,
entitled “Twenty-fifth anniversary of the Fourth World
Conference on Women”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, in addition to those delegations listed in
document A/73/L.86, the following countries have
also become sponsors of the draft resolution: Algeria,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Barbados, the
Plurinational State of Bolivia, Botswana, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cameroon, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
El Salvador, Eswatini, the Gambia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Iceland, Indonesia, Italy, Jamaica, Kazakhstan,
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Maldives, Mauritius, Montenegro,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Palau,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Poland, the Republic of
Korea, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe,
Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South
Africa, South Sudan, the Sudan, Sweden, Uganda, the
United Republic of Tanzania, Togo, Tunisia, Tuvalu,
Ukraine, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and Zimbabwe.
The President (spoke in Spanish): May I take it
that the Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/73/L.86?
Draft resolution A/73/L.86 was adopted (resolution
73/294).
19-14879

22/05/2019

The President: I am delighted that the General
Assembly decided by consensus to hold a high-level
meeting in 2020 to mark the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action. I
commend Kenya for its leadership on resolution 73/294
and the many sponsors from all regions. At a time of
heightened concerns about women’s rights, it is crucial
to ensure that the Assembly, the most representative
organ of the United Nations, sends a strong signal that
we are indeed a parliament for all humankind, including
women and girls.
Endorsed by all Member States in 1995, the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action remain
highly relevant today because of their vision, ambition
and focus on practical action on poverty, education,
health, violence, armed conflict, the economy, power
and decision-making, institutional mechanisms,
human rights, media, environment and the girl child.
Almost 25 years on, we can be proud of the progress
we have made through the Millennium Development
Goals — and now the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development — Security Council resolution 1325
(2000), which will be 20 years old next year, and UNWomen, established by the General Assembly almost a
decade ago. However, the Beijing Platform for Action
also remains highly relevant because progress has been
painfully slow.
As we heard at the Commission on the Status
of Women this year, if we maintain the current rate
of progress, it will take 108 years — more than a
century — to close the global gender gap, and 202
years to achieve economic gender parity. No country
has achieved gender equality. Women in every region
of the world are still denied their basic rights and needs,
and we cannot take for granted the gains we have made.
The landscape has changed dramatically in many areas
covered by the Beijing conference, notably media, the
environment and human rights. The push-back is real.
The twenty-fifth anniversary is therefore a
golden opportunity to recommit to women’s rights
and empowerment, rise to challenges old and new
and reclaim the agenda. As President of the General
Assembly, I will begin preparations immediately for
the high-level meeting and will appoint co-facilitators
to lead consultations on organizational arrangements.
I count on all Member States to support them and
ensure that the meeting leads to positive outcomes on
the ground.

A/73/PV.83

The United Nations will turn 75 next year. Let us
send a strong message that, going forward, even more so
than in the past, the Organization will protect, support
and empower women and girls and leave no one behind.
(spoke in Spanish)
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 29.
Agenda item 88
Request for an advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice on the legal
consequences of the separation of the Chagos
Archipelago from Mauritius in 1965
Note by the Secretary-General (A/73/773)
Draft resolution (A/73/L.84/Rev. 1)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Senegal to introduce draft
resolution A/73/L.84/Rev.1.
Mr. Niang (Senegal) (spoke in French): On behalf
of the Group of African States, I have the honour to
introduce, under agenda item 88, draft resolution
A/73/L.84/Rev.1, entitled “Advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice on the legal consequences
of the separation of the Chagos Archipelago from
Mauritius in 1965”.
For the record, in adopting resolution 71/292, on
22 June 2017, the General Assembly, in accordance
with Article 96 of the Charter of the United Nations,
requested the International Court of Justice, pursuant
to article 65 of the Statute of the Court, to issue an
advisory opinion on the following two questions. First:
was the process of decolonization lawfully completed
when Mauritius was granted independence in 1968,
following the separation of the Chagos archipelago
from Mauritius and having regard to international law
and the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly?
Secondly, what are the consequences under international
law arising from the continued administration by the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
of the Chagos archipelago, including with respect to the
inability of Mauritius to implement a programme for
the resettlement of its nationals, in particular those of
Chagossian origin?
Today’s draft resolution is in follow-up to the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
on the Legal consequences of the separation of the

19-148793/26

A/73/PV.83

Chagos archipelago from Mauritius in 1965, delivered
on 25 February (see A/73/773). According to the
opinion, the process of decolonization of Mauritius was
not lawfully carried out under international law when
that country gained independence in 1968, following
the separation of the Chagos archipelago. In that
respect, the Court unambiguously calls on the United
Kingdom to bring to an end its administration of the
Chagos archipelago as quickly as possible.
Moreover, it should be recalled that by resolution
1514 (XV), of 14 December 1960, the General Assembly
specifies that any attempt aimed at the partial or total
disruption of the national unity and territorial integrity
of a country is incompatible with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Resolution 2066 (XX), of 16 December 1965, which
deals specifically with Mauritius, urges the United
Kingdom to take no action that would dismember the
territory of Mauritius and violate its territorial integrity.
In its various decisions on the issue, the African Union
(AU) Conference of Heads of State and Government
reiterated its determination to continue and intensify
its efforts aimed at the complete decolonization of
Mauritius, in accordance with international law. At the
twenty-eighth ordinary session of the AU Summit, held
in Addis Ababa on 30 and 31 January 2017, the Heads
of State and Government, on the basis of the resolutions
I just referred to, reaffirmed the need to complete the
decolonization of the Republic of Mauritius and enable
it to fully exercise its sovereignty over the Chagos
archipelago, including Diego Garcia.
The Conference of Heads of State also decided to
fully support the action taken by the Government of
the Republic of Mauritius in the United Nations to have
the International Court of Justice issue an advisory
opinion on the legal consequences of the separation of
the Chagos archipelago from Mauritius.
It should also be recalled that the AU Commission
fully participated in the entire process leading up to the
issuance of the International Court of Justice advisory
opinion. The Commission issued its first written
statement on 1 March 2018, and its second in May 2018,
before its oral argument in The Hague in September
2018. On that occasion, the Commission stressed that
the AU’s mandate to preserve the territorial integrity
of Africa and its self-determination is derived from
its legal instruments and from Africa’s contribution
to the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly. In
4/26

22/05/2019

that regard, it urged the International Court of Justice
to assume its responsibilities as the supreme organ of
international justice. The approach taken at the United
Nations by the African States is therefore part of the
effort of all African States to enable one State, a member
of the African Union as well as of the United Nations,
to exercise full sovereignty over its entire territory, in
accordance with international law.
Africa has been a victim of slavery and colonization
for a very long time. Perpetuating a state of incomplete
decolonization is certainly not compatible with the
Charter or in conformity with international law.
Accordingly, the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice aims to assist the General Assembly, in
compliance with its mandate, in its efforts to contribute
significantly to the promotion of the rule of international
law and respect for the principles of the United Nations
Charter. As the Court has pointed out, it is now up to
this organ to take ownership of the Court’s opinion,
with a view to proposing practical arrangements for
the completion of the decolonization of the Republic
of Mauritius.
There is no need to recall that the rule of law is
indeed an integral part of the universal and indivisible
core values and principles of the United Nations. This
draft resolution is not only a faithful reflection of the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice,
it is also a request for the implementation of the Court’s
findings on the legal consequences of the separation
of the Chagos archipelago from Mauritius in 1965. A
vote in favour will therefore be a vote for the principles
enshrined in the Charter, which continue to guide the
work of our Organization with respect to the principle of
self-determination. A vote in favour would also affirm
the International Court of Justice as the principal legal
organ of the United Nations, as well as its critical and
decisive role in international law.
On behalf of the Group of African States, I
therefore urge all Member States to choose justice and
respect for the rule of law by voting in favour of this
draft resolution, in order to help Africa overcome the
traumas of a painful colonial past.
Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to speak on behalf of the
120 member States that make up the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries. We express our appreciation
19-14879

22/05/2019

for the convening of this meeting, which is dedicated to
an issue of great importance to the Movement.
The rejection of colonialism is one of the founding
principles of the Non-Aligned Movement. The struggle
for liberation was the main factor in uniting the newly
independent States of Africa, Asia and Latin America.
The Movement’s support for decolonization initiatives
remains unwavering. Since its establishment, in 1961,
its member States have maintained their position of
principle regarding the right of self-determination
of peoples under foreign occupation and colonial
domination. We are approaching in 2020 the end of
the third International Decade for the Eradication of
Colonialism, and there is a clear and urgent need to
liberate peoples from colonialism. During the April
2018 ministerial conference, the Ministers of the
Movement agreed to the following.
They reaffirmed that the Chagos archipelago,
including the island of Diego Garcia, which was illegally
detached from the territory of Mauritius by the colonial
Power, in violation of international law and resolutions
1514 (XV) and 2066 (XX), is an integral part of the
territory of the Republic of Mauritius. The Ministers
noted with great concern that despite the strong
opposition expressed by the Republic of Mauritius, the
United Kingdom sought to establish a marine protected
area around the Chagos archipelago, further violating
the territorial integrity of the Republic of Mauritius and
preventing the country from exercising its sovereignty
over the Chagos archipelago, as well as the right to
return of Mauritian citizens who were forcibly expelled
from the archipelago by the United Kingdom. In that
regard, the Ministers welcomed the ruling of the
Arbitral Tribunal constituted under annex VII of the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea in
the case presented by the Republic of Mauritius against
the United Kingdom, according to which the marine
protected area was established illegally according to
international law.
The Ministers noted the adoption of resolution
71/292, which requested an advisory opinion from the
International Court of Justice on the legal consequences
of the separation of the Chagos archipelago from
Mauritius in 1965, as well as the request issued on
14 July 2017 by the Court, through which it invited
the United Nations and its Member States to present
written submissions.

A/73/PV.83

For all of those reasons, we welcome the clear
and unequivocal advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice, handed down of 25 February, on the
Legal consequences of the separation of the Chagos
archipelago from Mauritius in 1965 (see A/73/773), in
accordance with the provisions of resolution 71/292.
We call on the United Kingdom to put an end to its
administration of the Chagos archipelago as soon
as possible.
In conclusion, the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, motivated by the sense of solidarity that
unites us in the defence of the self-determination of
peoples, calls for support for the action initiated by the
Group of African States under agenda item 88, with a
view to supporting the swift completion of the Republic
of Mauritius decolonization process.
Address by Mr. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth, Prime
Minister, Minister for Home Affairs, External
Communications and National Development
Unit, Minister for Finance and Economic
Development of the Republic of Mauritius
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
will now hear an address by the Prime Minister, Minister
for Home Affairs, External Communications and
National Development Unit, Minister for Finance and
Economic Development of the Republic of Mauritius.
Mr.
Pravind
Kumar
Jugnauth,
Prime
Minister, Minister for Home Affairs, External
Communications and National Development Unit,
Minister for Finance and Economic Development
of the Republic of Mauritius, was escorted to
the rostrum.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I have great
pleasure in welcoming His Excellency Mr. Pravind
Kumar Jugnauth, Prime Minister, Minister for Home
Affairs, External Communications and National
Development Unit, Minister for Finance and Economic
Development of the Republic of Mauritius, and inviting
him to address the Assembly.
Mr. Jugnauth (Mauritius): My delegation would
like to associate itself with the statement made by the
Permanent Representative of Senegal on behalf of the
States Members of the United Nations that are members
of the Group of African States.
At the outset, I would like to reiterate our deep
appreciation to the General Assembly for its adoption in
June 2017, by an overwhelming majority, of resolution

19-148795/26

A/73/PV.83

71/292, which requested an advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice on the legal consequences
of the separation of the Chagos archipelago from
Mauritius in 1965.
Mauritius welcomes the advisory opinion on the
Legal consequences of the separation of the Chagos
archipelago from Mauritius in 1965 (see A/73/773),
which the International Court of Justice handed down
on 25 February. This landmark opinion confirms the
long-standing position of Mauritius and Africa that the
decolonization of Mauritius has not been completed,
and will not be completed until Mauritius is able to
exercise sovereignty over the Chagos archipelago,
which the International Court of Justice found — with
no dissenting voice — to be an integral part of the
territory of Mauritius.
Let me also express our warm thanks and gratitude
to all the Member States that participated in the various
stages of the International Court of Justice process.
Countries from every region of the world, as well as the
African Union, contributed to the process that allowed
to Court to hear and consider the views from all
perspectives on this matter. We are also grateful to the
Secretary-General for the extensive dossier prepared by
the Secretariat for that purpose.
Let me recall the two questions on which the
International Court of Justice was requested to give
an advisory opinion. The first was about whether
the process of the decolonization of Mauritius was
lawfully completed when Mauritius was granted
independence in 1968, following the separation of the
Chagos archipelago from Mauritius and having regard
to international law, including obligations reflected in
resolutions 1514 (XV), of 14 December 1960, 2066 (XX),
of 16 December 1965, 2232 (XXI), of 20 December
1966, and 2357 (XXII), of 19 December 1967.
The second was about what consequences under
international law, including obligations reflected
in those resolutions, arose from the continued
administration by the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland of the Chagos archipelago,
including with respect to the inability of Mauritius to
implement a programme for the resettlement on the
Chagos archipelago of its nationals, in particular those
of Chagossian origin.
On the first question, the Court stated that it was
of the opinion that, having regard to international law,
the process of the decolonization of Mauritius was not
6/26

22/05/2019

lawfully concluded when it acceded to independence in
1968 following the excision of the Chagos archipelago.
On the second question, the Court stated that it was
its opinion that the United Kingdom is under an
obligation to bring to an end its administration of the
Chagos archipelago as rapidly as possible. With regard
to the consequences for States, the Court expressed its
opinion that all Member States are under an obligation
to cooperate with the United Nations in order to
complete the decolonization of Mauritius.
The advisory opinion is clear and unambiguous and
leaves no room for any doubt or other interpretation.
It is decisive. In addition to those express conclusions,
the Court made some pertinent findings that are worth
noting. Let me mention some of them.
First, at the time of its detachment from Mauritius
in 1965, the Chagos archipelago was clearly an integral
part of the territory of Mauritius.
Second, the right to self-determination and
territorial integrity formed a fundamental part of
customary international law at the time when Mauritius
was dismembered in 1965. The existence of that right
was recognized in resolution 1514 (XV), adopted
overwhelmingly and without a single negative vote in
1960. Resolution 1514 (XV) made clear that detachment
of part of a colonial territory without the consent of the
people concerned was a violation of international law.
Third, at the time of detachment, Mauritius was
a colony under the authority of the United Kingdom,
and the representatives of Mauritius did not have a
genuine legislative or executive power. It is therefore
not possible to talk of an international agreement when
one of the parties to it, namely, Mauritius, which is
said to have ceded the territory to the United Kingdom
under such an agreement, was under the authority of
the latter.
Fourth, the detachment of the Chagos archipelago
was therefore not based on the free and genuine
expression of the will of the people of Mauritius.
Fifth, the United Kingdom is under an obligation
to bring an end to its administration of the Chagos
archipelago as rapidly as possible, thereby enabling
Mauritius to complete the decolonization of its territory.
Sixth, all Member States have a legal interest in
protecting the right to self-determination, the respect
of which is an obligation erga omnes.
19-14879

22/05/2019

Seventh, the General Assembly must pronounce
itself on the modalities required to ensure the
decolonization of Mauritius, and all Member States
must cooperate with the United Nations to put those
modalities into effect.
Eighth, the issue of resettlement on the Chagos
archipelago of Mauritian nationals, including those of
Chagossian origin, is an issue relating to the protection
of the human rights of those concerned, which must
be addressed by the General Assembly during the
completion of the decolonization of Mauritius.
Those findings show the gravity and extent of the
wrongful act under international law that the colonial
Power committed in carrying out the excision of the
Chagos archipelago from Mauritius in 1965 and
maintaining the Chagos archipelago as a colony ever
since. The Court has characterized that as an unlawful
act of continuing character entailing the international
responsibility of the colonial State.
One might have hoped that any country found to
be engaged in an ongoing wrongful act by the highest
court in the world would hasten to make amends and
commit to terminating its unlawful conduct. In fact,
during a high-level meeting with the United Kingdom,
Mauritius offered to work closely with the United
Kingdom in order to present a joint draft resolution
that would be mutually beneficial, taking into account
both the security concerns of the United Kingdom and
the conclusions of the International Court of Justice’s
advisory opinion. Our offer was made in the spirit of
great friendship between Mauritius and the United
Kingdom, and the high respect and regard that we in
Mauritius have for the United Kingdom as a champion
of respect for the rule of law.
It is because of that high regard that we have for the
United Kingdom that, despite our status as a republic
within the Commonwealth, we have retained the
possibility for our citizens to use the United Kingdom
Judicial Committee of the Privy Council as our highest
court of appeal.
Under the circumstances, Mauritius is extremely
disappointed with the stance taken by the United
Kingdom, as is Her Majesty’s leader of the opposition
in the United Kingdom, who has made clear his respect
and support for the Court’s conclusions. We are all the
more disappointed to see that all the arguments, both
jurisdictional and on the merits, that the Court has flatly
rejected are being repeated here, more aggressively

A/73/PV.83

than ever before. It feels as if we are back in 1965. At
the time, the excision was carried out under duress and
was presented to the United Nations as a fait accompli,
as the contemporaneous documents show.
This time the excision is being justified by
challenging the authority of the General Assembly to
refer the questions to the International Court of Justice
and by undermining the authority of the Court itself.
This is indeed a sad situation, and one that should be
of concern to every single State Member of the United
Nations. As we all know, the Court has ruled by an
overwhelming majority that the questions were properly
referred to it by the General Assembly and that there
was no ground for it to refrain from answering them.
It has also been suggested that unlike the
International Court of Justice, which clearly rejected
the 1965 agreement by which the United Kingdom
claimed the then representatives of Mauritius had
ceded the Chagos archipelago to the United Kingdom,
the Arbitral Tribunal constituted under annex VII of
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,
which heard the case of Mauritius against the United
Kingdom on the unilateral declaration of a marine
protected area around the Chagos archipelago, had
validated that agreement. There could be nothing
further from the truth. What the Arbitral Tribunal
said was that the undertakings given unilaterally by
the United Kingdom to Mauritius in 1965 were legally
binding on the United Kingdom.
Some Member States may claim that the advisory
opinion is not legally binding on any State. While it is
true that, unlike a judgment of the Court in a contentious
case, which in itself is the source of an international
obligation for the parties to such proceedings, an
advisory opinion is an authoritative statement of
the law by the highest legal authority of the United
Nations system and the most highly respected judicial
institution in the world. Although the opinion itself
cannot impose a new legal obligation, it can recognize
and confirm — as it has in fact done — the existing
legal obligations that emanate from international law.
In this particular case the Court has established that
the source of legal obligations is the right of the peoples
to self-determination, which the United Kingdom has
violated by excising the Chagos archipelago from
Mauritius without the consent of the Mauritian people.
In the opinion of the Court, the United Kingdom now
has an obligation under international law to terminate its

19-148797/26

A/73/PV.83

ongoing wrongful administration as rapidly as possible,
in order to complete the decolonization of Mauritius.
It is therefore not correct to say that the opinion has
no legal consequences. Every State, including the United
Kingdom, is obligated to comply with international
law. There are also consequences for Member States,
as the Court has found that they must cooperate with
the General Assembly in bringing about the completion
of the decolonization of Mauritius. And there are
consequences as well for the General Assembly and the
United Nations and all its specialized agencies, which
cannot ignore or act in a manner contrary to the legal
conclusions of the highest judicial organ in the United
Nations system.
Draft resolution A/73/L.84/Rev.1, introduced on
behalf of the Group of African States, reflects the
confidence that Africa and many other States have
in the principles and values of the United Nations.
One of the main functions of the United Nations is to
contribute to the decolonization and self-determination
of all peoples. That is a sacrosanct principle of the
United Nations.
The International Court of Justice has clearly
established that the right of self-determination has
been violated, the decolonization of Mauritius has
not been completed, the colonial Power must end its
unlawful administration of the Chagos archipelago and
all Member States are under an obligation to cooperate
with the United Nations to complete the decolonization
of Mauritius. Not to lend support to that important
function of the General Assembly would be nothing
less than an endorsement of colonialism and a rejection
of the right of self-determination. That would be a total
abdication of our responsibility.
The forcible eviction of the inhabitants of the
Chagos archipelago, which accompanied its unlawful
excision from Mauritius, remains a very dark episode
of human history, akin to a crime against humanity.
Those Mauritian nationals, who are now mostly in
their seventies and eighties, have systematically been
prevented from returning to their birthplace. The
advisory opinion has given them a glimmer of hope
and tasked the General Assembly with addressing
the question of their resettlement and the protection
of their human rights during the completion of the
decolonization of Mauritius.
The Government of Mauritius has made a
commitment to implement a programme of resettlement
8/26

22/05/2019

in a manner consistent with respecting their dignity and
human rights, unlike the United Kingdom Government’s
proposal of giving monetary support to improve their
livelihoods outside their birthplace, which they have
rejected. The question now is whether the international
community, in line with the commitment made to leave
no one behind, is prepared to take remedial action, or
to allow yet another continuing wrongful act entailing
State responsibility to persist.
The United Kingdom invokes defence and security
considerations to reject the authority of the International
Court of Justice. It claims that in addition to keeping the
people in the United Kingdom and the world safe from
terrorism and organized crime, the defence facility in
the Chagos archipelago is ready for rapid and impactful
responses in times of humanitarian crisis in the region.
According to the United Kingdom, those functions can
be carried out only under its sovereignty.
It is important to note that in its submissions to
the International Court of Justice, the United Kingdom
did not consider it relevant or important to submit
that security considerations ought to be taken into
account. Now, however, after the Court has given its
opinion, those considerations are being put forward as
the overriding reason for holding on to a territory in a
manner that is inconsistent with international law.
Mauritius, for its part, has made public commitments
at the General Assembly and the International Court
of Justice that it is prepared to enter into a long-term
arrangement with the United States, or with the United
Kingdom and the United States, that would permit
the unhindered operation of the defence facility, in
accordance with international law. That is a position
that enjoys wide consensus across all major political
parties in Mauritius. That arrangement would provide a
higher degree of legal certainty regarding the operation
of the defence facility to the United States and the
United Kingdom over a longer period.
It is therefore difficult to understand the United
Kingdom’s position, unless it is one whereby Mauritius
is not considered to be a trusted partner — a position
that is deeply offensive to Mauritius and every member
of the African continent, and should be rejected by all
Members of the United Nations.
The African Group’s revised draft resolution
A/73/L.84/Rev.1 incorporates and endorses in its
operative paragraphs the actual language of the
International Court of Justice, in calling for the
19-14879

22/05/2019

termination of the unlawful colonial administration
as rapidly as possible, and for Member States, United
Nations agencies and international organizations to
cooperate with the General Assembly in bringing
about the full decolonization of Mauritius, as well as to
refrain from acts that would impede the performance of
that obligation.
As the Court left it to the General Assembly
to determine and adopt specific modalities for the
achievement of that objective as rapidly as possible, the
draft resolution sets a time limit of six months for the
termination of the colonial administration. That is more
than sufficient time to smoothly bring an end to an
administration that consists of no more than a handful
of personnel, who provide no social services whatsoever
and no services of any kind outside the military base
on the island of Diego Garcia. That kind of skeletal
administration can be terminated very rapidly.
For Member States of the United Nations to
dismiss or disregard the authoritative conclusions
of the International Court of Justice in respect of
the right of peoples to self-determination would be a
terrible setback, tantamount to abandoning the General
Assembly’s long-standing and noble commitment to
that paramount principle, especially at this challenging
moment in history.
For all those reasons, we urge Member States to
uphold the integrity of United Nations institutions and
the sanctity of the International Court of Justice by
voting in favour of that draft resolution and adopting
it by an even greater margin than resolution 71/292,
adopted two years ago to seek the opinion of the Court.
In that way we will send a clear signal to the world that
colonialism can no longer be tolerated.

A/73/PV.83

representative of Senegal on behalf of the Group
of African States. But I would first like to place on
record — and I am very sorry the Prime Minister
of Mauritius is not yet at his seat to hear it — the
United Kingdom’s warm and deep respect, regard and
friendship for Mauritius. It was very good to see him
here today, even though I might wish it was a more
cooperative venture that enticed him to New York.
The United Kingdom is a key trade and investment
partner of Mauritius. We are committed to building a
partnership that will see Mauritius thrive economically,
with a focus on financial services, innovation and
education. My Prime Minister and Prime Minister
Jugnauth discussed that when they met in London on
18 March. I repeat that gladly today. For the United
Kingdom, Mauritius is a friend and ally in an important
part of the world.
The maintenance of the security and stability of
the Indian Ocean region is vital to the maintenance
of international and regional peace and security. To
the east lies the Malacca Strait, which cargo vessels
transited through more than 84,000 times in 2017. To
the west lies the Gulf of Aden, through which one
eighth of the world’s trade passes annually. The joint
United Kingdom and United States defence facility on
the British Indian Ocean Territory plays a vital role in
that important part of the world in our efforts to keep
our allies and friends, including Mauritius, in the region
and beyond safe and secure.

Mr. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth, Prime Minister,
Minister for Home Affairs, External Communications
and National Development Unit, Minister for
Finance and Economic Development of the Republic
of Mauritius, was escorted from the rostrum.

The world is a dangerous and uncertain place. The
facility keeps people and countries safe and secure. It
is vital to efforts to combat conflict, terrorism, drugs,
crime and piracy. It supports partners in the Combined
Maritime Forces, a multinational naval partnership
made up of 33 United Nations Member States, from
Latin America to the Asia-Pacific region, the areas
of operation of which cover 3.2 million square miles
and include some of the most strategically important
shipping lanes in the world, including the Gulf of
Aden, Bab Al-Mandeb, the Suez Canal and the Strait of
Hormuz. It is the site of one of the world’s four Global
Positioning System stations, used widely for military
and civilian navigation. It hosts seismic monitoring
capabilities that support the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty.

Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like, in a
moment, to set out why the United Kingdom opposes
draft resolution A/73/L.84/Rev.1, introduced by the

The facility stands ready to assist in times of
humanitarian crisis. In recent years, it has contributed
heavily to international humanitarian responses to the

The President (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the
General Assembly, I wish to thank the Prime Minister,
Minister for Home Affairs, External Communications
and National Development Unit, Minister for Finance
and Economic Development of the Republic of
Mauritius for the statement he has just made.

19-148799/26

A/73/PV.83

2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami, the 2011
earthquake and tsunami affecting Japan and the 2013
typhoon affecting the Philippines. The facility also
supported search-and-rescue missions in support of
Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-370.
The United Kingdom is not in doubt about our
sovereignty over the British Indian Ocean Territory.
It has been under continuous British sovereignty since
1814. Contrary to what has been said today, it has
never been part of the Republic of Mauritius. In 1965,
the Council of Ministers of Mauritius freely entered
into an agreement to detach the British Indian Ocean
Territory in return for a range of benefits, including
fishing rights and natural and marine resources. The
agreement also included a commitment by the United
Kingdom to cede the Territory — and I use the word
“cede” here deliberately, not “give back” — when it is
no longer needed for defence purposes, and I have just
outlined those defence purposes.
The United Kingdom stands by our commitments
made in the 1965 agreement. We disagree with the earlier
characterization of that agreement. The Mauritian
Government has reaffirmed the 1965 agreement
on many occasions since its independence in 1968,
including through its own laws and Constitution. It is
worth noting here that the 1965 agreement, including
the commitment to cede when no longer needed for
defence purposes, was held to be legally binding by the
2015 award of the Arbitral Tribunal constituted under
annex VII of the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea (UNCLOS).
I want to turn, if I may, to the issue of the
Chagossians themselves, and use this opportunity
to state again, as the current United Kingdom
Government and its predecessors have done before,
the United Kingdom’s sincere regret about the manner
in which Chagossians were removed from the British
Indian Ocean Territory in the late 1960s and early
1970s. The draft resolution before us calls for the
resettlement of Mauritian nationals, including those of
Chagossian origin, on the Territory. Let me reassure
the General Assembly that the United Kingdom has
looked very closely at the question of resettlement. We
commissioned an independent feasibility study, and we
undertook a public consultation with Chagossians and
other stakeholders.
It was only after having considered carefully all
of the available information that the United Kingdom
10/26

22/05/2019

decided not to support resettlement, on the grounds of
feasibility, defence, security interests and cost. But,
while we have ruled out resettlement, we are determined
to improve the livelihoods of Chagossians in the
communities where they now live. We are therefore
currently working with Chagossian communities, not
just in Mauritius but also in the Seychelles and the
United Kingdom itself, to implement a $50 million
support package. As part of the package, we run
heritage visits, which allow Chagossians to spend time
on the Territory.
I need to take a moment to reject unconditionally
the allegations that the United Kingdom was engaged
in crimes against humanity. That is a very serious
allegation; it is not to be used lightly. It is a gross
mischaracterization of the United Kingdom’s position
and, once again, I reject it without qualification. I hope
that it will not be repeated.
If I may, I would like to turn now to the question of
the draft resolution and the issue before us. The United
Kingdom will vote no on the draft resolution, and we
invite others to join us. That is not because of a lack
of respect for the issue of decolonization or of the role
of the United Nations in that process. As I have been
saying to regional groups, we are very conscious of
our own history. As the Assembly knows, the United
Kingdom’s own history of working in partnership with
many countries as they developed their governance
and judicial structures post-independence is welldocumented. We are proud now to have many partners
across the world based on equality and respect. We
would have been happy, in principle, to work on a joint
draft resolution, but the gap between our positions was
too great to allow that to happen. Let me therefore set
out the reasons that we oppose the draft resolution.
Colleagues will be familiar with the detail of our
position from the briefings and my letter of 14 May.
The draft resolution has been revised since that time,
but we remain of the view that the majority of the
problems with it remain. I would like to emphasize
some specific points.
We do not challenge the authority of the
General Assembly, let alone the authority of the
International Court of Justice. Once again, I reject that
characterization of the United Kingdom’s position, and
I look to Member States to not repeat it. It simply is not
true. But there is a difficulty with the draft resolution
and with the way in which we have got to where we are.
19-14879

22/05/2019

First, and crucially, the issue between Mauritius
and the United Kingdom surrounding the Chagos
archipelago is a bilateral sovereignty dispute. The title
of the draft resolution and the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice on the Legal consequences
of the separation of the Chagos archipelago from
Mauritius in 1965 (see A/73/773) revolve around
“decolonization”, but the issue is fundamentally one of
disputed sovereignty between two countries. We heard
that as the draft resolution was introduced today.
Therefore, in giving its advisory opinion, the
International Court of Justice allowed the principle,
as enshrined in the Court’s own Statute, that it should
not hear bilateral disputes without the consent of
both States. It has allowed that principle — its own
principle — to be circumvented. That has wider and
profound implications for all Member States with
bilateral disputes. If the draft resolution is adopted, it
will create a difficult precedent in the General Assembly.
It would imply that any bilateral dispute between
two States could be referred to the Court for an
advisory opinion and then pronounced on by the
General Assembly, whether or not the States involved
have consented. I invite colleagues to reflect carefully
on that point. If today there is a country that has a
bilateral dispute with another Member State, it risks
throwing open the door for that dispute to be subject
to an advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice and a vote of the General Assembly.
Secondly, the draft resolution before us still
goes beyond the advisory opinion. It sets a sixmonth deadline for the United Kingdom. The draft
resolution calls on States, international organizations
and institutions, including the United Nations and its
agencies, to take action that could have wide-ranging
potential implications for the effective operation of
the joint defence facility on the British Indian Ocean
Territory. I set out earlier exactly the contribution that
facility makes to international peace and security and
regional peace and security in the Indian Ocean. Those
elements are not what the advisory opinion specified,
and they regrettably represent a clear attempt to extend
the scope of the advisory opinion.
Thirdly, advisory opinions may indeed, from time
to time, carry weight in international law, but that does
not change the fact that they are not legally binding.
They are advice provided to the General Assembly by
the International Court of Justice at the Assembly’s

A/73/PV.83

request. The Charter of the United Nations specifically
distinguishes between advisory and contentious
proceedings, including drawing a clear line between
the Court’s binding decisions and its advisory opinions.
The specific advisory opinion before us does not, we
believe, give sufficient regard to a number of legal and
material factual issues, which I detailed in my letter of
14 May. Allow me to summarize them.
It does not take into account the — legally
binding — 2015 UNCLOS Arbitral Tribunal award,
which held that the 1965 agreement between the United
Kingdom and Mauritius was legally binding. That is the
agreement in which Mauritius agreed to the detachment
of the British Indian Ocean Territory in return for the
access and benefits around resources that I outlined
earlier. We remain committed to implementing
that agreement.
In addition, there is a binding treaty obligation
between the United Kingdom and the United States
to maintain British sovereignty of the British Indian
Ocean Territory until at least 2036. The United States
Government, and most recently Secretary of State
Pompeo and the letter from Ambassador Jonathan
Cohen, has made clear that the status of the British
Indian Ocean Territory as a United Kingdom territory
is “essential” to the value of the joint facility and
our shared interests, an arrangement that cannot
be replicated.
Furthermore, when advisory opinions include
a number of issues within them, as the Court’s
opinion does, we risk creating an unhelpful precedent
institutionally if we treat them as if they were legally
binding. This is not an issue of colonialization; this is
about using advisory opinions for the purpose for which
they were intended.
In conclusion, we believe that this binding UNCLOS
Arbitral Tribunal award is important. And we believe
that the bilateral sovereignty dispute should remain a
bilateral matter as a matter of principle, both in respect
of the case of the British Indian Ocean Territory and
for wider reasons of concern to Member States. We
believe that the draft resolution before us seeks to set
an unwelcome precedent in several areas that should be
of concern to Member States. For that reason, we will
vote no, and we ask others to join us. For those Member
States that do not wish to vote against, we draw their
attention to the difficult precedents created by that
draft resolution, which justify abstention.

19-1487911/26

A/73/PV.83

Mrs. Hussain (Maldives): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this meeting. The Maldives
would like to express its views on agenda item 88,
entitled “Request for an advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice on the legal consequences
of the separation of the Chagos Archipelago from
Mauritius in 1965”.
As a member of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, Maldives has always respected the founding
principles of the Movement and continues to do so.
However, on draft resolution A/73/L.84/Rev.1, Maldives
dissociates itself from the statement delivered by the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
who spoke on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
We have always supported all United Nations
processes of the decolonization of territories and
the right to self- determination. The Maldives is not
opposing that draft resolution because of a change in
those principles. But, for us, the draft resolution does
not provide clarity on the issue at hand, which is of
great importance to the Maldives.
The draft resolution before us today will have
serious implications for the Maldives. While we fully
respect the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice on the Legal consequences of the
separation of the Chagos archipelago from Mauritius
in 1965 (see A/73/773), the draft resolution prejudges
the implications on the July 2010 submission by the
Maldives to the Commission on the Limits of the
Continental Shelf. Without due process and clarity on
the legal implications of a contested matter, Maldives
is not in a position to support the draft resolution
solely as a matter of decolonization. For the Maldives,
any uncertainty concerning the issue of the Chagos
archipelago will have serious implications for the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and wider security of
the Indian Ocean region.
We would like to note that our vote today should
not be construed as a vote or a position taken against
the sponsors of the draft resolution, with whom we have
excellent relations.
Mr. Hermida Castillo (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish) We welcome the presence this morning of
His Excellency Mr. Pravind Kumar Jugnauth. Prime
Minister of the Republic of Mauritius.
We thank the President for convening this plenary
meeting to consider draft resolution A/73/L.84/Rev.1,
12/26

22/05/2019

submitted by the Republic of Senegal on behalf of the
Group of African States. Nicaragua is also a sponsor of
the draft resolution.
Nicaragua aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.
For Nicaragua, the eradication of colonialism is a
position of principle. Historically, we have supported
decolonization initiatives, and we do so especially
now, given that the third International Decade for
the Eradication of Colonialism will end in 2020,
which is why it is urgent to accelerate the process of
decolonization of the territories and peoples still living
under colonial domination.
In its advisory opinion, the International Court of
Justice confirmed that the United Kingdom is under an
obligation to bring to an end to its administration of
the Chagos archipelago, an integral part of Mauritius.
The General Assembly, as the organ entrusted with
the task, is now deciding, through the draft resolution
submitted by the African Group, on the basic terms
under which the United Kingdom should complete the
decolonization process in relation to Mauritius. This is
the current stage.
Decolonization is a central issue for our
Organization, the Charter of the United Nations
and civilization in general. It lies at the heart of the
fundamental values of the United Nations, which guide
the relations among States. We recall that more than
half of the non-self-governing peoples and territories
are in our region of Latin America and the Caribbean,
pending their decolonization. In its advisory opinion on
the Legal consequences of the separation of the Chagos
archipelago from Mauritius in 1965 (see A/73/773), the
International Court of Justice, the main judicial body
of the Organization, stated that the United Kingdom
had violated and continued to violate the fundamental
rights of the population of the Chagos archipelago and
that the return of the archipelago to Mauritius must be
resolved within the decolonization process.
As Nicaragua has experienced the onslaught of neocolonialism first hand and seen how the international
judicial system can respond to the just cause of a
small nation, my country is particularly interested in
translating the Court’s advisory opinion into effective
action. Responding to the call to discharge its functions,
the General Assembly will assist our brother people of
19-14879

22/05/2019

Mauritius in fully recovering their sovereignty over
the Chagos archipelago. The eradication of colonialism
in all its forms and manifestations is an unconditional
obligation. No pretext, no matter how benign it is
intended to be, including supposed global security,
can override the erga omnes obligation to end the
decolonization process in relation to Mauritius and
allow its native population to return to the Chagos
archipelago, including the island of Diego Garcia.
Nicaragua advocates respect for international law
and hopes that the parties involved will comply with
their international obligations in accordance with
the draft resolution submitted by the African Group.
A positive response will be an important step in this
process as the third International Decade for the
Eradication of Colonialism comes to a close.
Mr. Al Arsan (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My country has joined the list of States that are
sponsoring draft resolution A/73/L.84/Rev.1, entitled
“Advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
on the legal consequences of the separation of the
Chagos Archipelago from Mauritius in 1965”.
The position of the Syrian Arab Republic is a
principled one, based on the importance of ending
all forms of colonization and occupation as well as
respecting the rights of peoples throughout the world
without exception or discrimination, including the
right to self-determination, freedom and independence.
Furthermore, my Government believes in the
importance of respecting and implementing every
judgment, decision and advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice, which is the sole legal
organ of the United Nations referred to in the Charter.
My country, Syria, is firmly convinced that
there is no reason that would justify the continued
occupation of the Chagos archipelago. All the security
reasons invoked by the United Kingdom, which is
occupying the archipelago, are based on an old colonial
mentality that is unacceptable today. We therefore
call for upholding the political and legal assessment
in the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice on the Legal consequences of the separation of
the Chagos archipelago from Mauritius in 1965 (see
A/73/773), which stresses that the separation of the
Chagos archipelago was not based on the genuine and
free expression of the will of the people of Mauritius.
It also stresses that decolonization in Mauritius is not

A/73/PV.83

yet legally complete and that the Chagos archipelago
remains an integral part of the territory of Mauritius.
The advisory opinion of the Court further
emphasized that the continued colonial administration
of the Chagos archipelago is illegal under international
law. We call on the United Kingdom, a permanent
member of the Security Council, to demonstrate
goodwill, accept its political and legal responsibilities
and accede to the advisory opinion of the Court and
its legal implications, which amounts to honouring an
ethical and legal commitment.
The United Kingdom must end its unlawful
colonization of the Chagos archipelago without
hesitation or delay, reflecting the respect we all have
for the authority and status of the International Court of
Justice, while our Governments are firmly committed to
ending all forms of occupation and colonization once and
for all. We call on Member States to support Mauritius
and commit to providing it with the assistance it needs
to achieve its complete freedom and independence,
recover its sovereignty over the Chagos archipelago
and address the issue of resettling its nationals there,
particularly those of Chagossian origin. In that way, the
decolonization of Mauritius will be complete.
We are living at an important time in history today
that unquestionably reflects the serious commitment of
all of us working within the United Nations framework
to respect for the rule of law, the authority of the
International Court of Justice and the fundamental
rights of all peoples of the world, including their right
to freedom, independence and self-determination.
We call on Member States to vote in favour of
draft resolution A/73/L.84/Rev.1 and to respect the
right of the people of Mauritius to realize their full
independence and freedom. On this occasion, we also
call on Member States to maintain their support for
the right of the Syrian Arab Republic to see an end to
the Israeli occupation of the Syrian Arab Golan and all
other unlawful forms of aggression and foreign military
presence on Syrian territories.
Let us all recall that there are only 11 years
remaining before the goals and targets of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development are supposed to
be met. Paragraph 35 of resolution 70/1, in which the
General Assembly adopted the 2030 Agenda, explicitly
calls for

19-1487913/26

A/73/PV.83

22/05/2019

“further effective measures and actions to be taken,
in conformity with international law, to remove the
obstacles to the full realization of the right of selfdetermination of peoples living under colonial and
foreign occupation”.

territory, which remains subject to illegitimate and
illegal foreign occupation. The occupying Power has not
even agreed to negotiate a settlement in the sovereignty
dispute, which is also a violation of the obligation to
settle international disputes by peaceful means.

Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Since its inception, one of the main purposes of the
United Nations has been to put an end to colonialism
in all its forms. Thanks to the Organization’s intensive
efforts, dozens of former colonies have achieved their
independence and become part of the symphony of
independent nations. The Argentine Republic has
assisted this process from the outset, as was evidenced
by our vote in 1960 in favour of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, adopted in resolution 1514 (XV), which is the
cornerstone of decolonization.

The Court has been forceful in emphasizing the
crucial role played by the General Assembly and its
Special Committee on Decolonization in overseeing
the implementation of the obligations incumbent on
administering Powers and the modalities necessary
for ensuring that decolonization processes are duly
completed, and in defining in appropriate cases how
the exercise of the self-determination of peoples
should proceed. The Court has also been clear about
the normative value of resolution 1514 (XV) and
the principles it contains, including its reference
in paragraph 6 to territorial integrity. The Court
also recalls that self-determination, a principle that
Argentina has always upheld, is not applicable in cases
involving populations that do not constitute peoples
entitled to that right.

My country’s commitment to decolonization — as
well as its solidarity with a country that, like ours,
continues to be a victim of colonialism — led us to
support Mauritius in its legitimate claim for sovereignty
over the Chagos archipelago, which was separated from
it in order to maintain colonial domination. For that
reason, we voted in favour of resolutions 2066 (XX),
2232 (XXI) and 2357 (XXII) in the 1960s, and were
a sponsor of resolution 71/292, which requested an
advisory opinion on the issue from the International
Court of Justice. The Argentine Republic therefore
welcomes the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice on the Legal consequences of the
separation of the Chagos archipelago from Mauritius
in 1965 (see A/73/773) and the draft resolution that
the General Assembly is considering at this juncture
(A/73/L.84/Rev.1).
The advisory opinion of the International Court
of Justice, rendered on 25 February 2019, and the
draft resolution are a victory for international law
and convey the unequivocal message that colonialism
is unacceptable in the twenty-first century. The draft
resolution values the conclusions of the principal
judicial organ of the United Nations as arbiter of the
rules of law that apply to all countries, not just the
United Nations. The draft resolution confirms that the
Chagos archipelago is an integral part of the territory
of Mauritius and that the United Kingdom has an
obligation to end its colonial administration there.
Argentina and its people have also been deprived of
the full exercise of their sovereignty over a part of their
14/26

Argentina believes that the double, consistent voice
of the General Assembly and the International Court
of Justice cannot be ignored and therefore calls on all
countries to cooperate in completing the decolonization
of Mauritius and the other territories still under
colonial domination.
Ms. Ioannou (Cyprus): Cyprus welcomes the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
on the Legal consequences of the separation of the
Chagos archipelago from Mauritius in 1965 (see
A/73/773), the very clear direction given by the Court,
and the Court’s forward-looking and cooperative
approach. By clarifying the scope of decolonization
and what it entails, the Court makes a very significant
contribution to an endeavour consubstantial with the
United Nations. As a necessary step towards achieving
the sovereign equality of States in a global order built
on shared values and principles and governed by the
rule of law, it guides us in finally laying to rest the
remnants of colonialism.
It is this commitment to the rules-based
international order in general, and international law in
particular, that compelled Cyprus to participate in the
proceedings before the International Court of Justice,
more than did the analogies that could be drawn with
our own decolonization experience. We wanted to
be part of this process because we are keenly aware
19-14879

22/05/2019

that today our global order has still not fully escaped
the colonial mindset that prevailed at the time of the
genesis of our international community of States, with
the United Nations at its core. We are equally cognizant
of the fact that the transition we are seeking is only
possible through cooperation, not confrontation.
That is why we are particularly pleased that the
Court’s interpretation of the right to self-determination
definitively rejects any arguments and methods
employed to prevent complete decolonization. The
Court has reaffirmed that decolonization is incomplete
if, against the will of its people, the entire territory
of a former colony is not an integral part of the State
that emerges. Self-determination, which is at the
core of decolonization, is an inalienable right that no
people can wholly or partly waive, surrender, cede or
transfer. The jus cogens character of the right to selfdetermination and the erga omnes character of the
obligations it generates engage the responsibility of all
States to give proper effect to that right. As the Court
has reaffirmed, colonial Powers are under a continuing
obligation to give full effect to the right to selfdetermination in respect of countries and territories
that are wholly or partly deprived of that right. In our
view, no arrangements may be invoked to absolve the
administering Power of its legal duties or enable it
to escape its obligations under international law as it
stands today.
According to the Court’s advisory opinion,
territorial integrity is a key element in giving proper
effect to the right to self-determination. Beyond the
general incompatibility with the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations of the disruption of
a country’s national unity and territorial integrity, there
is, with specific respect to decolonization, a presumption
in favour of the independence of a territorial unit as a
whole. Territorially handicapped independence must
constitute a violation of the obligations relating to the
right to self-determination. The disruption of a colony’s
territorial integrity of through the excision and retention
of part of its territory by the colonial Power prior to
granting independence is prohibited, unless based on
the free and genuine acceptance by the people of the
territory concerned. But we would go beyond this and
argue that a genuine willingness to part with a parcel of
one’s territory is a myth. We consider that an element
of coercion is always present when a parcel of colonial
territory is excised, irrespective of whether it is done in
keeping with legal convention.

A/73/PV.83

Particularly in cases of decolonization, territorial
dismemberment — or indeed any conditions imposed by
the colonial Power as a price for independence — cannot
be argued to have been genuinely consented to, given
the inherent inequalities of power between the colonial
Power and the people under its control and domination.
That is why no legal effect may be created by a situation
resulting from such conditions.
I turn now to our obligations as the General
Assembly. Colonialism is a specific violation of
the Charter, and the Charter gives the General
Assembly explicit overall competence with regard
to decolonization precisely because the obligations
generated are owed to the international community as a
whole. The International Court of Justice has responded
to our call, in line with its purpose of upholding the
rule of law in international relations and to protect
the integrity of the international legal order. As an
Assembly, we now have the responsibility, but also the
informed basis for it, to consider appropriate action in
the interests of the principles of equal rights and selfdetermination of peoples.
Holding all of us, the Member States, accountable
for our actions vis-à-vis one another in this international
legal framework we have developed, with our own
judicial organ as its guardian, is at the core of the
raison d’être of the United Nations. States responsible
for wrongful acts are under an obligation to cease such
acts and make full reparation for the injury caused. We
have before us an opinion that deems the incomplete
decolonization of Mauritius due to the unlawful and
non-consensual dismemberment of its territory to be
an ongoing wrongful act that should be remedied by
rapidly terminating the administration of the Chagos
archipelago by the colonial Power, with the cooperation
of all States Members of the United Nations.
The implementation of the draft resolution before
us (A/73/L.84/Rev.1) would mean compliance with
the obligation to cooperate in effecting the modalities
for completing the decolonization of Mauritius and
therebydischarging the Assembly’s functions under the
Charter in this case, and my delegation will therefore
be voting in favour of the draft resolution. Let us
leave behind the colonial paradigm by establishing
partnerships among equals, since this is the only way
to legitimately achieve collective goals in good faith.
Lastly, we would be remiss if we did not mention
the human dimension of the question at hand and the

19-1487915/26

A/73/PV.83

importance of providing remedies for human rights
violations. We wish to particularly highlight the right of
return of people displaced from their places of origin,
the right of people to enjoy freedom of movement in their
own countries, and the right of restitution of property
to people forcibly dispossessed of it, in line with the
Pinheiro Principles and general international law.
Mr. Gertze (Namibia): I too would like to recognize
the presence of the Prime Minister of Mauritius in our
midst today.
Namibia aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the representatives of Senegal and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Group of African
States and the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries,
respectively, as well as by the Prime Minister of
Mauritius. I would now like to add the following in my
national capacity.
Namibia reiterates its firm and unwavering support
for draft resolution A/73/L.84/Rev.1 and the will
of the people of Mauritius in their quest for the full
decolonialization of their country to be completed by
restoring the full territorial integrity of Mauritius,
with the inclusion of the Chagos archipelago.
Namibia attaches great importance to the work of the
International Court of Justice and accords its advisory
opinions and judgments the highest respect, as
international law and justice are the cornerstone of our
work as an international community. As an example,
when Namibia and Botswana had exhausted bilateral
discussions to resolve a dispute about territorial
sovereignty over Kasikili/Sedudu Island without
reaching a mutually acceptable agreement, the case
was referred to the International Court of Justice, and
in 1999, in the case between the two Member States,
the Court ruled in favour of the Republic of Botswana
and against Namibia. Namibia readily accepted that
judgment, showing its respect for international law.
The main findings of the International Court
of Justice in its advisory opinion on the Legal
consequences of the separation of the Chagos
archipelago from Mauritius in 1965 (see A/73/773)
are clear and unequivocal. The Chagos archipelago
forms an integral and indivisible part of the territory of
Mauritius, and the ongoing colonial administration of
the archipelago is wrongful act under international law.
The displacement of Chagossians remains unacceptable,
and, as a former colonized people, Namibians can only
16/26

22/05/2019

share the frustration and longing felt by Chagossians,
who would like to return to the land of their birth.
Colonialism has no place in today’s world, and the
continued United Kingdom occupation of the Chagos
archipelago is an injustice that must be righted. We
must collectively seek to fulfil our obligations to others
who are still under the yoke of colonialism. It is only
as we seek to ensure full decolonization that peace,
security and development will be assured, and no one
will be left behind.
Namibia is a firm supporter of the importance of
respecting systems, processes and institutions aimed
at strengthening governance in line with democratic
principles and systems and the rule of law. All the
countries in the Assembly speak of the high respect
they have for international law and justice. It is time
that we saw those speeches followed up by concrete
action on the part of the Government of the United
Kingdom and that it adhered to the advisory opinion
of the principal organ of the United Nations. That is
all the more so considering that in the 73 years of the
Court’s existence, the United Kingdom has served as
a judge on it no fewer than 71 years. I would like to
believe that such long service on the Court was because
of the United Kingdom’s strong belief in adhering to
and complying with international law, and in the view
that the Court is credible and necessary for ensuring
respect for international law and justice.
In conclusion, Namibia affirms its full support and
solidarity with the people of Mauritius in enabling the
process of decolonization to be completed. According
to international law, Mauritius should exercise
sovereignty over the totality of its territory and enable
the implementation of programmes for resettling its
citizens in the Chagos archipelago, particularly those
of Chagossian origin. As a sponsor of draft resolution
A/73/L.84/Rev.1, along with the entire Group of
African States and many other delegations in the Hall,
Namibia calls on all Member States to take the side of
international law and justice and to vote in favour of it.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): Draft
resolution A/73/L.84/Rev.1, before us today, addresses
the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice on the Legal consequences of the separation of
the Chagos archipelago from Mauritius in 1965 (see
A/73/773), an archipelago that the United Kingdom
administers as the British Indian Ocean Territory.
19-14879

22/05/2019

As the United States and others cautioned two years
ago, it was inappropriate to seek an advisory opinion
with respect to this purely bilateral dispute, particularly
without the consent of both parties. The draft resolution
under consideration makes it clear that those concerns
were warranted. We share the views already expressed
about the scope of the draft resolution and the dangerous
precedent it sets for the misuse of the advisory function
of the International Court of Justice and of the ability of
States to decide for themselves how best to peacefully
settle their bilateral disputes. I would like to briefly
reiterate our views on the matter.
First, the United Kingdom remains sovereign
over the British Indian Ocean Territory, as it has
been continuously since 1814. The United States
unequivocally supports the sovereignty of the United
Kingdom over the British Indian Ocean Territory. Its
status as a territory of the United Kingdom is essential
to the value of the joint United States-United Kingdom
base on the British Indian Ocean Territory. The joint
base on the British Indian Ocean Territory is critical to
our mutual security as well as broader efforts to ensure
global security. The strategic location of the shared
base enables the United States, the United Kingdom
and our allies and partners to combat some of the most
challenging threats to global peace and security. It also
allows us to remain ready to provide a rapid, powerful
response in times of humanitarian crisis. The specific
arrangement involving the facilities on the British
Indian Ocean Territory is grounded in the uniquely
close and active defence and security partnership
between the United States and the United Kingdom. It
cannot be replicated.
Secondly, all States should be concerned about
the overreaching of the draft resolution, especially
those currently engaged in efforts to resolve their own
bilateral disputes. Even in its revised form, the text goes
beyond the non-binding advisory opinion issued by the
International Court of Justice and mischaracterizes the
content and effect of the opinion in critical respects.
The Court did not say that today Mauritius is sovereign
over the British Indian Ocean Territory, or suggest that
States or international organizations must recognize it
as such. Furthermore, it rejected Mauritius’s argument
that the transfer of sovereignty must be immediate.
In sum, the draft resolution sets an unsettling
precedent, with potentially far-reaching implications.
And it undermines a fundamental principle of
international law, one enshrined in the Statute of the

A/73/PV.83

International Court of Justice, that States must consent
to have their disputes adjudicated. For those reasons, we
oppose the draft resolution and encourage all Member
States to do the same.
Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): South Africa
recognizes the presence of the Prime Minister of
Mauritius in our midst today. We endorse the remarks
he made earlier.
It is significant that we are meeting today
to consider a draft resolution (A/73/L.84/Rev.1)
introduced by the representative of Senegal on behalf
of the Group of African States on the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice on the
Legal consequences of the separation of the Chagos
archipelago from Mauritius in 1965 (see A/73/773).
We welcome the advisory opinion, in which the
Court found that the process of the decolonization
of Mauritius was not lawfully completed when that
country acceded to independence in 1968, following
the separation of the Chagos archipelago. The Court
goes on to say that all Member States are under an
obligation to cooperate with the United Nations to
complete the decolonization of Mauritius. South Africa
will therefore vote in favour of the draft resolution. We
invite all other Member States to do likewise.
We align our statement with that delivered by the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
This matter has been on the agendas of the United
Nations and the African Union for decades. It was
essential for the General Assembly, through resolution
71/292, of 22 June 2017, to request its principal judicial
organ to issue an advisory opinion with respect to the
decolonization of Mauritius. South Africa, itself a
former colony, knows at first-hand that the effects of
colonization continue long after a State has obtained
its independence. South Africa suffered for centuries
under successive waves of colonialism and apartheid.
The forced removal of civilian populations caused
terrible human and economic harm, the effects of which
are still being felt today. Indigenous communities were
subjugated by military force, with devastating effects
on their social and economic structures. Thousands
of forcibly displaced persons died in concentration
camps in South Africa as a result of the scorched-earth
policy employed as a military strategy by our former
colonizers during the South African war. Subsequent
apartheid policies resulted in the forced removal of

19-1487917/26

A/73/PV.83

entire communities from their places of residence, on
the sole basis of their race.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
By participating in today’s meeting of the General
Assembly and voting in favour of the draft resolution,
South Africa hopes to contribute to the further
elimination of colonialism in all its forms and to the
promotion of the right of all peoples to the realization
of their right to self-determination. As stated in South
Africa’s presentation to the International Court of
Justice, colonialism is an archaic remnant of a previous
world order that considered some peoples more worthy
than others. That has left a lasting stain on the conscience
of humankind. The completion of decolonization is one
of the most pressing and fundamental challenges facing
the present international legal order. Decolonization
must and will remain on the agendas of the General
Assembly and the African Union as long as there
are people in the world who do not enjoy freedom on
their own territories and are unable to determine their
own future.
The International Court of Justice has clearly
provided guidance to the General Assembly so that it
can play its part in permanently removing all vestiges
of colonialism from among the family of nations, and in
particular over the Chagos archipelago.
Mr. Elshenawy (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic):
Egypt aligns itself with the statements made by the
representatives of Senegal, on behalf of the Group
of African States, and Venezuela, on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Egypt, which currently has the honour to chair
the African Union, welcomes the advisory opinion
of the International Court of Justice handed down on
25 February concerning the Legal consequences of the
separation of the Chagos archipelago from Mauritius in
1965 (see A/73/773). We welcome its content, findings
and recommendations with regard to the colonization
of the Chagos archipelago and the importance of
unconditionally ending that situation within six
months. All Member States have a commitment to
cooperating with the United Nations to complete this
decolonization.
Egypt supports the draft resolution (A/73/L.84/
Rev.1) introduced on behalf of the Group of African
States under agenda item 88, based on the competence
18/26

22/05/2019

of the General Assembly and according to the
Charter of the United Nations. Egypt’s position in
support of the advisory opinion is founded on the
following considerations.
First, we continue to support the rights of peoples
to self-determination and decolonization. That has
been a constant position of Egyptian foreign policy
for decades.
Secondly, it is time to end all forms of colonization
on the African continent, which has long suffered the
effects of colonization and the injustice that flows from
it. Decolonization was one of the fundamental goals
and principles of the Organization of African Unity,
which was established in 1963 and later transformed
into the African Union.
Thirdly, Egypt supports the mandate of the
International Court of Justice, in particular its advisory
role, as it is our highest international judicial organ
and issues advisory opinions in accordance with
international law.
Fourthly and finally, Egypt firmly believes in
the principles of international multilateralism and the
United Nations system and its various organs, foremost
among them the International Court of Justice and the
General Assembly.
In conclusion, our collective commitment to
the purposes and principles of the United Nations
Charter makes it incumbent on us to preserve the
credibility of the International Court of Justice as the
highest international judicial organ by supporting and
strengthening it. That is what the draft resolution before
us today calls for.
Mr. Butler-Payette (Seychelles): Seychelles
aligns itself firmly with the statement delivered by the
representative of Senegal on behalf of the Group of
African States.
Having experienced colonization and gone through
a process of decolonization leading to independence,
the Republic of Seychelles firmly believes that all
peoples have a right to self-determination under
international law and that the territory of the people
of an independent nation cannot be excised without
their consent. That was determined by the International
Court of Justice. Seychelles therefore calls for the rapid
and orderly implementation of the advisory opinion
of the International Court of Justice concerning the
19-14879

22/05/2019

Legal consequences of the separation of the Chagos
archipelago from Mauritius in 1965 (see A/73/773).
In that context, when Seychelles gained
independence, territories formerly administered by
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland under the British Indian Ocean Territory were
returned to it. They are Aldabra, today a UNESCO
World Heritage site, and the islands of Farquhar and
Desroches. It stands to reason that the same precedent
should be applied in the case of Mauritius.
Seychelles has a sizeable Chagossian community.
As such, the question of the Chagossian people
returning to their home is one shared by us as well as by
Mauritius and the United Kingdom. They have not only
a legal claim to their ancestral homeland but a moral
one. Small nations, especially island nations such as
our own, rely heavily on the primacy of international
law and the international institutions defining them,
such as the International Court of Justice, which
add significantly to the corpus juris. Furthermore,
small island developing States, as well as the broader
international community, must have full confidence
that customary international law can be respected and
upheld. We do not have the luxury of selecting which
of the opinions of the International Court of Justice to
uphold and which to disregard.
The United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland has throughout its history been a
great promoter of multilateralism and has contributed
immensely to international law, in part by upholding
decisions of the International Court of Justice. Our
broader membership in the United Nations family,
as well as in the Commonwealth, which in itself is a
reflection of a group of nations that have embraced in
full their inalienable right to self-determination yet
maintain excellent relations and cooperate on an equal
footing, should pave the way for implementing what is
essentially right.
Finally, Mauritius is a valued friend and trading
partner of both the United Kingdom and the United
States. It has publicly accepted the future operation of
the United Kingdom-United States defence facility on
Diego Garcia, in accordance with international law.
Mr. Sisa (Botswana): Botswana welcomes today’s
meeting convened to consider agenda item 88, entitled
“Request for an advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice on the legal consequences of the
separation of the Chagos Archipelago from Mauritius

A/73/PV.83

in 1965”, as mandated by the Assembly through
resolution 71/292, of 22 June 2017. We warmly welcome
the Prime Minister of the Republic of Mauritius to
today’s meeting.
We align ourselves with the statement delivered
by the Permanent Representative of Senegal, who
introduced draft resolution A/73/L.84/Rev. 1 on behalf
of the 54 Member States of the United Nations that are
members of the Group of African States, including
my own country, Botswana. We also align ourselves
with the statement delivered by the representative of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
As a member of the African Group and the United
Nations, Botswana attaches great importance to the
draft resolution, which aims to endorse and implement
the landmark advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice delivered on 25 February, concerning
the Legal consequences of the separation of the Chagos
archipelago from Mauritius in 1965 (see A/73/773).
Botswana joins other delegations that have
welcomed and supported the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice, the principal judicial
organ of the United Nations. As requested by the
Assembly, the Court provided an advisory opinion on
the two main questions posed in resolution 71/292. For
the sake of brevity, I will not repeat them.
As a supporter of multilateralism and the rulesbased international order, Botswana participated in the
hearings of the International Court of Justice. Having
participated in the process, my country fully supports
the advisory opinion, which was adopted by 13 votes
to 1, and the main findings of the International Court
of Justice. First, the process of the decolonization of
Mauritius was not lawfully completed when it became
independent in 1968 following the separation of the
Chagos archipelago. Secondly, the United Kingdom is
under an obligation to bring to an end its administration
of the Chagos archipelago as rapidly as possible.
Thirdly, all Member States are under an obligation to
cooperate with the United Nations in order to complete
the decolonization of Mauritius. And fourthly, the
Chagos archipelago forms an integral part of the
territory of Mauritius and the ongoing administration
of the Chagos archipelago is a continuing wrongful act
under international law.
The President returned to the Chair.

19-1487919/26

A/73/PV.83

Based on those points, Botswana will support the
draft resolution, because it seeks to determine the
modalities for the completion of the decolonization of
Mauritius. We therefore call on all other like-minded
States to vote in favour of the draft resolution, if a
vote is requested. No continent has borne the brunt
of colonialism as Africa has. A vote in favour of the
draft resolution would contribute to the process of the
decolonization of Mauritius and the Mauritian people’s
right to self-determination, as well as respect for
international law and justice.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Mexico would like to take the opportunity
presented by this debate to reiterate its unequivocal
commitment to the peaceful settlement of disputes, and
to the International Court of Justice as the main judicial
organ of the Organization. Every decision of the Court,
together with its effective implementation, serves to
strengthen the rule of law at the international level.
Having recourse to the International Court of Justice
must always be seen as an incentive for States, since
an increase in the number of cases that are referred to
it is a healthy symptom of a preference for the peaceful
settlement of disputes over confrontation.
As we have said in the past in the context of
considering the reports that the Court submits to
the General Assembly every year, there are various
ways by which we can bolster the work of the Court,
including giving it a vote of confidence by recognizing
its obligatory jurisdiction, including jurisdictional
clauses in multilateral treaties and having recourse to
forum prorogatum.
Making greater use of its advisory capacity is
another mechanism for strengthening the Court that
we should not neglect. Through its advisory function,
the Court determines applicable law in legal situations
submitted for its consideration. While they do not
constitute decisions that put an end to disputes, they
do respond to questions that are useful to other organs,
such as the General Assembly, in their follow-up work
in specific areas within their own remits. That is where
the important value of advisory opinions lies. Moreover,
when the General Assembly requests advisory opinions,
they provide a unique space for interaction, dialogue
and cooperation between two of the principal organs of
the United Nations, thereby strengthening the United
Nations system as a whole.
20/26

22/05/2019

Our debate today and the draft resolution to
be adopted (A/73/L.84/Rev.1) constitute a further
example of the contribution of the United Nations to
strengthening the rule of law at the international level.
Mr. Monyane (Lesotho): Lesotho warmly welcomes
the presence of the Prime Minister of Mauritius on this
very important day on which we are discussing draft
resolution A/73/L.84/Rev.1, introduced by Ambassador
Niang of Senegal on behalf of the Group of African
States, with which we are fully aligned. We also
recognize and align ourselves with the statement made
by the Ambassador of Venezuela on behalf of the member
States of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Sustainable peace is founded on international
justice and the observance of international law. Lesotho
will therefore continue to foster principles that entrench
international legality and justice, in particular the
principles of the right to self-determination and respect
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States.
During its twenty-eighth ordinary session, held in
Addis Ababa from 30 to 31 January 2017, the African
Union Assembly of Heads of State and Government
reaffirmed that the Chagos archipelago, including
Diego Garcia, forms an integral part of the territory of
the Republic of Mauritius and that the decolonization of
Mauritius will not be complete until it is able to exercise
its full sovereignty over the Chagos archipelago.
The Assembly of Heads of State and Government
resolved to fully support the action initiated by the
Government of Mauritius at the level of the United
Nations. Subsequently, the General Assembly adopted
resolution 71/292, on 22 June 2017, which requested
the International Court of Justice to render an advisory
opinion on the issue at hand. The Court issued its
opinion on 25 February. We wish to reiterate Lesotho’s
unwavering support for the position of the African
Union. Furthermore, it should be recognized that the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on
the Legal consequences of the separation of the Chagos
archipelago from Mauritius in 1965 (see A/73/773) was
with respect to the completion of decolonization, and not
about security or official development assistance. We
strongly believe that the development and maintenance
of peace among nations should be based on respect for
the principle of equal rights and the self-determination
of peoples, irrespective of the size of the affected States.
In conclusion, it has been more than 50 years since
the decolonization of Africa began. In the case of
19-14879

22/05/2019

Mauritius, the process has been ongoing on for 51 years.
In fact, it has been close to 60 years since the General
Assembly’s adoption of resolution 1514 (XV), on the
subject of decolonization. There are many challenges in
the twenty-first century. The international community
should be focusing on more pressing issues, including
sustainable development, peace and security, as well as
action on climate change. We therefore call on Member
States, and indeed the entire global community, to
support draft resolution A/73/L.84/Rev.1 so as to ensure
the completion of the decolonization of Mauritius,
thereby drawing to a close the remaining chapter of the
scourge of colonialism.
Ms. Sande (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Today the General Assembly is considering draft
resolution A/73/L.84/Rev.1, concerning the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice on the
Legal consequences of the separation of the Chagos
archipelago from Mauritius in 1965 (see A/73/773),
which the General Assembly requested under
resolution 71/292, adopted on 22 June 2017 and having
to do with the decolonization of Mauritius. The draft
resolution involves fundamental principles governing
the conduct of States in their relations, which are
the guiding principles of the rule of law within the
international community.
Since its founding, the United Nations has
functioned based on the principles of the sovereign
equality of States, equal rights and the selfdetermination of peoples, among others. In that regard,
resolution 1514 (XV), of 14 December 1960, is the basic
framework that establishes the self-determination of
peoples as a principle under international customary
law. Paragraph 1 states that
“[t]he subjection of peoples to alien subjugation,
domination and exploitation constitutes a denial
of fundamental human rights, is contrary to the
Charter of the United Nations and is an impediment
to the promotion of world peace and co-operation.”
Moreover, paragraph 6 states that
“[a]ny attempt aimed at the partial or total disruption
of the national unity and the territorial integrity of
a country is incompatible with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.”
The principles established in the resolution are thus
clear and constitute jus cogens norms of general
international law.

A/73/PV.83

The territorial integrity of States and respect
for fundamental human rights are at the core of the
decolonization process, which begins with resolution
1514 (XV), the cornerstone of decolonization. In
that regard and with respect to its implementation,
resolution 1654 (XVI) established the subsidiary body,
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
which is devoted to monitoring the implementation of
resolution 1514 (XV).
Uruguay has traditionally been committed to
multilateralism and respect for the validity of the rule of
law, and has striven to implement the principles referred
to in the Charter and set forth in resolutions 1514 (XV)
and 2625 (XXV), of 1960 and 1970, respectively, by
providing decisive support to decolonization processes.
Uruguay has always championed the work of
the International Court of Justice, in full respect for
its independence, its decisions and the value of its
advisory opinions, which may be requested by the
General Assembly on any legal question, in accordance
with Article 96 of the Charter of the United Nations
and article 65 of the statute of the Court. Those norms
grant the General Assembly the power to request
an advisory opinion on the separation of Mauritius
from the Chagos archipelago, and the Court has the
jurisdiction to pronounce on that request, given that it
is a legal question.
The requested advisory opinion seeks to determine
whether the decolonization of Mauritius and the
process that was followed have been completed and if
they have been carried out in accordance with the law.
In that regard, it is worth noting that the Court stated in
paragraph 88 of the advisory opinion that
“[t]he Court therefore concludes that the
opinion has been requested on the matter of
decolonization, which is of particular concern
to the United Nations. The issues raised by
the request are located in the broader frame of
reference of decolonization, including the General
Assembly’s role therein, from which those issues
are inseparable.” (A/73/773, p.24)
The Court issued its advisory opinion in response
to the General Assembly, which is the main and most
representative organ of the United Nations and is
tasked with monitoring the decolonization process.
Within that jurisdictional context, the Court deems that

19-1487921/26

A/73/PV.83

it is the Assembly that must pronounce itself on the
modalities required to ensure that the decolonization
process of Mauritius is completed. For Uruguay, it is
undeniable that in the light of the advisory opinion, it is
the responsibility of the General Assembly to establish
such modalities itself or by delegating this process to its
subsidiary bodies.
In conclusion, pursuant to those points, Uruguay
expresses its support for the draft resolution before us.
Ms. Andrianantoandro (Madagascar) (spoke
in French): On behalf of my delegation, I would first
like to warmly congratulate you, Madam President, on
the manner in which you are leading the work of the
General Assembly.
Madagascar aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of Senegal on behalf of the Group
of African States.
Madagascar reaffirms its commitment to
the principles and values of the Organization
and will therefore work to achieve its priorities,
particularly decolonization.
The General Assembly has an essential
responsibility to ensure the complete decolonization of
Mauritius, given the active role played by the General
Assembly in the decolonization process. We are now
reaching the end of the third decade of decolonization.
Madagascar believes that draft resolution A/73/L.84/
Rev.1, on the advisory opinion of the International Court
of Justice on the Legal consequences of the separation
of the Chagos archipelago from Mauritius in 1965
(see A/73/773), remains a key element of the process.
Madagascar therefore intends to contribute by voting
in favour of the draft resolution in order to complete
the decolonization of Mauritius, and we urge others to
do the same by applying United Nations mandates and
reaffirming the supremacy of international law.
In conclusion, our delegation is ready to cooperate
with the United Nations and all its partners in the noble
undertaking of completing the decolonization process.
Mr. Shava (Zimbabwe): I would like to recognize
the presence of the Prime Minister of Mauritius in
our midst.
I would also like to align my statement with those
made by the Chair of the Group of African States
for this month, the Ambassador of Senegal, and the
22/26

22/05/2019

representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
I want to congratulate the General Assembly on its
adoption on 22 June 2017 of resolution 71/292, in which
it decided to request the International Court of Justice
to give an advisory opinion on the two questions that
the Ambassador of Senegal spelled out in his statement.
The questions pertained to whether the process of
decolonization was lawfully completed when Mauritius
attained independence in 1968, and to the consequences
under international law arising from the continued
foreign administration of the Chagos archipelago.
My gratitude also goes to the International Court
of Justice for rendering its advisory opinion on the
Legal consequences of the separation of the Chagos
archipelago from Mauritius in 1965 (see A/73/773),
based on the facts on the ground and international law,
a development that has led all of us to be at this meeting
today in the General Assembly to consider and decide
on the way forward on this very important issue on
the future of the Chagos archipelago of the Republic
of Mauritius.
It is important that we recognize that one of the
functions of the United Nations is to contribute to
the decolonization and self-determination of all
peoples, and that the International Court of Justice
advisory opinion is an authoritative pronouncement of
international law that all Members of the United Nations
must respect. We must not forget that the opinion relates
to the full decolonization of a Member of the United
Nations and was requested by the General Assembly in
the execution of its responsibilities. Failure to support
this important function of the General Assembly and
to respect the International Court of Justice would be
legitimizing colonialism.
The Government of Zimbabwe agrees with the
Government of Mauritius that the delivery of this
particular advisory opinion by the International Court
of Justice was an important contribution to the efforts
of the international community aimed at bringing
colonization to an end and promoting human rights,
self-determination and the international rule of law.
It is important to recognize the fact that 2,000
Chagossians who lived on the Chagos archipelago were
forced to move from their homelands and resettle in
mainland Mauritius, and as we have heard this morning
and elsewhere, have been prevented from returning
to the country of their birth. There is no national who
19-14879

22/05/2019

would accept being in that kind of position. The advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice recognizes
the right of the Chagossians and their descendants to
return to their ancestral lands sooner rather than later.
However, they can return only if today we ensure that
the Chagos archipelago is reinstated as an integral
and indivisible part of the territory of Mauritius and
that Mauritian sovereignty and territorial integrity are
thereby restored.
Zimbabwe, like many other countries, stands in
solidarity with Mauritians, who are demanding the
reunification of their country and the repatriation
of citizens who have been yearning to return to their
rightful homes. I do not believe that there is any
monetary enticement that would convince citizens
to perpetually live away from their homes. The
Government of Zimbabwe believes that ignoring the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
on the complete self-determination of Mauritius would
be regrettable because the General Assembly would be
abandoning the supreme principles of the equal rights
and self-determination of peoples embodied in Article
1 of the Charter of the United Nations.
In conclusion, I join the Ambassador of Senegal in
calling uon all Member States to stand up for the rule
of law and uphold their respect for the international
institutions that they created to serve humankind
by voting in favour of draft resolution A/73/L.84/
Rev.1 today.
Mr. Akbaruddin (India): Many long years ago — to
be precise, at its fifteenth session, on 14 December
1960 — the Assembly adopted the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples. The Declaration, enshrined in resolution 1514
(XV), recognized that the world ardently desired to end
colonialism. It also proclaimed the necessity of bringing
colonialism to an end speedily and unconditionally. As a
result of sustained efforts, more than 80 former colonies
have today taken their rightful place in the Assembly.
The support for the process of decolonization is, in
historic terms, one of the most significant contributions
that the United Nations has made to the promotion of
fundamental human rights, human dignity and the cause
of larger human freedom. However, here we are, nearly
59 years after the adoption of resolution 1514 (XV),
being advised by the International Court of Justice
that with regard to international law, the process of the
decolonization of Mauritius was not lawfully completed

A/73/PV.83

when that country acceded to independence in 1968,
following the separation of the Chagos archipelago. The
highest international legal authority that can consider
such issues has advised us that all Members are under
an obligation to cooperate with the United Nations in
order to complete the decolonization of Mauritius.
As one of the few non-sovereign colonial territories
to be a founding Member of the United Nations, India
has remained steadfast in its commitment to the ideals
of decolonization since its independence in 1947. India
was a sponsor of the 1960 Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, which
proclaimed the need to unconditionally end colonialism
in all its forms and manifestations. In 1962, India was
elected as the first Chair of the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples, which was established
to monitor the implementation of the Declaration and
make recommendations on its application.
The process of decolonization that gathered
momentum with India’s own independence still remains
unfinished. We would like to see an early conclusion to
this drawn-out process.
We have heard the view that this may be a bilateral
dispute. The opinion of the International Court of Justice
on this matter, which is articulated in paragraphs 88 to
90 of its advisory opinion on the Legal consequences
of the separation of the Chagos archipelago from
Mauritius in 1965 (see A/73/773), is unambiguously
clear. The Court held that the issues raised by the
General Assembly’s request to it are located in the
broader frame of reference of decolonization. The
Court also concluded that it did not consider that
giving the opinion requested would have the effect of
circumventing the principle of consent by a State to the
judicial settlement of its dispute with another State.
India shares with the international community
security concerns relating to the Indian Ocean. We are
conscious of the need for a collective commitment to
ensuring the security and prosperity of our oceanic
space. However, that is a separate matter on which we
urge the concerned Governments to reach a mutually
agreeable understanding as soon as possible.
Mauritius is a fellow developing country from
Africa with which India has age-old people-to-people
bonds. We are therefore happy to see in our midst

19-1487923/26

A/73/PV.83

Prime Minister Pravind Jugnauth and warmly welcome
his presence at this meeting.
As part of our long-standing support to all peoples
striving for decolonization, India has supported
Mauritius in its quest for the restoration of its
sovereignty over the Chagos archipelago. In accordance
with our consistent approach to the important issue
of decolonization, India supports draft resolution
A/73/L.84/Rev.1, submitted by Senegal on behalf of
members of the Group of African States. India will
therefore vote in favour of the draft resolution.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the last speaker in the debate on this item.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/73/L.84/Rev.1.
Before giving the floor for explanations of vote
before the voting, I would like to remind delegations
that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mrs. Hussain (Maldives): I am taking the floor
to provide an explanation of our vote before the vote
on draft resolution A/73/L.84/Rev.1, entitled “Request
for an advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice on the legal consequences of the separation of
the Chagos Archipelago from Mauritius in 1965”.
The Maldives has always supported all processes
concerning the decolonization of territories within the
United Nations. We will not deny any peoples their right
to self-determination. As a responsible Member of the
United Nations, we abide firmly by the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and express our support
for a rules-based international order. Our record in the
General Assembly reflects that.
The Maldives also supports and accepts the
jurisdiction and role of the International Court of
Justice in settling disputes and giving advisory
opinions on important legal questions referred to it by
the bodies of the United Nations. We strongly believe
that the acceptance of the Court’s role is paramount
in solidifying the supremacy of international law in a
rules-based system and in the peaceful settlement of
international disputes.
However, a decision made by any international
body that does not reflect the genuine interests of the
States concerned cannot amount to an effective and
long-lasting solution, and the Maldives has always
24/26

22/05/2019

believed that the issue of the Chagos archipelago
would best be addressed through dialogue between the
States concerned.
As I have already stated, the draft resolution before
us today will have serious implications for the Maldives.
While we fully respect the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice on the Legal consequences
of the separation of the Chagos archipelago from
Mauritius in 1965 (see A/73/773), the draft resolution
before us prejudges the implications of the submission
by the Maldives in July 2010 to the Commission on the
Limits of the Continental Shelf. Without due process
and clarity on the legal implications of the contested
matter, the Maldives is not in a position to support the
draft resolution solely as a matter of decolonization. For
the Maldives, any uncertainty concerning the issue of
the Chagos archipelago will have serious implications
for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and wider
security of the Indian Ocean region.
It is for those reasons that the Maldives will vote
against the draft resolution. However, we would like
to reiterate that our vote should not be construed as a
vote or position taken against the sponsors of the draft
resolution, with which we have excellent relations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the last speaker in explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/73/L.84/Rev.1, entitled “Request for an
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
on the legal consequences of the separation of the
Chagos Archipelago from Mauritius in 1965”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors
of draft resolution A/73/L.84/Rev.1: Argentina, the
Plurinational State of Bolivia, Cuba, Nicaragua, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Vanuatu and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela.
The President (spoke in Spanish): A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
19-14879

22/05/2019

In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bangladesh,
Belarus,
Belize,
Benin,
Bhutan,
Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Chad, China, Comoros,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Finland, Gabon,
Gambia, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Ireland, Jamaica, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Mali, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mozambique,
Myanmar,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Norway, Pakistan, Palau, Paraguay, Peru, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Hungary, Israel, Maldives, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Bahrain,
Barbados, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, El
Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, France, Germany, Honduras,
Italy, Japan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Netherlands,
New Zealand, North Macedonia, Oman, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania, Saint Lucia,
Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Sri Lanka,
Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Tuvalu

A/73/PV.83

Draft resolution A/73/L.84/Rev.1 was adopted
by 116 votes to 6, with 56 abstentions (resolution
73/295).
The President (spoke in Spanish): Before giving
the floor for explanations of vote after the voting, I
would like to remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom regrets that today the General Assembly
has voted to adopt resolution 73/295. The United
Kingdom fully recognizes the importance of the issue
of decolonization and the role of the United Nations
in that.
As I said in my earlier statement, the United
Kingdom sincerely regrets the manner in which
Chagossians were removed from the British Indian
Ocean Territory in the 1960s and 1970s, and we are
determined to improve their lives where they have
resettled. A grave accusation was made against the
United Kingdom this morning. It is without foundation,
and I repeat that we reject it in full.
The United Kingdom has no doubt about our
sovereignty over the British Indian Ocean Territory.
The issue put today before the General Assembly
remains at heart a bilateral sovereignty dispute between
Mauritius and the United Kingdom, and we continue
to believe that it remains an important principle that
bilateral sovereignty disputes should be resolved by the
parties themselves. Today’s vote sets a precedent that
should be of concern not only to the United Kingdom
but to all Member States in the Hall today that have
sovereignty disputes of their own.
I would like to acknowledge that the result of
today’s vote shows that a significant number of
Member States share those concerns, as witnessed by
the high number of abstentions and absences, and I am
particularly grateful to those States that voted with the
United Kingdom against today’s resolution.
I would like finally to turn to a point that was
made in the debate. I should state that the United
Kingdom’s well-known position on the Falkland Islands
remains unchanged. We welcome the principle and the
right of the Falkland Islanders to self-determination
as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, and
that means that there can be no dialogue on sovereignty
unless and until the Falkland Islanders so wish.

19-1487925/26

A/73/PV.83

22/05/2019

Mr. Cuellar Torres (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Colombia recognizes that the issue we are addressing
is part of the task of decolonization, which is strongly
promoted by the United Nations. Our country has
supported and will continue to support efforts that seek
the recognition of the right to self-determination and
territorial integrity.

El Salvador has already shown its support for
the universal value of the advisory opinions of the
International Court of Justice on issues of a global
scope, such as that on the Legality of the threat or use of
nuclear weapons (A/51/218, annex), on which it bases
its support for the follow-up resolutions of the First
Committee.

At the same time, Colombia values the importance
of each advisory opinion of the International Court
of Justice for the development of international law.
However, we do not consider it appropriate to demand
an obligation through a General Assembly resolution
based on a non-legally-binding instrument. For that
reason, we decided to abstain in the voting on the
matter.

However, we believe that parts of the resolution
adopted today exceed the non-binding nature of the
advisory function of the International Court of Justice.
We therefore believe that the language contained in
paragraphs 3, 6 and 7 is not consistent with an advisory
opinion of the Court. As such, El Salvador does not
acknowledge any precedent emanating from them that
should be considered in or affect future proceedings. In
El Salvador’s view, the content of resolution 73/295 is
therefore a declaration of a purely political nature and
not the result of the advisory opinion requested.

Mr. Escalante Hasbún (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): El Salvador wishes to explain its position
after the voting on resolution 73/295, on the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice on the
Legal consequences of the separation of the Chagos
archipelago from Mauritius in 1965, (see A/73/773) on
which El Salvador has just abstained in the voting.
El Salvador was among the countries that voted in
favour of resolution 71/292, through which the General
Assembly requested the advisory opinion from the
International Court of Justice, pursuant to Article 65 of
the Statute of the Court. El Salvador therefore thanks
the Court and believes that it is consistent for the
General Assembly to pronounce on its content, given
that the Assembly requested the opinion.
El Salvador believes that the content of paragraphs 1
and 2 of the resolution is relevant, and thanks the Group
of African States for the corrections made to them so
as to ensure that they faithfully reflect the text of the
advisory opinion. El Salvador considers that the issue
we are addressing not only has a bilateral dimension
that concerns the parties exclusively, but also a global
dimension relating to decolonization and the human
rights of indigenous peoples, on which the General
Assembly is more than competent to pronounce itself.

26/26

For its part, El Salvador recognizes the pertinence
of the questions asked in resolution 71/292 and the
answers provided by the Court, which demonstrate that
we are facing an incomplete decolonization process and
that the status quo is no longer satisfactory for at least
one of the parties concerned.
El Salvador therefore urges the Governments of
Mauritius and the United Kingdom to pursue bilateral
talks with a view to arriving at satisfactory results
for both parties. At the multilateral level, and based
on the call made in paragraph 4 of the resolution, El
Salvador is open to supporting concrete modalities
of support, including through the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples, as has been done in
other cases, such as that established through resolution
67/265.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the last speaker in explanation of vote for this meeting.
We shall hear the remaining speakers at 3 p.m. here in
this Hall.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

19-14879
