100

General Assembly-Twenty-sixth Session

sions of the Charter of the United Nations, to secure
the full and speedy implementation by Portugal of
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and of the
decisions of the Security Council concerning the Territories under Portuguese domination;
15. Invites the Secretary-General, within the framework of the United Nations Educational and Training
Programme for Southern Africa and in consultation
with the specialized agencies, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the Governments of the
host countries and the Organization of African Unity,
to further intensify educational and training programmes for the people of the Territories under Portuguese domination, taking into account their needs for
qualified administrative, 'technical and professional
personnel to assume responsibility for the public administration and the economic and social development of
their own countries, and to include information on the
progress achieved in that regard in the report concerning that Programme to be submitted by the Secretary-General to the General Assembly at its twentyseventh session;
16. Notes with satisfaction the intention of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to
send a group to visit the liberated areas of Angola,
Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau) ;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
present resolution to all States and to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-seventh session on the
steps taken or envisaged by States in the implementation of the various provisions contained therein;
18. Requests the Special Committee to keep the
situation in the Territories under review.
2012th plenary meeting,
10 December 1971.

2796 (XXVI). Question of Southern Rhodesia
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Southern Rhodesia,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 11
Bearing in mind the views expressed by representatives of national liberation movements, 12
Having heard the statement of the petitioner, 13
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling further all previous resolutions concerning
the question of Southern Rhodesia adopted by the
General Assembly and the Special Committee,
Recalling also the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council, particularly its resolutions 232 (1966) of 16
11 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/8423/Rev.1), chaps. V and VI.
12 Ibid., chap. V, annex.
18 Jbid., Twenty-sixth Session, Fourth Committee, 1939th
meeting.

December 1966, 253 (1968) of 29 May 1968, 277
(1970) of 18 March 1970 and 288 (1970) of 17
November 1970,
Gravely concerned at the further deterioration of the
situation in Southern Rhodesia, which the Security
Council has reaffirmed as constituting a threat to international peace and security, resulting from the failure
and refusal of the Government of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to put an end
to the illegal racist minority regime in that Territory
and from the racialist and repressive policies pursued
by that regime in violation of the relevant resolutions
and decisions of the United Nations,
Deeply concerned at the continued presence of South
African forces in the Territory, which constitutes a
threat to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
neighbouring African States,
Deploring that certain States, in particular South
Africa and Portugal, continue to collaborate with the
illegal racist minority regime in violation of the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council, contrary to their specific obligation under
Article 25 of the Charter of the United Nations,
thereby seriously obstructing the efforts of the international community to put an end to that regime,
Bearing in mind that the Government of the United
Kingdom, as the administering Power, has the primary
responsibility for putting an end to the rebellion of
British settlers who organized the illegal racist regime
and for transferring effective power to the people of
Zimbabwe on the basis of the principle of majority
rule,
Deploring the intransigent attitude of the Government of the United Kingdom, as the administering
Power, which, in contravention of the provisions of
the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Special Committee, persists in its refusal to cooperate with the Special Committee in the discharge
of the mandate entrusted to it by the General Assembly,
Noting with deep regret the decision of the International Olympic Committee to permit the participation in the XXth Olympic Games of the so-called
National Olympic Committee of Rhodesia,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Zimbabwe to self-determination, freedom and independence and the legitimacy of their struggle to secure
by all the means at their disposal the enjoyment of
that right as set forth in the Charter of the United
Nations and in conformity with the objectives of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Strongly deplores the continued refusal of the
Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland to take effective measures to
bring down the illegal racist minority regime in Southern Rhodesia and to transfer power without any delay
to the people of Zimbabwe on the basis of the principle of majority rule, in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly, and calls upon
that Government to take such measures without further
delay in fulfilment of its responsibility as the administering Power;
3. Condemns the continued intervention and presence of South African armed forces in Southern Rhodesia in violation of Security Council resolutions 277
(1970) and 288 (1970), and calls upon the administering Power to ensure the immediate expulsion of
all such forces;

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

4. Condemns the policies of those Governments,
particularly the Governments of South Africa and
Portugal, which continue to maintain political, economic, military and other relations with the illegal
racist minority regime, in contravention of the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations and contrary to their
obligations under the Charter, and calls upon those
Governments to cease forthwith all such relations;
5. Reaffirms its conviction that the sanctions will
not put an end to the illegal racist minority regime
unless they are comprehensive, mandatory, effectively
supervised, enforced and complied with by all States,
particularly by South Africa and Portugal;
6. Strongly urges all States to take more stringent
measures in order to prevent any circumvention by all
individuals and bodies corporate of their nationality,
or under their jurisdiction, of the sanctions prescribed
by the Security Council, and to refrain from any action
which might confer a semblance of legitimacy on the
illegal racist minority regime;
7. Strongly deplores the imprisonment and detention of freedom fighters of Zimbabwe by the illegal
racist minority regime and calls upon the administering
Power to effect the immediate and unconditional release
of those persons;
8. Calls upon all States to take all appropriate steps
to ensure the exclusion of the so-called National Olympic Committee of Rhodesia from participating in the
XXth Olympic Games and requests the SecretaryGeneral to draw the attention of the President of the
International Olympic Committee to the relevant provisions of Security Council resolution 253 (1968) for
appropriate action;
9. Calls upon all States, the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations
system, in consultation with the Organization of African
Unity, to extend all moral and material assistance to
the people of Zimbabwe;
10. Calls upon the Government of the United Kingdom, in view of the armed conflict in the Territory
and the inhuman treatment of prisoners, to ensure the
application to that situation of the Geneva Convention
relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War14 and
the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, 16 both dated 12 August 1949;
11. Calls upon the Government of the United Kingdom to report on the implementation of the present
resolution to the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and to the General Assembly at its
twenty-seventh session;
12. Draws the attention of the Security Council, in
view of the gravity of the situation arising from the
further intensification of repressive activities against
the people of Zimbabwe, to the urgent necessity of
taking further steps to ensure the full and strict compliance by all States with the decisions of the Council,
in accordance with Article 25 of the Charter, and to
the need to widen the scope of the sanctions against
the illegal racist minority regime and to impose sanctions against South Africa and Portugal, whose Governments persist in their refusal to carry out the
mandatory decisions of the Council;
14 United Nations,
111 United Nations,

Treaty Series, vol. 75 (1950), No. 972.
Treaty Series, vol. 75 (1950), No. 973.

101

13. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-seventh session on the
implementation of the present resolution;
14. Requests the Special Committee to keep the
situation in the Territory under review.

2012th plenary meeting,
10 December 1971.

2865 (XXVI). Question of Papua New Guinea
The General Assembly,
Recalling the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations and General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV)
of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples,
Recalling its previous resolutions concerning Papua
and the Trust Territory of New Guinea, in particular
resolutions 2590 (XXIV) of 16 December 1969 and
2700 (XXV) of 14 December 1970,
Having considered the report of the Trusteeship
Council covering the period from 20 June 1970 to 18
June 197116 and the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,17
Having heard the statement of the representative of
the administering Power,18
Taking into account the conclusions and recommendations of the Special Committee and the Trusteeship Council regarding developments in Papua and
the Trust Territory of New Guinea,
Noting in particular the express desire of the people
of Papua and the Trust Territory of New Guinea for
national unity and independence as a single political
and territorial entity,
Taking note of the decision of the House of Assembly of Papua and the Trust Territory of New Guinea
that the Territory formed from the administrative
union of those two Territories should be named Papua
New Guinea,
Bearing in mind the decisions taken during 1971
by the House of Assembly of Papua and the Trust
Territory of New Guinea and the administering Power
with regard to the attainment of full internal selfgovernment during the period 1972-1976, and the
affirmation by the Government of Australia, as the
administering Power, that the interval between the
attainment of full self-government and independence
will be a matter to be determined by the then Government of Papua and the Trust Territory of New Guinea,
Noting further the decision of the Government of
Australia to invite a special mission of the Trusteeship
Council, including two members of the Special Committee, to observe the elections to the Third House
of Assembly of Papua and the Trust Territory of New
Guinea in 1972,
Mindful of the responsibility of the United Nations
to render all help to the people of Papua and the
16 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth
Session, Supplement No. 4 (A/8404).
17 Ibid., Supplement No. 23 (A/8423/Rev.1), chaps. IV and
XIX.
18 Ibid., Twenty-sixth Session, Fourth Committee, 1956th
meeting.
