TWENTY-SIXTH

YEAR
th
MEETING:

NEW

26 MAY 1971

YORK

CONTENTS
Pa;
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/

1567)

Expression

of thanks to preceding

Adoption

of the agenda

,

. . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . , . . . . . , . . .. . .. . . . . . . . .

1

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , . . . . . . .. .. .. . . . .. . . . .

1

Letter dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/5488):
Report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Operation in Cyprus
(S/10199 and Corr.1)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . ,

1

Presidents

SfPV.1567

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . +)are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the OfficiaI Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before I January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

.
.

_,,,.

__l.l

.._

_

.,_

.--I__

-

FIFTEEN HUNDRED AND SIXTY-SEVENTH

MEETING

eld in New York on Wednesday, 26 May 1971, at 10.30 a.m.
President: Mr. Nsanze TERENCE (Burundi).

without the right to vote, to take places at the Security
Council table.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Z. Rossides
(Cyprus), Mr. U H. Bayiilken (Turkey) and Mr. D. Bitsios
(Greece) took places at the Security Council table.
3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation porn French): The
Security Council will now take up the question of Cyprus
on the basis of the report of the Secretary-General of 20
May 1971 [S/l0199 and Corr.l]. Members of the Council
have before them also the draft resolution which has been
prepared during informal consultations [S/10209].

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 567)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Letter dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/5488):
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Operation in Cyprus (S/l0199 and Corr.1).

4. A certain number of representatives have expressed the
wish to speak before the vote on the draft resolution.
Before calling on them, however, I should like to welcome
and express my congratulations to Ambassador George
Bush of the United States, who is participating in the
meetings of this United Nations organ for the first time. It
was a great pleasure for me, in order to enable him to be
present on this occasion, to make arrangements to advance
the date of this meeting, which had originally been set for
28 May. I am sure that we can count on having him share
with us here, with his characteristic dynamism, the responsibilities and duties of the Security Council, as well as its
rights and powers, bringing with him a new air due in part
to his youth, which I feel corresponds perfectly to the
qualities of the African leadership.

Expression of thanks to preceding Presidents
1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): First of
all, I have the greatest pleasure in expressing my gratitude
to my immediate predecessors, the Ambassador of Argentina, who presided over the Council for the month of
March, and the Ambassador of Belgium, who presided for
the month of April. Although they were not faced with
events which made it necessary for them to convene a
meeting of the Security Council, in their capacity as
Presidents of the Council they nevertheless endeavoured to
maintain contacts and consultations to everyone’s satisfaction. It is therefore on behalf of all members of the
Security Council that I express my gratitude to them for
having successfully discharged their functions.

5. The first speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of Cyprus, on whom I now call.
6. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): Mr. President, it is my pleasant duty, if I may be permitted to do so, to offer you our
sincere congratulations on the occasion of your assuming
the presidency of this august body for a second time. Your
experience and diplomatic skill, combined with your many
other qualities, make it specially appropriate for you to
preside over the debate on the renewal of the mandate of
the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus
(UNFICYP),
particularly since you know the problem of
Cyprus so well.

Adoption of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
titter
dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/5488):
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Operation in Cyprus (S/10199 and Corr.1)

7. Before I enter upon the subject before us I wish on this
occasion to extend to the Government and people of
Turkey the sincere condolences of my delegation and my
Government on the tragic loss of life and property that has
occurred in that country as a result of recent earthquakes.
Having ourselves been victims of similar catastrophes in the
past, we in Cyprus can understand the tragic situation that

2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
fiorn French): In
accordance with the usual practice of the Council when
dealing with the question now before it, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite the representatives of
Cyprus, Turkey and Greece, pursuant to their request to be
allowed to participate in the discussion of the question
1

,.

..^

___2-

--

-

has arisen and feel every sympathy and compassion for the
unfortunate victims in Turkey.
8. I wish to thank you, Mr. President, and the Council for
giving me this opportunity to participate in this debate and
to put forward our views on the United Nations Force in
Cyprus.
9. We meet again for the renewal of the mandate, and on
this occasion I wish first to state the consent of Cyprus for
such renewal, considering that under the resolution it is
Cyprus that must signify its consent, and I wish to express
my Government’s
appreciation of the positive work
UNFICYP has been carrying out in contributing io the
maintenance of peace and its efforts to normalize the daily
life of the people of Cyprus. In that connexion I should like
to convey to the Commander of the Force, Major-General
D. Prem Chand, and to the officers and men under his
command, the expression of our appreciation.
10. I should like now to reiterate once more our deep
gratitude to the Secretary-General for his genuine concern
about the question of Cyprus over the years and his
dedicated efforts to contribute to a just and peaceFu1
solution of the problem and, furthermore, our admiration
of his wise leadership of the United Nations and his
outstanding services in the cause of peace and progress in
the world. As time goes by we admire him more and more.
We wish to see him as Secretary-General for as long as he
thinks he can possibly serve this Organization.
11, We also express appreciation to Mr. Osorio-Tafall for
his very patient and constructive work on the island, which
has been useful on many occasions, as also to the
collaborators and assistants of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ralph Bunche, Mr. Rolz-Bennett, who served until
recently, and Mr. Guyer.
12. I take this opportunity to say a few words about
Mr. Rolz-Bennett and express our deep sorrow at his
absence today. He has for many years been a very familiar,
helpful and respected figure as one of the SecretaryGeneral’s closest collaborators on the question of Cyprus--and, of course, on other subjects also-and his deep
knowledge of the question of Cyprus, coupled with his
many qualities and his dedication to duty, will be greatly
missed,
13. In meeting to renew the mandate the Security Council
must consider the Secretary-General’s report covering the
United Nations peace-keeping operations in Cyprus over the
past six months (S/10199 and Co17:l]. The report shows
that within that period the situation with regard to any
recurrence of fighting has been generally calm. Indeed in
this respect it has actually been calmer than any of the
preceding periods. Thus there have been only four shooting
incidents, of which three are at,tributed to Turkish Cypriot
armed elements and one to Government security forces-all
without casualties or any consequences. Furthermore, the
report notes that “emphasis continues to be given with
encouraging results to the prevention of incidents, as well as
to the maintenance of the status quo in sensitive areas”
[ibid., para. 321.

14. As appears from the report, the co-operation that had
emerged between the Greek and Turkish Cypriots on
economic matters continued and increased. Thus in the
economic field contacts have been maintained, especially in
the private sector and in a number of semi-autonomous and
non-governmental institutions. In the Government Pro&.
tivity Centre there has been growing Turkish Cypriot
participation and the same can be said of the Dekelia Trade
Training Centre organized under an agreement between the
Governments of Cyprus and Britain. Similarly, there is
greater interest and increasing participation of Turkish
Cypriots in agricultural projects undertaken by the Government with the assistance of FA0 and the World Food
Programme. In public services further progress towards
normalization was noted in respect of electricity for
Turkish Cypriot villages, new water schemes and teIephonc
and postal services.
15. However, in that respect the necessity for an in&
grated economic policy is all too apparent. Such a policy
would greatly benefit all concerned but more importantly
the Turkish Cypriots. It is therefore regrettable that the
Turkish Cypriot leadership still prevents progress in that
direction. To us that seems an anachronistic approach. At a
time when great nations that have had deep national
differences are striving to integrate their economies it seems
particularly odd and inexplicable that in Cyprus a small
Turkish community is still following the opposite course.
As the report points out,
“It . . , will be difficult to utilize fully and rationally
the human and other resources of the island if the present
trend towards separate economic development is rnaintained, especially when the preparation of the new
Five-Year Plan for 1972 to 1976 is in its final stages. It
has been suggested in this connexion that one way to
foster some form of intercommunal economic co-opera.
tion would be the establishment of closer links between
the Greek and Turkish Cypriot co-operative movements
and regular exchanges of views between Greek and
Turkish Cypriots within economic planning institutions.
[Ibid., pura. 41.1
16. The Cyprus Government for its part, as is stated in the
report,
“has reiterated its willingness to help raise the [Turkish
@priots?
living standards and to allocate funds for
investments in Turkish Cypriot-controlled areas, provided
it has [the necessary/ over-all supervision and financial
control over such projects” [ibid., para. 401.
It is further observed that:
“The military situation has continued to be relatively
calm . . . but UNFICYP’s efforts to bring about a rc.
laxation in the areas of direct confrontation have failed,
as in the past, to produce any positive results.” /Ibidn
para. 26.1
17. In this respect it may be recalled that proposaIs madr
by UNFICYP regarding deconfrontation were agreed to by
my Government but regrettably the Turkish Cypriot

L

leadership did not accept them;1 similarly, they rejected a
number of suggestions subsequently made to them by the
SpeciaI Representative of the Secretary-General which, as
the report says, if agreed to, could, at minimum risk to
them, help to generate an atmosphere of increased mutual
confidence and contribute significantly to the improvement
in the living conditions of their community.

“Throughout most of the period, uniformed Turkish
Cypriot ‘:ghters . . , continued to appearin the Turkish
Cypriot quarter of Limassol,marchingto and from their
training area” and in a numberof instances“appearingin
full uniform and parading with weapons.” [Ibid.
para. 29.J
Strong protests, therefore, from UNFICYP had become
necessaryto restorethe status quo.

18. In his present observations the Secretary-General
refers to the problem of de-escalation and deconfrontation
as one “of crucial importance for a return to normal
conditions” [ibid., para. 84]. It may be recalled that the
report of the Secretariat survey team of 1969 that went
over the whole situation of Cyprus in relation to UNFICYP
emphasized the importance of this problem of military
confrontation: unless solved or attenuated by the moving
of the forces farther apart, it would cause the presence of
the United Nations Force to continue to be necessary. I say
this to ernphasize the need for this deconfrontation which
really seems absolutely necessary in respect of the positions
held over three and a half years of calm. In his present
observations the Secretary-General refers to the problem of
de-escalation again and remarks:

22. The report refersalsoto the Government’sconcernat
the “apparent increasein Turkish Cypriot fighter presence
and activity throughout the island” and “at the intensive
overt training programmes
now beingcarried out in Turkish
Cypriot-controlled areas.”Particularly perturbing was the
“stepping up of the distribution of locally manufactured
arms and ammunition, sincefull freedom of movement”
was ensuredto all the Turkish Cypriots “by the Government early in 1968.“[Ibid,, para 27.1
23. Thus accentuatedmilitary preparations and intense
distribution of armsthroughout the island appearto have
been so far the Turkish Cypriot responseto the Government’s gesture of normalization by unilaterally lifting all
restrictionsand all checkpoints and searchesat the risk of
internal security.

“Although this has for a long time now been the subject
of persistent efforts by UNFICYP, . . . no substantial
progress has been made during the period under review.
An important factor in this impasse is the contention of
the Turkish Cypriot leadership that a return to normal
conditions in this field cannot take place without
impairing its position with regard to the basic issues of
the Cyprus problem which are under discussion in the
intercommunal talks”. /Xd./

24. We have alsodefinite information that the Turkish
Cypriots have been suppliedwith very heavy weapons,
apart from the light weaponsthat they havemanufactured
themselvescontinually, the source of which could be
understoodto be that of the Turkishcontingent in Cyprus.
I will not go into detail on this subjectat presentbut it is a
matter of concernasit indicatesa trend on this point.

19. This seems a strange explanation. Mere deconfrontation or lessening of the degree of proximity of the two
armed posts does not in the least alter the status quo and
could not affect the positions of the parties in the talks. On
the contrary by the resulting relaxation in the tension it
creates a better climate. As a matter of fact, the normal
thing is that you have normalization first to help promote a
solution. You cannot wait for the solution in order to bring
normalization. Indeed, the main resolution adopted by the
Security Council on 4 March 1964 (186 (1964)] seestwo
duties: the duties for normalization, and a different thing
for’ the soIution of the problem. Of course,it is understood
that you first normalize, conciliate and proceed to bring a
better climate before you can hope for the solution. So if
we prevent the normalization it is asif we werepreventing
the solution.

25. On the Governmenteffort at nonnalization so vitally
needed for promoting a peaceful solution, the report
remarkswith regretthat therehasbeenno improvementon
the long-standingproblem of freedomof movement. On
this freedomof movementthere havebeenrepeatedurgings
by the Secretary-General
in his previousreports, andin the
presentreport there is a call for reciprocalaction by the
Turkish Cypriot leadershipto the Government’s normalization measures
in lifting all restrictions,even at the
risk of internal security, which remainunheeded.As a
result, this abnormal situation continues in which all
Turkish Cypriots, without exception,enjoy full freedomof
movement in all parts and on all roadsof the island. In
contrast the Greek Cypriots, namely, 80 per cent of the
population, are forcibly preventednot only from entering
the Turkish enclavesbut alsofrom usingover a hundred
public roadsandevenmaincommunicationroads.

20. From the report we seethat the training activity of
the Turkish Cypriot armed elements has continued to
increasewhile that of the Government armed forces hasas
before remained at the samelevel.

26. In addition, Greek Cypriot farmers are still being
deniedaccessto their’ fields which lie in Turkish Cypriotcontrolled areas,while Turkish Cypriot farmersare allowed
21. Referring to what is called “periods of considerable by the Government to cultivate their lands even within
military display and acute sensitivity” [S/10199 and prohibited military areas.
C0tr.1,
para. 261 the report notesthat:
27. This unbalancedsituation is due to the fact that in its
policy of retaining peaceful conditions on the island-in
co-operationwith the United Nations Force-the Govern1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-fourth
ment has consistentlyrefrained from any forcible measures
Year, SuppZement for October, November and December 1969,
for the purpose of ensuringthe necessaryfreedom of
documentS/9521,para.77.
3

“With somegoodwill it shouldbe possibleto approach
the whole problem, which affects thousandsof Turkish
Cypriots, from a humanitarian rather than from a
political point of view.” (Ihid., para. 84.j

movement on all roads for all the inhabitants of Cyprus-notwithstanding its unquestionable power to do SO.
28. In the observationsof the report of December1970,
the Secretary-Generalnotes:

35. Security Council resolution 186 (1964) of 4 March
1964, which is the basic resolution, provides for a twopronged effort of the United Nations on the problem of
Cyprus, namely, first, that of peace-keepingand normati.
zation through the establishmentof the United Nations
Force in the island and, second, that of peace-making
through the appointmentof a Mediator.

“It is with regret that I have once againto voice my
disappointmentthat, notwithstanding the persistent efforts of my representativesin Cyprus, no significant
advance has been made towards a return to normal
conditions, especiallyto freedom of movementalong all
roadsfor unarmedcitizens.“[S/lOOOS, para. 116.]

36. The former task, which was entrusted to the United
Nations Force, is being performed in a most useful and
valuableway. The latter, that of mediation, wasperformed
by the Mediator who produced a report2 which was a
constructive, middle-courseplan for the solution of the
problem; it wasendorsedby the Secretary-General,and it
has generally been regarded as a positive basisfor a
solution.

29. At the last meeting of the Security Council on this
question a number of membersspoke of the need for
normalization and referred to thrke aspects: deconfrontation, freedomof movementfor all Cypriots, andreturn of
displacedpersonsto their villages.I have alreadydealt with
the first two. Regardingthe third, displacedpersons,there
has been a significant development through my Government’s putting forward a concrete formula for the repair
and reconstruction of damagedTurkish housesand other
buildingsin twenty-one villages.

37. We are at presentfollowing another procedureon the
samebasis,the procedure of local talks which come asa
sequel to and within the framework of the SecretaryGeneral’s good offices; it falls within the United Nations
peace-keepingeffort under the aforementionedresolution.
The talks have in many ways been useful and constructive
and have helpedto improve the situation significantly. The
exchange of viewsis a channelof communicationtowards
mutual understandingfor a common purpose-that of
achieving a peaceful,just and democratic solution to the
problem. The continuanceof the talks hasreceivedgeneral
support. The interlocutors, Mr, Cletidesand Mr. Denktash,
in a number of public. statements,have made it clear that
although they still disagreeon fundamentalissuesthey will
continue the talks asthe best,andperhapsthe only way to
find a peaceful andagreedsolution.

30. This servesto demonstrateonce againthe good faith
of the Government towards normalization and its sincere
wish to facilitate the return of Turkish Cypriot displaced
personsto their villages,
31. As is stated in the current report of the SecretaryGeneral,this formula which wasput forward in the form of
a letter dated 13 February 1971 from Mr. Cletides to
Mr. Denktash,provides for the repair or reconstruction of
Turkish Cypriot housesin thirteen villagesby 31 August
1971, and the samewould apply asa secondstagefor eight
more villagesby the end of 1971, provided that the Turkish
Cypriot inhabitants of the first thirteen villagesin fact do
return.
32. It will no doubt be appreciated that this stipulation
regardingthe two stagesis indeednecessarysincerepaired
buildings,if left unoccupied,deteriorate both from natural
causesand from furtive removal of building materials,and
thus require additional financial expenditure to makethem
habitable. This is what in reality did happenin severalcases
during the past four years when Turkish houseswere
repaired by the Government at considerableexpenseand
the Turkish leadersdid not allow the inhabitants of those
houses to return, as in the villages of Skylloura, Ayios
Vasilios, Lapithos and others. The Turkish villagerswho
returned did soonly in very smallnumbers.
33. In approachingthis questionin a positive and realistic
manner the Government proposalprovides an opportunity
to the Turkish Cypriots to respondin the spirit in which
this proposal wasmade, and it shouldbe recalledthat the
urgency of this matter wasstressedby the Turkish Cypriot
leaders.
34. However, three monthshave already elapsedwithout a
positive response;yet it is to be hopedthat sucha response
may soon be forthcoming. As the Secretary-Generalput it
in his previousreport:
4

38. These talks initiated in 1968 on the agreedbasisof an
independent unitary State and with a view to overcoming
unworkable provisionsin the Constitution have, however,
run into difficulties and have been practically stalledfor
nearly thirty months on the questionof local government.
The difficulties atdsein respectof the degreeand extent of
the division involved in the Turkish Cypriot proposals.Ia,
this connexion it shouldbe recalledthat local government
is an entirely new element as it did not exist in the
Constitution in respect of which the talks are being
conducted. Upon universally accepted norms, “local
Government”, both in its meaningand its application,is
intended to refer to specificgeographicalareas.It is never
based on ethnic criteria, nor could it be conceived as
,extending from the bottom to the top of the administrative
structure, for it would then ceaseto be local andwouldin
reality create a Statewithin a State.
39. The obvious result of such unworkable provisions
would be the collapseof the State itself,, bringing abouta
confused situation fraught with the gravest dangersand
threats to international peaceand, what is still worse,with
2 Ibid., Twentieth
Year, Supplement
March 1965, document
S/6253.

for

January,

February

arrd

the disaster of partition looming on the horizon. AS I have
already said on another occasion, partition is the saddest lot
and the worst calamity that can befall any country and its
people. This has been amply demonstrated in repeated cases
over the years. A glance around the world today shows that
war is waged continually and human suffering never ends in
those countries that have had the unfortunate fate of being
partitioned.

activities towards a return to normal conditions, inter
communal talks; and finally, in the concluding part, we
have the observations. The Secretary-General begins the
pertinent part of the report with the observation that:
“It is with concern that I am compelled to report to the
Security Council that in the period under review there has
been little perceptible improvement in the situation in
Cyprus and no indication of progress towards a negotiated solution of the underlying problems of the island,”
[S/10199 and Corr.1, para. 78.1

40. All the people of Cyprus, Greek and Turkish alike,
should be deeply concerned with saving their country and
themselves from a misfortune of such magnitude.

47. Indeed, it is this aspect of the problem that requires
full attention. On several occasions my Government expressed its concurrent views with this assessment by the
Secretary-General that there has been very little improvement indeed in the situation in Cyprus and no substantial
progress towards a peaceful and agreed solution.

41. In the current talks on the Constitution of Cyprus, my
Government has made all possible concessions in an effort
to reach accommodation by repeated and increasingly
accommodating proposals. There is, however, a certain limit
beyond which separatism cannot be pushed without imperilling the independence of the State and its very
existence, And it is on this very issue that the talks have
hinged, as is well-known
to all who follow closely the
developments in Cyprus. The need for a more positive
approach to the problem has become all too obvious,
particularly since the very constructive and accommodating
package-proposals made by the Government on 30 November 1970. It is therefore to be hoped that the Turkish
Cypriot side will, in a positive spirit of co-operation, join in
an effort to overcome the difficulties that have arisen on
this issue so that in that spirit the talks may proceed on a
fruitful course towards the achievement of a peaceful and
lasting solution on the agreed basis of an independent
unitary State within the principles of the Charter. In doing
SO, we would be following the course called for by the
Secretary-General in his observations in paragraph 83 of the
report for a peaceful solution based on the independence
and sovereignty of a unitary State of Cyprus.

48. If in the last three years the intercommunal talks have
not made substantial progress, if they have not penetrated
the heart of the problem, it is because mistrust between the
two communities has prevailed-mistrust
has even been
fostered. This aspect of the problem has constantly been
emphasized in the reports of the Secretary-General, including the present one. Consequently, efforts with respect
to normalization, as well as efforts to return to constitutional order, have suffered from this lack of trust. Let us
take normalization first.
49. First, the report indicates no notable progress in the
economic field which concerns the livelihood of the
Turkish community. It is almost exclusively the Greek
Cypriots that benefit from international programmes of aid
and technical assistance, as well as all the revenues of the
Republic, although the Turkish community pays some
duties and taxes. It was only after insistent urgings that
some of the programmes were partially extended to the
Turkish Cypriots.

42. The PRESIDENT (inteerpretation from French): I now
call upon the representative of Turkey.
43. Mr. BAYULKEN (Turkey): First of all, Mr. President,
I should like to join the previous speakers in extending our
congratulations to you on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council. All our good wishes are with
you.

50. Secondly, even public services such as water supply,
telephone, electricity and postal services are not effectively
available to the Turks. There have been six months of
planning and talks regarding the supply of electricity to the
Turkish villages, but if ever these talks are concluded and
the plans implemented, still less than 20 per cent of the
Turkish Cypriot villages will be covered. I take this
information from the report.

44. 1 should also like to express my thanks to Ambassador
Rossides for his very kind words with regard to the
earthquake disaster that struck Turkey a few days ago. I
appreciate his expression of kind sentiments,

51. Thirdly, the Turkish Cypriots have been eliminated
from the social insurance plan. Continued requests have not
produced any feasible results from 1964 onward.

45. Mr. President, I thank you and the members of this
COUIIC~~ for allowing me to present the views of my
Government on the item before the Council today. The
Council is convened to consider the renewal of the mandate
of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus. Once
again the Secretary-General’s comprehensive report provides the customary terms of reference for our deliberations
this morning.

52. Fourthly, the 20,000 displaced Turkish Cypriots, in
the eighth year of their displacement, are kept away from
their homes, Discussions which produced elaborate plans on
the part of the Greek Cypriot community have not?
unfortunately, been directed solely to humanitarian ends.
On the contrary, these plans have sought to bring the
displaced persons unconstitutionally under the political and
juridical authority of the Greek Cypriot administration.
They constitute one fifth of the population of the Turkish
community, namely, 20,000 people.

46. AS usual, the report includes almost all the practical
aspects of the issue: the operation of IJNFICYP, activities
towards preventing a recurrence of fighting and contributing to the restoration and maintenance oflaw and order,
5

/
‘!
i ,I
!I

ii
11

Executive Council for Labour, Co-operatives and Rehab&tation of the Turkish Community, and three Turkish
representatives accompanying him, were manhandled and
assaulted by armed Greek Cypriot policemen near Famagusta. 011 a road in this locality, their car was stopped and
these proIninent Turkish Cypriot leaders were manhandled
and assaulted on the spot by armed Greek Cypriot
policemen without any cause or provocation. Then they
were fiegally arrested and taken to the Greek Cypriot
Police Headquarters in Famagusta where they were interrogated and later released.

53. l+dlY, movement in the island has not become
completely free. True, given the political motivation of the
Greek Cypriot leadership I have already described, one
cannot be surprised that freedom of movement has not
been established.
54. On this issue I should like to clarify two points. As
stated by Mr. KQ5ik, Vice-President of the Republic of
Cyprus, in a letter dated 17 May 19’71 [see S/102001,
Greek Cypriot
civilians who have a legitimate business can
enter the Turkish controlled areas. Furthermore, it iS not
correct to say that the Turks enjoy full freedom of
movement in all parts and on all roads of the island, for the
Turkish Cypriots are denied access to some areas which are
unconstitutionally declared sensitive or restricted areas by
the Greek Cypriot administration. In fact, these restricted
areas are much larger in extent than the areas under the
control of the Turkish Cypriots.

62. That is the treatInent that the prominent members of
the Turkish Community are receiving when returning from
a very innocent visit to soIne areas in Cyprus. 111fact the
area from which they were coining back was just a mixed
village in Cyprus, Nergisi. It was not even a visit to aIt
entirely Turkish Cypriot village.
63. Incidents of this grave nature are bound to have
negativeeffects on the processof confidence-building, and,
moreover,they resultin a further aggravationof the tension
in the island which, if not checked, may develop an
explosivecharacter.

5.5. On the question of normalization, it is the Turkish
community that is subject to all the deprivation, and what
could be more natural than its desire to achieve normalcy?
I believe that the Greek Cypriot leadership stretches its
credibility when it seeks to impute inhibitions to the
Turkish Cypriots on this issue. So much for ncnmalization.

64. In Mr. Kiic;i.ik’sletter of 17 May, the Council was also
informed about some actions concerning the implementation of this ultimate political objective suchasaffiliating
Greek Cypriot federations, trade unions, tclecommunication services,banking institutions, student and
youth organizationswith similar organizations in Greece;
Greek Cypriot National Guardstaking an oath of allegiance
to the Kingdom of Greeceand playing the Greek national
anthem at all official ceremoniesas if it was the national
anthemof the Republicof Cyprus, and so on.

56. It is not only mistrust but diversion in the objectives
of the communities in the talks that has prevented real and
final progress.
57. Members of the Council will recall that the basic issue
in the island rests on the adjustment of the sovereign entity
of the two communities in the governing of the island in
such a manner that neither community is constitutionally
soluble. Indeed, as also very pertinently underlined in the
report of the Secretary-General, the re-declaration of an
ultimate political objective other than the continuation of
the independence has gravely endangered not only the
process of confidence building, but also all the efforts for a
peaceful soIution of the problem,

65. The attention of the Council wasdrawn to the scope
of the action in pursuance of this ultimate political
objective. This policy was reiterated in unequivocal terms
when at a meetingit wasdisclosedthat on 9 March 1971
Archbishop Makarios had said he would never ceaseto
work for enosisand that he would never signan agrecInent
which excludedenosis.

58. In March, statelnents demanding enosis-the annexation of the island-emanated with a new momentum from
leading Greek Cypriots. This stream of statements reached
its peak on 14 March 1971, when the most responsible of
them all, Archbishop Makarios, emphatically declared:

66. Such statementsby the most authoritative Greek
Cypriot quarters are not an expressionof “the natural
ethnic sentimentsof the large majority of the [Greek]
Cypriot people for union with Greece”, as Mr. Rnssides
claimedin his letter of 6 May 1971 [,S/IOl87/. Rather, as
the Secretary-Generalindicates in his report, they constitute an irrefutable revelation of an ultimate political
objective and the disclosureof the official policy of the
Greek Cypriot Community.

“CYPJU is Greek. Cyprus was Creek since the dawn of
its history and will remain Greek. Greek and undivided
we have taken it over. Greek and undivided we shall
preserve it. Greek and undivided we &all deliver it to
Greece.”
59. In addition, this pro-enosis campajgll was supplemented with a series of acts of harassment against the
Turkish Cypriot community. I have sent many communications in this respect to the SecretaIl/-General,

67. This openly expressedpolicy of erzasis, and the
consequentenosis-mindedapproach to problems, are the
main reasons-I repeat, the main reasons-why the inter.
communaltalks have been unproductive until now. This
irreconcilableGreek Cypriot state of mentality pursuesan
ultimate political objective rather than the continuation of
the independenceof Cyprus as a final and permanent
solution. Continuation of independence was the basic
accord which madethe initiation of intercommunal talks
possible.Any attitude contrary to this basic accord, thus

60. This morning I have presented yet another commu.
nicaticm to the Secretary-General concerning a very recent
example of such acts. Regrettably, I shall have to relate it.
61. On the night of 23 May 197 I, only two days ago,
Mr. Ismet Kotak, a MeInber of Parliament, a member of the
6

denying the Turkish Community’s vested constitutional and
legitimate rights and interests is bound to stall the
intercommunal talks, and for very obvious reasons.

73. Before concluding,allow meto expressonceagainmy
Government’sappreciationto our distinguishedSecretaryGeneral, U Thant, and his assistantsboth here and in
Cyprus-Mr. Osorio-Tafall, his Special Representative,
Major-General D. Prem Chand, the Commanderof the
Force, Mr. Ralph Bunche, Under-Secretary-Generalfor
SpecialPolitical Affairs, Mr. Guyer, his political assistantaswell asto all membersof UNFICYP for their dedication
and constructive work. Our appreciation also goes to
contributing countries and the membersof the Security
Council which makeit possiblefor UNFICYP to continue
its important task.

68. The Turkish Cypriot Community has followed a
constructive and patient line in the talks, but its demands
for the reiteration and restoration of its legitimate and
constitutional rights and interests, as well as its demands for
effective guarantees against a future attempt to change the
international status of the island, have constantly been
labelled as “divisionist”
or “intransigent”
by the Greek
Cypriot Community
in order to conceal an ultimate
political objective: namely, the abrogation of the independence and the recolonization of the Turkish Community. It
is an historical fact that partition for the Turkish Community has (always been a self-defensive measure against
recolonization vis-8-vis demands and activities for enosis.
Take en~sis away and respect the Turkish Community’s
partnership and rights, and you will not hear of partition,

74. May I alsobe permittedto expressour appreciationto
Mr. Rolz-Bennett for all his past efforts in this matter and
to wishhim all the bestfor the future?
75. I think that my statementtakes care of almostall the
points that were raisedthis morning in the statementof
AmbassadorRossides,but let me just offer one or two
clarifications. I do not intend to say anything that may
make this debateeither an acrimoniousone or a very long
one. I shouldmerely like to offer one or two clarifications
which I believeareneeded.

69. Cyprus became an independent State as an outcome of
international
agreements reached among Turkey, the
United Kingdom and Greece, as well as between the two
communities.
This independence rests on two communal
pillars and on equal footing with the Greek Cypriot
Community.
The Turkish Cypriot Community has inalienable and undeniable rights and interests in the independence, the territorial integrity and the sovereignty of the
island.

76. First of all, with regardto normalization I stated the
basicandimportant point. Ambassador
Rossides
referredto
Security Council resolution 186 (1964) of 4 March 1964
and rightly saidthat a return to normal conditions was
prescribedin the resolution.That is true, but of courseit
shouldbe borne in mind that the referenceto a return to
normalconditionsis precededin the 4 Marchresolutionby
another statenlent of fact and obligation that relatesto
“the maintenanceandrestorationof law andorder”. When
law and orderis restored,whenthe constitutionalrights are
respected,there is no difficulty in restoringnormal conditions in Cyprus.

70. Once this fact was realized, I believe, Cyprus would
not 0x11~be an island where the two communities happily
and peacefully lived within the framework of an agreed
constitution,
but would also constitute a strong link rather
tllan a subject of dispute between Turkey and Greece,
which have close historical, ethnic and contractual ties with
this island and its peoples.

77. Another point wasthat the Greek Cypriot leadership
had information that someheavyarmamentsweresupplied
to the Turkish Cypriot community. I am really puzzled as
to the sourceof this informationbecauselessthan a week
agomy GovernmentapproachedUNFICYP about the new
and additional importation of Cobra anti-tank guns to
Cyprus and askedfor an inquiry about it. The Turkish
community expressedits concern about this increasein
armaments.To saythat the Turkishcommunity is receiving
heavy equipmentfront the Turkishcontingenton the island
is, I believe, either entire misconstructionor misinformation, becauseI am surethat AmbassadorRossides
knows
perfectly well what sort of equipmentis permitted to the
contingentsof Greeceand Turkey on the island.Thereis a
specific list, and this list is known by UNFICYP, by the
United Nationsand alsoby Mr. Rossidesand by the Greek
Cypriot leadership.Therefore,to speakof heavyequipment
is to usea very strangeterm. I do not want to drawmyself
into a useless’and
acrimoniousdebate in this connexion,
but I shouldlike just to point to the fact that sincethe
treatieswere enteredinto the attitude and the behaviourof
the Turkish contingenthasbeenimpeccable,andits record
is spotlesswhen onerecallsthe very tragic eventsof 1963,
1964, and soforth, andthe attitude of this contingent.SO I
think that that is avery wrongandunjust imputation, and I
reject it.

71. Nevertheless,
the Turkish Cypriot Community has
already stated its determination to continue to the end the
search for all possibilities of reaching a peaceful solution,
ad I am sure that the members of the Security Council
Ilave noted with satisfaction the recent assurances given in
his letter to the Secretary-General by Mr. Fazil Ktictik,
Vice-President
of the Republic of Cyprus, that the Turkish
Community
would continue to work For permanent independence
based on a compromised peaceful solution,
irrespective
of whether the Greek side chooses to misrepresent the policy of defending the Turkish Community’s
vested rights and interests as “divisive” or as an attempt to
create a “State within a State” in order to justify the
uncompromising Greek Cypriot attitude and aims.
72.

My Government has alsorepeatedly expressedits wish

to see an early and peaceful solution to the Cyprus
problem. I take pleasure in stating once again that the
Turkish Government has always been ready to work
‘onstructively
for a just and equitable solution to this
crroblem, effectively safeguarding the independence of
Cyprus as well as the respective rights and interestsof the
:wo communities within the framework of the balance
:stablished, recognized and respectedat the inception of
Ale State.
7

78. Concerning the refugees, I think my main statement
took care of the main reasons. But I should nevertheless
l&e to quote from the report of the Secretary-General, to
show
that the programme, prepared by the Greek Cypriot
community, is not SO much to help the Turkish refugees
who would be prepared to go to their homes.
In paragraph
52 the repo?t states:

this meeting devoted to further consideration of the
question of Cyprus. I should like to congratulate you and
extend to you our best wishes. May I also express to
Ambassador Bayiilken the deep sympathy of my delegation
for the victims of the recent earthquakes in his country?
We share the emotions which our colleagues of the Turkish
delegation feel at hearing this sad news.

‘&In its programme, the Government reiterates that
returning Turkish Cypriots will come under Government
administrative control and policing as well as being
subject to the jurisdiction of its courts. It also reserves the
right to restrict temporarily the return to mixed villages
of certain individuals whose presence in its view might
cause difficulties to peaceful village coexistence. The
Government has firther renewed its offer of some
provisional resettlement aid, but feels that it cannot
consider compensation and damage claims of Turkish
Cypriots without at the same time considering Greek
Cypriot claims.”

84. The Secretagf-General’s report dated 20 May 1971 ’
and Corr.I] informs us about developments in :
Cyprus during the last six months, and I, thank you, :
Mr. President, and the members of the Council for allowing ‘
me to make a few observations on behalf of my Govern.
ment. I should like to start by saying that we agree to the i
recommendation of U Thant concerning the extension of
the mandate of UNFICYP for a further period of six
months, because it is due to his desire to contribute to the
maintenance of calm on the island of Cyprus and will thus
provide valuable assistance to those in Nicosia who arc
negotiating for the solution of the problem. This desire of
the Secretary-General’s is fully, consonant with the policy
guiding the Government of Greece.

[S/l0199

We have information that some time ago 500 Greek
Cypriots were already compensated for damages sustained
in the events.

85. The records of the Security Council testify to the ,
consistency of our attitude. They further reveal that we :
insisted at an earIy date on the fact that time was of the
essence because, as I stated here as early as 11 December
1969 [152lst meetingJ, lack of movement in the Nicosia
conversations threatened to lead to a hardening of opposing
positions and to make success more difficult.

79. These are conditions which mean that the Turkish
Cypriot community would surrender its defence of the
rights and interests it acquired under the treaties, and
should forget all its struggles to maintain its rights. If it is
so, then I believe there would have been no use meeting
here today just for the extension of the mandate of
UNFICYP.

86. The Secretary-General, in his observations, in large
part attributes the slow pace of these conversations to a
lack of confidence on both sides in Cyprus. The Secruity
Council was aware of this important factor when it
requested both parties of the population to work for a
return to normalcy and instructed UNFICYP to contribute
to this goal. The obvious hope of the Council was that a
return to a normal situation would lead to an easing of
tension, which, in turn, would engender a climate of
confidence likely to foster the political settlement of the
problem. Each of the parties can examine its conscience
and see to what extent it has heeded the appeal of the
Council. The moment is not propitious for drawing ul; a
balance sheet now.

80, I think Ambassador Rossides touched upon the
Turkish Cypriot freedom-fighters. In the report in regard to
the military preparedness of the two sides, there are some
remarks, and %e made some allusions to them. What I can
say is that it is a perfectly well-known fact that these
fighters comprise an organization that is designed solely for
defence, in nature and in purpose, an organization that has
no offensive-destructive weapons such as tanks, cannons or
armored carriers.
81. AS regards the intercommunal talks and the allusions
‘to creating a State within a State, and so forth, I shall not
repeat what we have been saying all along during the
meetings of the Security Council, I believe that my main
statement made it quite clear why these talks are stalled
and what is the main reason for the lack of progress. But as
I said-and I repeat-we should like to express the hope that
in spite of everything. the representatives of the two
communities, whose outstanding qualifications are well
known, will work hard in order to reach a basic agreement
on the framework of the constitution which will take care
of the interests and legitimate rights of both communities
and will pave the way later on for an over-all agreement on
the question of Cyprus.

87. I will limit myself to reminding the Council of
measures gradually taken by the Government of Cyprus to
ensure a return to normalcy. Those measures culminated on
7 March 1968 in the removal of all restrictions to the
movement of persons and goods.
88, I would also note the more recent but equally
constructive role of the Government in the field of
economic co-operation, investment, the labour force, the
normalization of public services, and its proposals in favour
of displaced persons, which are mentioned in paragraphs 38
to 55 of the Secretary-General’s report.

82. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I now
call on the representative of Greece.

89. Furthermore, the contribution of the Cyprus Govern
ment to the development of the Nicosia conversations has
been positive. It is not up to me to deal with the details,
and I would merely recall the contents of paragraph 61 of
the report.

83. Mr. BITSIOS (Greece) (interpretation from FreuchJ:
Mr. President, my delegation is very happy to see you
presiding over the deliberations of the Council, especially at
8

90. These are concrete facts, which are infinitely more
weighty than words. Words fly away, and only acts reveal
intentions and enable an observer to obtain an objective
view of the situation and the way in which it develops.

present. Some major unforeseen difficulties arose to which
I had to attend, causing me to be a little late in arriving. I
would express my admiration to those members who
arrived most punctually and would ask them, as well as the
Secretary-General, to accept my apologies.

91. We also agree with the statement of the SecretaryGeneral that intercommunal talks “are unquestionably not
only the best but in the present circumstances probably the
only way to an agreed settlement.” [S/10199 and Corr. I,
para. 81.1

98. The silver anniversary ceremonies a few months ago,
marking the end of the adolescence and the beginning of
the maturity of the United Nations; the dawn of a new
decade, my unshakeable faith in this Organization in
general and my deep veneration for the Security Council in
particular, and my ardent passion for interracial brotherhood on the scale of our human race are the reasons for
which I must discharge a prior duty, that of inaugurating
this meeting with an introductory statement which, it
seems to me, in my capacity as President, is not only
appropriate but imperative.

92. On 3 April 1971 the Under-Secretary of State for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Palamas, speaking in the name of the
Greek Government, stated:
“Greece is interested in a peaceful and equitable
solution. On our part we avoid public statements and
replies. We do everything that is in our power to facilitate
progress and the success of intercommunal talks. We
believe that these talks will continue not only because
they constitute a reasonable procedure accepted by all
parties concerned, but also because we do not see who
would
assume the heavy responsibility of interrupting
them ,”

99. I would fez1 grave remorse if I resisted the imperatives
of my conscience which resolutely call upon me to insist
again on the fundamental aspects of the Security Council’s
mission. After the commemorative session as before it, I
had the honour and pressing obligation to stress the colossal
but exalting task of the Security Council which is to work
for the benefit of mankind.

93.
were

All previous statements from the Greek Government
conceived in the same spirit. They testify to our wish
to
see both parties in Cyprus conciliate their differences,
establish
a State machinery capable of functioning adequately,
and thus to find a way to live together in an
independent,
sovereign and unified State, as advocated in
the report of the Secretary-General.

100. The United Nations has just emerged from its years
of adolescence. Happily, it has survived the crisis inherent
in adolescent behaviour. Would it be wise to claim that the
deluge has passed and rest on our laurels? I agree with the
statement of Victor Hugo that “adolescence is the most
delicate of all transitions, but also the beginning of
womanhood and the end of girlhood.” A quarter of a
century has granted the world community a respite to alter
and correct its course. It has teen helped by extenuating
circumstances.

94.
That is the wish X express at the end of my statement
because, as far as we are concerned, we believe, with the
philosopher
Hera&us,
that “opposites work together and
that it is from diversity that the most beautiful harmonies
PZSUlt.”

101. In its youth, our Qrganization faced acute crises and
open conflicts; it was shaken by international tensions and
wracked by local or regional conflicts.

95.
The constant interest shown by our eminent Secretary-General
in the question of Cyprus has earned him our
fullest
gratitude. We shall never cease to support his efforts.
Wc should also like to thank his assistants, Mr. Ralph
Bunche
and Mr. Roberto Guyer. This leads me to think of
and express our best wishes to Mr, Jose Rolz-Bennett, who
spared
110 efforts over many long years to contribute to the
pacification
of Cyprus and ensure the well-being of its
inllabitants.
To his successor, Mr. Guyer, we wish full
=lccess
in his new task. We are convinced that he will put
his great talents and experience to the service of peace.

102. What will be its fate now that it embarks upon its
phase of crystallization and full maturity? Must it CORstantly founder, or is it resolved to reassert its mission? Is
it enough to engage in endless recriminations against the
Security Council to cure‘it of its ills? Is it enough for the
doctor to diagnose the illness without curing the patient, or
without prescribing an antidote?
103. The viability and the effectiveness of the Security
Council in the field of peace will be fully assured only if the
causes that previously weakened it are eradicated.

96.
On the spot, in Cyprus, the Special Representative of
the
Secretary-General
Mr. Osorio-Tafall, and the Commander
of the Force, General Prem Chand, continue their
constructive
efforts with infinite patience and unlimited
goodwill.
We are most grateful to them.

104. When I had the privilege of presiding over the first
meeting last year, seventeen months ago, my irresistible
propensity for appealing as powerfully as possible for the
strengthening of the effectiveness of this body led me, in a
statement similar to this one, firmly to ask the Council to
recover its rights and powers and make full use of them.

97.
THE PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Fkench): As
no other
representative wishes to speak before the vote, I
should
like to make a statement. First of all I regard the
members
of the Security Council as an organic entity. From
that
point
of view the traditional quorum in other
assemblies
cannot apply in this organ, whose scope is
unique.
That is why I was led to delay for a few moments
tile opening of this meeting so as to allow all members to be

105. Let me quote from a speech that I made then:
“At Its age our Organization is faced by many temptations-the temptation to sink in routine activities to
9

of China, whose triumphal entry into this Organisation
should be speeded up, must revive the significance of the
rights and powers attributed to and reserved for the
permanent members by the Charter. The considerable
prerogatives they enjoy entitle them to protect this great
body against the insolent contempt some Governments
show for the Security Council.

make insufficient efforts, to persist in its refusal to
recover . , . the sublime ideal of universal peace which the
Council has the weighty task of guarding throughout our
planet makes it imperative for all the members to . . .
adopt a more dynamic attitude which would enable the
Council to face its tremendous responsibilities.
‘6. I .

112. Invested with unlimited powers, when in harmony
they could act as dependable and supreme guarantors of
peace and the authority of the United Nations.

“The objectives of the United Nations make it incumbent upon all members of the Security Council, mainly
the great Powers which have primary responsibility, to
take a stand against the de facto measures taken by
Governments that have revolted against the United
Nations , . .” [1527th meeting, ~QYQS. 13 and 16.1

113. Security and peace are not within the exclusive
purview or sole competence of the five Powers because
according to Article 2 of the Charter it is the collective
efforts of ‘all Member States that are responsible for the fate
of the world. The role of each State, no matter what its
resources, is important as that of a member of one single
human family.

106. Richelieu was right when, in his Maximes d ‘Et& he
wrote that in political matters everyone conceives of public
affairs according to his own mind.
307. On the basis of that maxim, a retrospective glance
upon the achievements of the past twenty-five years reveals
a tremendous gap between dream and reality. But the same
glance shows tangible results achieved by the United
Nations in general and especially its main body, the
Security Council.

114. The stationary nature of politics makes it mandatory
to find a genius capable of adapting it to the universe asit
evolves. “TO reach truth,” Descartes said, “we must once in
our lifetime abandon all preconceived opinions and reconstruct from the beginning all the systems of our knowledge.” Without being an unconditional advocate of it, one
must admit that this Cartesian thesis comprises a good deal
of truth and is applicable to the political machinery that
guides the conduct of international affairs.

108. Therefore a sense of justice prevents us from downgrading the merits of the United Nations or, 0 fortiori, from
condemning it as a whole. On the contrary, it was able to
dominate the various events that threatened its very
existence.

115. The gap, characteristic of our time, between political
activity and the level of other human progress, is extremely
striking. While science and technology are striving to
overtake each other in speed and compete for primacy,
politics seems to be lagging behind. The rules for directing
international affairs are still modelled on ancient patterns.
The tremendous speed of human progress in all other fields
makes it ever more obvious that political activity mostly
remains wedded to forms and traditions which sometimes
go back twenty-five centuries. Some examples will illustrate
that political reality.

109. As a happy witness of the success achieved mainly in
the past decade, during which this international Organization has been led by a man as devoted as U Thant, to whom
I wish to pay a highly deserved tribute for his intellectual
talents and the superiority of the human qualities he has
devoted to the quest for peace while confronting opposing
ideologies and navigating in the midst of contradictory
events, this Council was not always able to overcome all the
tribulations in its path and reach the ultimate ideals which
the objectives and noble and imperative principles of the
Charter entrust to him,

116. Thus, in the face of the magnificent triumphs of
science and technology we see a disconcerting contrast
between the .luminous progress of creative thought from
Pythagoras to Galileo, from Lavoisier to Einstein, and the
slow motion of political thought.

110. It is the giants who, in the last analysis bear the full
brunt of the destiny of mankind and the primacy of peace.
My apologia for the preponderant part of the great Powers
in the safeguarding of peace is not made in order to
catalogue them, nor to view them as titans who would
overshadow all the other States. It is a conclusion realistically dictated by the undeniable hegemony of the five
giants: the United States, the Union of Soviet Socialist
RepubIics, France, the People’s Republic of China and the
United Kingdom. They exercise their supremacy by dint of
the nuclear weapons at their disposal as also their over.
whelming might in all political, economic and military
fields.

117. In many respects the speeches mentioned by Thucy
dides in the fifth century before our era fully apply to our
own international problems although the intellectual, sociological and technical environment is completely different.
It is surprising to note that policies applied in the
international area are still hamstrung by methods followed
by, men whose memory has been blurred by history:
Pericles, Disraeli, Caesar, Napoleon and Mazarin, all giants
in their day but meaning nothing in our own, all authors of
political maxims which were a stroke of genius then but are
quite insignificant now.

111. There is no doubt that they are best able to ensure
the salvation of mankind if they are determined to make of
this Council a powerful instrument for peace. To reach that
indispensable objective the four giants of the Security
Council, together with another giant, the People’s Republic

118. The procedures and principles used in the treaties of
Westphalia and Vienna are still fashionable. The same wars
are born around the same borders under the same grandiose
but wasteful historical processes. In this era of the atomic
10

bomb our frozen international law continues t0 lead to
armed conflicts which are the normal activity of States,
whilst the criterion of sovereignty is construed as the right
to unleash hostilities. In acute contrast to the constantly
increasing speed of transport communications and, unfortunately, miss&, the problems of sovereignty and borders
relnain subject to notions that were current in the days of
slow caravan, and plodding cavalcades.

objectives of the United Nations. Thus, interpenetration of
interests and interrelation of causes threaten to transform
this virtual abdication into a final capitulation of the five
great Powers.
124. In the final analysis, if we wish to avoid that, it
would seem beneficial to envisage the creation of an
apolitical brain-trust which would not come above the
Security Council and substitute itself for any body of the
United Nations but, rather, serve as a kind of intellectual
general staff which would strive to remedy the immobility
of present international customs which are still dominated
by old-fashioned systems in complete contrast with the
development of today’s world. This new “think tank” in
the United Nations would be a crucible for international
relations; it would lead our Organization to move at the
same pace as all other human activities, it would free it
from the shackles of obsolete traditions. It would avoid any
duplication with the Secretariat. This brain-trust would be
composed of outstanding specialists in international politics, devoid of any partisan allegiance or ideological bias
and would be free from any external or internal influence,
devoted to the ideals of the Charter and recruited from
various institutions, particularly the universities, among
international civil servants and on the five continents.

119, In international forums, political behaviour remains a
prey of collective impulses. De,pendable technology and
rational organiz.ation are applied everywhere except in the
political field, which remains open to sentimental improvisation or to violence, And the regrettable consequence is
that the life of international organizations is characterized
by harmful periodic fluctuations which are sometimes akin
to the way in which nature spontaneously restores the
balance in animal societies, including human society.
120. How is it possible in the nuclear era for antagonists
still to be incapable of imagining any solution other than
war to their traditional competition? Just as in the Middle
Ages every Government considers itself justified in stating
that its armaments are there to preserve peace. And each
one considers that its weapons are defensive and those of
the other side offensive, and that its war would be a “just

125. This initiative, if approved by the United Nations,
would be a powerful step towards the ultimate ideal in the
direction of the destinies of our world where the problems
of peace among nations and harmony among races confront
each other, where the needs and interests are pitted against
one another, as are the ambitions of States and of human
collectivities.

WllY.

121. One can therefore not beg the question whether our
civilization, in the final analysis, is not condemned to die of
this frightening sophistry, which is sincere in addition. In
any case, we must remember that all civilizations prior to
ours died by war.
122. Thus, Bergson seems to have been right when he
stated that “the future of mankind remains unknown
because it depends upon mankind,” This strange paradox,
this
sophism justifies the sarcastic remark of Jean Jaurhs
who said:

126. While expressing my thanks for the patience with
which the members of the Council listened to me, I am
compelled to propose a solution, since the time remaining is
most brief. I have many speakers listed to speak after the
vote. Therefore, I should like, in order to limit our work for
this afternoon, to invite the members of the Council to pass
on to the vote so that at the next meeting statements may
be made relating to the draft resolution which will have
been voted upon at that time.

“It seems, the Heads of State themselves proclaim it
that all the peoples want peace and that human progress
points in that direction. But this peace, which everybody
wants, can only be guaranteed by universal arming to the
teeth! Let al1 peoples be covered with heavy armour and
bristle with bayonets at a cost of billions. Let all budgets
be taken over by military expenditures. This is a
condition for peace! Human reason has gone so far that
it cannot maintain a peace which everybody desires
without arming everyone with the gun and the sword.”

127. I hear no objections to this proposal, and I shall
therefore put to the vote the draft resolution contained in
document S/10209.
A vote wns taken by show of hands.
In favour: Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France,
Italy, Japan, Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia,
Syria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America.

123. One is often tempted to judge the actions of great
Powers without mercy, without patiently examining the
reasons which inspire their national and international
policy, without understanding the ultimate reasons for their
position. I must admit that supremacy, if it is used on
behalf of peace, overbearing as it may superficially seem, is
reaSSUring
if it is possible to understand its scope. If the five
gigantic Powers (the four in this Council and China which is
about to join them) in a framework of peace and security,
adopt attitudes almost leading to the &facto abdication of
their omnipotence, it is because they find it difficult to
conciliate their obligations on the national level towards
their citizens and the fundamental obligation towards the

The draft resolution was adopted unanimously.3
128. The PRESIDENT (interpretation jkom French): Pursuant to unofficial consultations during the meeting, a
second meeting has been scheduled for 4 p.m.
3 Seeresolution 293 (1971).
11

operations in Cyprus. Although the United Nations Forceand all United Nations personnel connected with the
Cyprus operation-have performed their duties with great
ability, we are at least as far from a solution now as we
were six months ago. The Secretary-General speaks of “an
aggravation of tension”, in his report rather than the
reIaxation which is necessary for progress. He notes that
should the intercommunal talks break down-which
re.
mains a dismal but real possibility-“a
new and major crisis
would more than likely erupt”. .

129. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): I have asked to speak on a point
of clarification. Am I correct in understanding, Sir, that
you have decided to defer all statements to the afternoon
meeting?
130. The PRESIDENT (intelpretation from French): That
is precisely the proposal which I intended to make:
perhaps, in order to preserve a certain degree of uniformity,
we might start our statements this afternoon from beginning to end, if this proposal is acceptable to the members of
the Council.

137. In these circumstances, we of course supported the
extension of the mandate. The Secretary-General’s report
makes it plain that without the United Nations presence a
serious threat to international peace and security could
easily develop on the island. The United Nations Force has
played an invaluable role during the past six months,
helping to defuse potentially inflammatory situations. Yet
it is not only in times of crisis that the United Nations
presence is essential. The Secretary-General’s report shows
the supportive and catalytic role that UNFICYP plays in
preventing friction and promoting progress in everyday
situations, in economic development as well as the preservation of order.

131. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): With all due respect to the
Chair, it seems to me that since we still have some time left,
and since there is a long list of speakers, we might perhaps
start by hearing two or three speakers before the meeting is
adjourned,
132. The PRESIDENT [integwetation from French): We
have a while left, if a speaker were to take the floor it might
save a few minutes’ time.
133. Mr. BUSH (United States of America): My statement
is reasonably short. Before I give it, let me join the previous
speakers in expressing our condolences to the Government
of Turkey. Our President today made a statement in which
he said that he had instructed our Ambassador, Ambassador
Handley, in Turkey to receive recommendations from the
Government for any appropriate aid, and I join the others
who very eloquently expressed the concern of this Council
about that disaster.

138. Since becoming the United States representative to
the United Nations, I have frequently been asked by
Americans to catalogue the Organization’s achievements.
There are many of these, but Cyprus is one of the
outstanding areas where the United Nations is performing
the role that most of us believe it was primarily created
for-the
preservation of peace in a situation where an
outside agency is absolutely indispensable. I think we can
all be proud of the Cyprus operation as a peace-keeping
operation in the true sense of this word.

134. Since this is my first opportunity to represent the
United States in the Security Council, I should Iike to
recall-and violate-an excellent precedent set by my
predecessor, Ambassador Yost. At the Council’s 1565th
meeting, Ambassador Yost set an example of restraint in
the practice of mutual congratulation which has been a
feature of the Council’s work for some years, I am told. I
am entirely in favour of this sort of reciprocal self-denial,
but I could not let this opportunity pass without expressing
my pleasure at serving with such a distinguished membership on the Council. Both as representatives of your
Governments and as individuals, I know each of you is in a
position to make a unique contribution to the work of the
Council in the all-important field of international peace and
security.

139. At the same time, my Government wishes to caution
that UNFICYP can assist in creating a climate in which
agreement may be reached, but can do no more than that.
It is up to the parties directly and intimately involved to
demonstrate the good faith, the spirit of compromise and,
above all, the necessary statesmanship to resolve the
underlying political difficulties. The world community is
not prepared indefinitely to bear the burdens created by
failure to come to grips with the need for mutual
concessions.

135. Having thus made an inroad on one of Ambassador
Yost’s reforms, I wil1 adhere to two other practices that he
initiated. Although I have the highest regard for His
Excellency the President of the Council I will refrain from
congratulating him on assuming the Presidency this month.
He has too many real accomplishments to his credit to be
praised for an alphabetical accident of succession to the
Presidency. I do want to thank him for his very generous
opening remarks and his words of welcome to me, the
newest of your members. Second, I should like the
Secretariat to note that the United States waives the right
to consecutive interpretation for all interventions unless a
specific statement to the contrary is made before the
United States representative begins his remarks.

140. The mechanisms for resolving the Cyprus conflict
exist, in the intercommunal talks. As we have stated in the
past, the United States firmly supports these talks and
believes they provide the best procedure for reaching an
agreement which will safeguard the legitimate rights of all
elements in Cyprus within a unified and independent State.
In the interim we welcome the Secretary-General’s comments on deconfrontation, de-escalation and refugee resettlement. Efforts by both sides to reach agreement on these
outstanding problems would reduce tensions and the
possibilities of violent incidents, thus enabling the local
negotiations to concentrate on the basic issues that are
before them. I join the Secretary-General in calling uporl
the leaders of all parties to give impetus to these negotiations by exerting their best and most statesmanlike efforts
to reach a mutually acceptable accommodation so that
there may be an equitable, lasting and peaceful solution.

136. We have before us a somewhat cheerless documentthe Secretary-General’s
report on the United Nations
12

My Government believes that the discussion in this Council
should convey this conviction clearly to the parties concerned, I also join the Secretary-General in urging all parties
concerned to refrain from any activities, or statements,
especially statements referring to enosis or partition, which
would aggravate the already delicate situation. Only a step
such as this can bring the abatement of tensions, the
atmosphereof mutual confidenceand statesmanship,
which
certainly must take place in order to be a prelude to
progress.

delegationwashappy to vote in favour of the resolution
that hasbeen unanimouslyadopted.l3ut it waswith m&ed
feelingsthat we did so,becausewe have to regret that the
positive courseis no more than a repeat performance of
what we have beendoing for the last sevenyears.If we are
not careful we shallbe tivaIling one of thoselong-running
Broadway productions;but if so it will be a tragedy, not a
spectacular.

141. Finally, let me say a few words about the problems
of meeting UNFICYP’s costs. We have all noted the
Secretary-General’sreport on the increasinglyperilousstate
of financing. To support peace”keepingas a principle-and
who of us here, certainly, does not; I think we all do-is
fine, but unlesswe are prepared to support it in practical
terms our words mean very little. My Government has
pledged up to 40 per cent of the coststo the Organization
for UNFICYP. Much of that sumhasalready beenpaid to
the Organization, but we have been unable to turn over all
of it becausesufficient pledgesand payments to cover the
other 60 per cent have beenlacking. In effect, we hold in
escrow a large sum of money, pending receipt by the
United Nations of matching funds. Many nations pledged
sumsfor UNFICYP in the past, but have not done sowithin
recent years. Other nations, some of them with a direct
interest in the maintenanceof peacein the Mediterranean
area, have never pledgedanything at all. The United States
is fully prepared to play its part, but we believe that the
clear interest of other Statesin preservingthe peaceon this
island should be reflected in their financial support of the
United Nations operation. We earnestly entreat all nations
to recognize that we have a joint responsibility and
obligation to assureUNFICYP’s successand to take the
steps necessary to that end by making contributions now.
142. The PRESIDENT (intepretation
from French):
Since brief thanks addressed
to the last speakerwill not run
counter to his convictions, I wish to extend my thanks to
him.
143. Mr. JAMIESON (United Kingdom): First, Mr. President, allow me to congratulate you on assumingthe
Presidency of our Council. It is customary alsoto congratulate the outgoing President;this is the first meetingwe have
had this month and we did not meet at all in April, nor for
that matter in March. However, my experiencein Committeesof the Security Council allowsmeto sayhow fortunate
we have been in the delegationsin the chair in the last three
months.

146. As the Secretary-Generalremindsus in his report,
which once moreprovidesa clear if necessarilypessimistic
picture of the situation in the island,this isthe nineteenth
time that he has recommendeda renewalof UNFICYP’s
mandate. My delegation sharesthe Secretary-General’s
concernthat the blue beretsof the Force shouldnot come
to be regardedas a permanentpart of the landscapein
Cyprus. My Prime Minister mademuch the samepoint in
the House of Commonson 2 March when he said in
connexionwith peace-keeping:
“We haveendeavouredto supportthe United Nations in
this, but for too long a United Nations force has been
neededin Cyprus.Wewishto seea settlementthere and
an end to the needfor a peace-keeping
operation.A more
determinedeffort is now required to resolvethe differenceswhich took the Forcethere sevenyearsago,for one
reason, namely, that there are other possibilitiesof
peace-keeping
forcesbeingrequiredin other parts of the
world. I do not believethat we shallbe able to persuade
other countriesconstantly to supportthe United Nations
in peace-keepingendeavoursif they find that a peacekeepingforce is not a meansto resolvea situation and to
give time for diplomacy to work, but is merely a
permanentcommitmentwhich seems
to be unending.”
147. The fact of the matter isthat the United Nationshas
done a magnificentjob in keeping the peacein Cyprus.
Unfortunately, however, lesssuccess
has beenachievedin
making the peace.Here againI would like to quote from
somethingmy PrimeMinister hassaid,this time during his
speech in the commemorativesessionof the General
Assemblylast October.He said:
“I want to emphasize
that the taskof the peace-keepers
should,of course,be a temporaryone.Too often we take
them for granted,asI have said,andlittle is doneto deal
with the problemsthat took them there. They are there
to hold the ring whilethe peace-making
machineryof our
Organizationis brought into actionto tackle the problem
at its roots.“4

144. It would have beennice to think that the absenceof
meetings of the Security Council in the last three months
represented an absenceof controversy and conflict in the
world. Utifortunately it doesnot do this, though perhapsit
signifies a realization that there is little point in callingfor a
meeting of the Security Council unlesswe have someidea
where we are going, unlessthere is a reasonableprospect
that agreement on a certain courseof action is possible,as
for example has beenthe casetoday.

148. It is in this context that my delegationhasnoted the
Secretary-General’s
suggestion
that.thereshouldbefore long
be a comprehensivereview of the problem and that
membersof the Security Council shouldgive thought to
constructive alternativesto the presentarrangement.Quite
clearly to continueindefinitely with the presentsituationis
an admissionof failure. It is therefore not only inevitable
but right that the Secretary-General
shouldhave to think in
theseterms. My Government,of course,sharesthe Secretary-General’sbelief that the intercommunaltalks continue

145, From this point of view, namely, that we areableto
agree on a positive courseof action in regardto Cyprus,my

4 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fifth Session,
Plenary Meetings, 1881st meeting, para. 97.

13

to provide the best hope of making progress towards a
solution of the basic problems of the island. It is of vital
importance that these talks should go on and we urge both
sides to continue to take part in them with the maximum
flexibility and goodwill. This is the first priority and clearly
the primary contribution to a constitutional settlement
must come from the parties themselves. But we must all,
whether members of the Security Council or representatives
of the States particularly concerned, bend all our efforts to,
and use all our ingenuity in, seeing whether there is
anything more that can be done to promote quicker
progress,to reducethe physical dangersrepresentedby the
degree of armed confrontation on the island, and to
contribute to the creationof conditions in which UNFICYP
is no longer necessaryand to the re-creation of an
atmospherein which all the pcopIe of the islandcanlive in
peaceandprosperity.

Secretary-General will, in consultation with the Force i
Commander, continue to keep the possibility of further i
reductions under closereview.
151. My Government is willing to keep its troop contin- i
gent in Cyprus for the perio& of the renewedmandate.We I
are prepared to make a financial contribution in supportof [
the Force up to a total figure of E875,OOOsterling, that is fz
$2.1 million at the current rate of exchange,for the period I;
of the renewedmandate.This figure will include both the 1“
extra costs of the British contingent, and, asbefore, acash i
element which will not exceed the previous level of
2625,000 sterling.

152. Finally, 1 would like to draw attention to what the
Secretary-Generalsaysin hisreport about the deficit onthe
UNFICYP account, and to the remarkswhich the representative of the United States has just made on the sanle
149. At this point I would like to expressmy delegation’s subject. My delegation has often expressedits concern
thanks once more to the Secretary-Generalfor his report. I
about the deficit and about the way in which the operation
should alsolike to expressour gratitude to the Secretary- is financed. But recently the number of contributionshas
General’s Special Representative, Mr. Osorio-Tafall, to
even been declining. In thesecircumstances
we supportthe
Mr. Rolz-Bennett,formerly the Under-Secretaryresponsible plea which has been made by the representativeof the
for this question,to whom all our sympathiesgo out for his United States. We hope that those countries which have
premature retirement because of ill-health, and to his contributed in the pastwill at leastcontinue to do so,and
that other countrieswill considerwhether they alsoought
successor,Mr. Roberto Guyer, who has just visited the
islandfor the first time. We are confident that Mr. Guyer’s not to give their financial support to this peace-keeping
operation.
wide experienceof diplomacy will help us at last towardsa
solution to this problem which has concernedus for so
long. I shouldalsolike to take this opportunity to express 153. I cannot cloge without associatingmy delegatioa
my delegation’sadmiration for the work which General with those others that have expressedsympathy to the
delegation of Turkey on their recent new tragic earthquake.
Prem Chandand the men under his commandareperforming in Cyprus on behalf of usall.
I would ask AmbassadorBayiilken to accept on behalfof 8
my delegation and transmit to his Government and people!
150. My delegationwaspreparedto accept the Secretary
/
our sincerecondolences.
General’s recommendation that UNFICYP’s mandate
should be extended for a further six months, on the
154. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I
understanding,now confirmed, that it had the general propose with the consentof the Council to adjournthe
support of membersof the Council and of the partiesto the
meeting. We shall meet again at 4 p.m., as was agreedin
dispute. We noted the Secretary-General’sview that any
private consultations.
sizablereduction of the Force would be inadvisableat this
stage.We agreewith this assessment,
but we hope that the
The meetingroseat 1.lOp.m.

14
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

SUS.

1.00

(Or

equivalent

in other

currencies)

82010~July

1973-2,wJ
