A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/48/112
11 March 1994

Forty-eighth session
Agenda item 112
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/48/630)]
48/112.

International action to combat drug abuse and illicit
production and trafficking

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 47/98, 47/100, 47/101 and 47/102 of 16
December 1992 and 48/12 of 28 October 1993,
Gravely concerned that the illicit demand for, production of and traffic
in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances continue to threaten seriously
the socio-economic and political systems and the stability, national security
and sovereignty of an increasing number of States,
Fully aware that the international community is confronted with the
dramatic problem of drug abuse and the illicit cultivation, production,
demand, processing, distribution and trafficking of narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances and that States need to work at the international and
national levels to deal with this scourge, which has a strong potential to
undermine development, economic and political stability and democratic
institutions,
Emphasizing that the problem of drug abuse and illicit trafficking has
to be considered within the broader economic and social context,
Emphasizing also the need for an analysis of transit routes used by drug
traffickers, which are constantly changing and expanding to include a growing
number of countries and regions in all parts of the world,
Alarmed by the growing connection between drug trafficking and terrorism
in various parts of the world,

/...

A/RES/48/112
Page 2

Recognizing the efforts of countries that produce narcotic drugs for
scientific, medicinal and therapeutic uses to prevent the channelling of such
substances to illicit markets and to maintain production at a level consistent
with licit demand,
Reaffirming that a comprehensive framework for international cooperation
in drug control is provided by the Declaration 1/ and the Comprehensive
Multidisciplinary Outline of Future Activities in Drug Abuse Control, 2/
adopted by the International Conference on Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking,
the Political Declaration and Global Programme of Action adopted on 23
February 1990, at the seventeenth special session of the General Assembly, 3/
and the Declaration adopted by the World Ministerial Summit to Reduce the
Demand for Drugs and to Combat the Cocaine Threat, held in London from 9 to 11
April 1990, 4/ together with the international drug control treaties,
Stressing the important role of the United Nations and its specialized
agencies in supporting concerted action in the fight against drug abuse at the
national, regional and international levels,
Underlining the role of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs as the
principal United Nations policy-making body on drug control issues,
Reaffirming the importance of the role of the United Nations
International Drug Control Programme as the main focus for concerted
international action for drug abuse control and commending its performance of
the functions entrusted to it,
Affirming the proposals set out in the United Nations System-Wide Action
Plan on Drug Abuse Control, and recognizing that further efforts are needed to
implement and update it,
Inviting the relevant agencies of the United Nations system to make
greater progress in incorporating within their programmes and activities
action aimed at dealing with drug-related problems,
I
Respect for the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations and international law in the fight against drug abuse and
illicit trafficking
1.
Reaffirms that the fight against drug abuse and illicit
trafficking should continue to be based on strict respect for the principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and international law,
particularly respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States
____________
1/
See Report of the International Conference on Drug Abuse and
Illicit Trafficking, Vienna, 17-26 June 1987 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.87.I.18), chap. I, sect. A.
2/ Ibid., sect. B.
3/ Resolution S-17/2, annex.
4/ A/45/262, annex.
/...

A/RES/48/112
Page 3

and non-use of force or the threat of force in international relations;
2.
Calls upon all States to intensify their actions to promote
effective cooperation in the efforts to combat drug abuse and illicit
trafficking, so as to contribute to a climate conducive to achieving this end,
and to refrain from using the issue for political purposes;
3.
Reaffirms that the international fight against drug trafficking
should not in any way justify violation of the principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations and international law;
II
International action to combat drug abuse
and illicit trafficking
1.
Reiterates its condemnation of the crime of drug trafficking in
all its forms, and urges continued and effective international action to
combat it, in keeping with the principle of shared responsibility;
2.
Supports the focus on national and regional strategies for drug
abuse control, particularly the master-plan approach, and urges the United
Nations International Drug Control Programme to keep in mind that these should
be complemented with effective interregional strategies;
3.
Requests the Secretary-General to report on the arrangements made
by the Programme to promote and monitor the United Nations Decade Against Drug
Abuse, 1991-2000, under the theme, "A global response to a global challenge",
and on the progress made in attaining the objectives of the Decade by Member
States, the Programme and the United Nations system;
4.
Welcomes the trend towards ratification and implementation of the
Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961, 5/ as amended by the 1972
Protocol, 6/ the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971 7/ and the
United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances of 1988; 8/
5.
Requests the Programme to include in its report to the Commission
on Narcotic Drugs on the implementation of the United Nations Convention
against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances a
section on experience gained to date in implementing the Convention, which
should contain recommendations and strategies for its further implementation,
and invites Member States to cooperate with the Programme in this regard;
__________
5/

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 520, No. 7515.

6

Ibid., vol. 976, No. 14152.

7/

Ibid., vol. 1019, No. 14956.

8/

United Nations publication, Sales No. E.91.XI.6.

/...

A/RES/48/112
Page 4

6.
Encourages all countries to take action to prevent the illicit
arms trade by which weapons are provided to drug traffickers;
7.
Expresses its satisfaction with the efforts of the Commission on
Narcotic Drugs to improve the functioning and impact of the meetings of heads
of national drug law enforcement agencies;
8.
Requests the Programme in its report on illicit traffic in drugs
to analyse world-wide trends in illicit traffic and transit in narcotic drugs
and psychotropic substances, including methods and routes used, and to
recommend ways and means for improving the capacity of States along those
routes to deal with all aspects of the drug problem;
9.
Emphasizes the link between the illicit production of, demand for
and traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances and the economic and
social conditions in the affected countries and the differences and diversity
of the problems in each country;
10.
Calls upon the international community to provide increased
economic and technical support to Governments that request it in support of
programmes of alternative development that take fully into account the
cultural traditions of peoples;
11.
Takes note of the initiative of the Programme to study the concept
of swapping debt for alternative development in the area of international drug
abuse control and requests the Executive Director of the Programme to inform
the Commission on Narcotic Drugs of any progress made in this area;
12.
Encourages Governments to nominate experts for the roster
maintained by the Programme, to ensure that the Programme and the Commission
on Narcotic Drugs may draw from the widest pool of expertise and experience in
implementing its policies and programmes;
13.
Stresses the need for effective action to prevent the diversion
for illicit purposes of precursors and essential chemicals, materials and
equipment frequently used in the illicit manufacture of narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances;
14.
Commends the International Narcotics Control Board for its
valuable work in monitoring production and distribution of narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances so as to limit their use to medical and scientific
purposes, and for the effective manner in which it has implemented its
additional responsibilities, under article 12 of the United Nations Convention
against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances, 8/
concerning the control of precursors and essential chemicals;
15.
Expresses its satisfaction with efforts being made by the
Programme and other United Nations bodies to obtain reliable data on drug
abuse and illicit trafficking, including the development of the International
Drug Abuse Assessment System;
16.
Recommends to the Commission on Narcotic Drugs that it consider,
at its thirty-seventh session, the world-wide research study on the economic
and social consequences of drug abuse and illicit trafficking prepared by the
United Nations Research Institute for Social Development in conjunction with
the report of the Executive Director of the Programme on the economic and
/...

A/RES/48/112
Page 5

social consequences of drug abuse and illicit trafficking, and that it
consider including this issue as an item on its agenda;
III
Global Programme of Action
1.
Reaffirms the importance of the Global Programme of Action as a
framework for national, regional and international action to combat the
illicit production of, demand for and trafficking in narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances, and its commitment to implementing the mandates and
recommendations contained therein;
2.
Calls upon States individually and in cooperation with other
States to promote the Global Programme of Action and to implement its mandates
and recommendations, with a view to translating it into practical action for
drug abuse control;
3.
Calls upon the relevant bodies of the United Nations, the
specialized agencies, the international financial institutions and other
concerned intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to cooperate
with and assist States in their efforts to promote and implement the Global
Programme of Action;
4.
Requests the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, in discharging its
mandate to monitor the Global Programme of Action, to take into account the
recommendations contained in the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation by Member States of the Global Programme of Action; 9/
5.
Requests the Commission on Narcotic Drugs and the United Nations
International Drug Control Programme to consider ways and means to facilitate
reporting by Governments on the implementation of the Global Programme of
Action, so as to increase the level of responses;
IV
Implementation of the United Nations System-Wide Action Plan
on Drug Abuse Control: action by agencies of the United
Nations system
1.
Reaffirms the role of the Executive Director of the United Nations
International Drug Control Programme to coordinate and provide effective
leadership for all United Nations drug control activities, in order to ensure
coherence of actions within the Programme as well as coordination,
complementarity and non-duplication of such activities across the United
Nations system;
2.
Calls for completion of the updated United Nations System-Wide
Action Plan on Drug Abuse Control, as was requested in its resolution 47/100,
in full cooperation with the Administrative Committee on Coordination, in time
for the review and recommendation of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs at its
thirty-seventh session, and for the consideration of the Economic and Social
Council at its substantive session of 1994 and of the General Assembly at its
____________
9/

A/48/286.
/...

A/RES/48/112
Page 6

forty-ninth session;
3.
Reiterates that the following should be included in the updated
System-Wide Action Plan:
(a)

An annex containing agency-specific implementing plans;

(b)
A reference to the important role of the international financial
institutions, as noted in chapter II of the Comprehensive Multidisciplinary
Outline of Future Activities in Drug Abuse Control, 2/ and the ability of such
institutions to promote economic stability and undermine the drug industry;
4.
Calls upon all relevant United Nations agencies to complete their
agency-specific implementation plans for inclusion in the updated System-Wide
Action Plan and to incorporate fully into their programmes all the mandates
and activities contained in the Action Plan and its annex;
5.
Requests the Commission on Narcotic Drugs to pay particular
attention to reviewing the agency-specific implementing plans of the SystemWide Action Plan for consideration by the Economic and Social Council at its
coordination segment in 1994;
6.
Requests the Economic and Social Council, at its coordination
segment, to pay due attention to the role of the international financial
institutions in supporting international drug control efforts, particularly in
the field of alternative development;
7.
Calls upon the governing bodies of all United Nations agencies
associated with the System-Wide Action Plan to include the issue of drug
control in their agendas with a view to examining the need for a mandate on
drug control, assessing the activities taken to comply with the Action Plan
and, as appropriate, reporting on how the issue of drug control is taken into
account in the relevant programmes;
8.
Requests the United Nations International Drug Control Programme,
in cooperation with the relevant agencies, particularly the United Nations
Children’s Fund, to report on the efforts to study the impact of drug abuse
and related crime on children and to recommend measures that may be taken to
address this problem;
9.
Recommends that the United Nations International Drug Control
Programme cooperate and coordinate with the Crime Prevention and Criminal
Justice Branch on activities to counter drug-related criminality, including
money-laundering, to ensure complementarity and non-duplication of efforts;
10.
Requests that the System-Wide Action Plan be reviewed and updated
on a biennial basis;
V
United Nations International Drug Control Programme
1.
Welcomes the efforts of the United Nations International Drug
Control Programme to implement its mandates within the framework of the
international drug control treaties, the Comprehensive Multidisciplinary
/...

A/RES/48/112
Page 7

Outline of Future Activities in Drug Abuse Control, the Global Programme of
Action and relevant consensus documents;
2.
Urges all Governments to provide the fullest possible financial
and political support to the United Nations International Drug Control
Programme, in particular by increasing voluntary contributions to the
Programme, to enable it to expand and strengthen its operational and technical
cooperation activities;
3.
Welcomes the work of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs on the
consideration of the programme budget of the Fund of the United Nations
International Drug Control Programme, in accordance with the mandate contained
in section XVI, paragraph 2, of General Assembly resolution 46/185 C of 20
December 1991;
4.
Takes note of the note of the Secretary-General on the
administrative and financial arrangements of the United Nations Drug Control
Programme 10/ submitted pursuant to section XVI of resolution 46/185 C;
5.
Notes with appreciation the efforts made by the United Nations
International Drug Control Programme to comply with the approved format and
methodology of the programme budget of the Fund of the United Nations
International Drug Control Programme, in particular with the relevant
resolutions of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs;
6.
Encourages the Executive Director of the United Nations
International Drug Control Programme to continue his efforts to improve the
presentation of the budget of the Fund;
VI
1.
Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General presented under
the item entitled "International drug control"; 11/
2.
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly
at its forty-ninth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
85th plenary meeting
20 December 1993

____________
10/

A/C.5/48/7.

11/

A/48/286, A/48/327 and A/48/329 and Corr.1.
