United Nations

A/RES/67/112

General Assembly

Distr.: General
14 January 2013

Sixty-seventh session
Agenda item 50

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 18 December 2012
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/67/421)]

67/112. Effects of atomic radiation
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 913 (X) of 3 December 1955, by which it established
the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation, and its
subsequent resolutions on the subject, in which, inter alia, it requested the Scientific
Committee to continue its work,
Concerned about the potentially harmful effects on present and future
generations resulting from the levels of radiation to which mankind and the
environment are exposed,
Conscious of the continuing need to examine and compile information about
atomic and ionizing radiation and to analyse its effects on mankind and the
environment, and conscious also of the increased volume, complexity and diversity
of that information,
Acknowledging the concerns about the radiological consequences of an
accident which were raised by the accident at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power
station following the March 2011 earthquake and tsunami in Japan,
Reaffirming the desirability of the Scientific Committee continuing its work, and
welcoming the increased commitment of States members of the Scientific Committee,
Emphasizing the vital need for sufficient, assured and predictable funding, as
well as efficient management, of the work of the secretariat of the Scientific
Committee to arrange the annual sessions and coordinate the development of
documents based on scientific reviews of the sources of ionizing radiation and its
effects on human health and the environment,
Recognizing the increasing importance of the scientific work of the Scientific
Committee and the need to carry out unforeseen additional work in cases such as the
nuclear accident in Japan,
Recognizing also the importance of voluntary contributions to the general trust
fund established by the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment
Programme to support the work of the Scientific Committee,
12-48532

*1248532*

Please recycle

A/RES/67/112

Considering that the high quality of the work of the Scientific Committee
needs to be maintained in the future,
Recognizing the importance of disseminating results from the work of the
Scientific Committee and widely publicizing scientific knowledge about atomic
radiation, and recalling, in that context, principle 10 of the Rio Declaration on
Environment and Development, 1
Welcoming Belarus, Finland, Pakistan, the Republic of Korea, Spain and
Ukraine as members of the Scientific Committee and their attendance at the fiftyninth session of the Scientific Committee in May 2012,
Commends the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of
1.
Atomic Radiation for the valuable contribution it has been making since its inception
to wider knowledge and understanding of the levels, effects and risks of ionizing
radiation, and for fulfilling its original mandate with scientific authority and
independence of judgement;
Reaffirms the decision to maintain the present functions and independent
2.
role of the Scientific Committee;
Notes with appreciation the work of the Scientific Committee, and takes
3.
note of the report on its fifty-ninth session; 2
Welcomes with appreciation the scientific report on attributing health
4.
effects to radiation exposure and inferring risks 3 requested by the General Assembly
in its resolution 62/100 of 17 December 2007 and the report on uncertainties in risk
estimates for cancer due to exposure to ionizing radiation; 4
Requests the Scientific Committee to continue its work, including its
5.
important activities to increase knowledge of the levels, effects and risks of ionizing
radiation from all sources, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
sixty-eighth session;
Endorses the intentions and plans of the Scientific Committee for
6.
conducting its programme of work of scientific review and assessment on behalf of
the General Assembly, in particular its intention to complete at its next session an
assessment of the levels of exposure and radiation risks attributable to the accident
following the great east-Japan earthquake and tsunami and a report on the effects of
radiation exposure on children, and its decision to initiate its next Global Survey of
Medical Radiation Usage and Exposures in close cooperation with other relevant
organizations, encourages the Scientific Committee to submit at its earliest
convenience the other related reports, including on assessments of levels of ionizing
radiation exposure from electrical energy production, and requests the Scientific
Committee to submit plans for its ongoing and future programme of work to the
Assembly at its sixty-eighth session;
Calls upon the Secretariat to facilitate the timely publication of the
7.
reports of the Scientific Committee, inter alia, by continuing to streamline internal

_______________
1
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June
1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and
corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
2
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 46 (A/67/46).
3
Ibid., chap. III, sect. 1.
4
Ibid., sect. 2.

2

A/RES/67/112

procedures as necessary, and to strive to publish the reports within the same
calendar year as their approval;
Re-emphasizes the need for the Scientific Committee to hold regular
8.
sessions on an annual basis so that its report can reflect the latest developments and
findings in the field of ionizing radiation and thereby provide updated information
for dissemination among all States;
Invites the Scientific Committee to continue its consultations with
9.
scientists and experts from interested Member States in the process of preparing its
future scientific reports, and requests the Secretariat to facilitate such consultations;
10. Welcomes, in this context, the readiness of Member States to provide the
Scientific Committee with relevant information on the levels and effects of ionizing
radiation, and invites the Scientific Committee to analyse and give due
consideration to such information, particularly in the light of its own findings;
11. Also welcomes the strategy of the Scientific Committee to improve data
collection, encourages in this regard Member States, the organizations of the United
Nations system and non-governmental organizations concerned to provide further
relevant data about doses, effects and risks from various sources of radiation, which
would greatly help in the preparation of future reports of the Scientific Committee
to the General Assembly, and further encourages the International Atomic Energy
Agency, the World Health Organization and other relevant organizations to establish
and coordinate with the Secretariat the arrangements for periodic collection and
exchange of data on radiation exposures of workers, the general public and, in
particular, medical patients;
12. Requests the United Nations Environment Programme to continue and
strengthen, as appropriate, support for the effective conduct of the work of the
Scientific Committee and for the dissemination of its findings to the General
Assembly, the scientific community and the public;
13. Urges the United Nations Environment Programme to continue to
strengthen the funding of the Scientific Committee, pursuant to paragraph 11 of
General Assembly resolution 65/96 of 10 December 2010;
14. Encourages Member States to make voluntary contributions to the
general trust fund established by the Executive Director of the United Nations
Environment Programme and also to make contributions in kind in order to support
the work of the Scientific Committee.
59th plenary meeting
18 December 2012

3
