S/PV.8108

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8108th meeting

Monday, 20 November 2017, 9 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cardi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Italy)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Fesko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli Frieri

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-39012 (E)
*1739012*

S/PV.8108

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 9.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process and Personal Representative
of the Secretary-General, to participate in this meeting.
Mr. Mladenov is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Jerusalem.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mladenov.
Mr. Mladenov: I brief the members of the Security
Council today as critical infra-Palestinian talks are
scheduled to open in Cairo tomorrow. The United
Nations, the Middle East Quartet and the international
community continue to support Egyptian efforts to
sustainably implement the recent infra-Palestinian
agreement and return Gaza under the control of the
legitimate Palestinian Authority.

20/11/2017

a step towards the normalization of movement in and
out of the Strip.
Another important step happened on 2 November
when the Palestinian committee tasked with
rationalizing and integrating Gaza’s public sector held its
first meeting. Meanwhile, the transfer of responsibility
at Gaza-based public institutions is slowly proceeding
as well. Ministers of Education, Health, Transport
and Environment, among others, as well as technical
teams from ministries in Ramallah, have travelled to
Gaza to begin restoring Government control. Some 150
PA-employed teachers have returned to work for the
first time since 2007. A 10-day registration period for
all PA employees in Gaza began on 12 November to
determine staffing numbers, based on an evaluation of
qualifications against needs. The process is proceeding
in an organized manner. Some ministries, with low
numbers of employees, have already accomplished
the task, and others are expected to finish within a set
time frame. I encourage all sides to use tomorrow’s
meeting in Cairo to reinforce their commitment to a
gradual process of implementing the Cairo agreement
and to ensure that positive momentum is sustained by
upholding commitments and ensuring follow-up.

By signing the Cairo agreement on 12 October,
Palestinians embarked on a long road that could lead
to reconciliation. First, however, they must resolve the
humanitarian crisis in Gaza and return the Strip to the
full civilian and security control of the Palestinian
Authority (PA). If success is to be achieved, the failed
policies of the past must be avoided, security for
Palestinians and Israelis must be preserved, and all
sides must be willing to compromise in the interest
of peace.

Regrettably, there is also some not-so-good news.
Despite progress in implementing the Cairo agreement,
Gaza residents have not seen any improvements to their
daily lives. The lack of electricity has been devastating
for the provision of basic services. Power outages of
18 to 20 hours a day continue; most of the population
has access to piped water for only three to five hours
every five days; untreated sewage continues to flow
into the Mediterranean Sea at catastrophic levels;
45 per cent of essential drugs and medical supplies have
now reached zero stock in Gaza. Only the most critical
health, water and sanitation facilities are functioning,
thanks to donor-funded emergency fuel distributed by
the United Nations.

Let me start with the good news. On 1 November,
we witnessed a landmark step as the Palestinian
Authority regained control over Gaza crossings. For
the first time in more than a decade, on 18 November,
the Rafah border crossing opened under PA control.
The handover has eased access at the crossings for
Palestinians with permits and ended the illegal taxation
imposed by Hamas at the crossings since June 2007. The
handover, if translated into full civilian and security
control by the Palestinian Authority of Gaza, could be

As the Palestinian Government seeks to return
to Gaza, it should take immediate action to reverse
measures that add to the burden of Palestinians living
there. The United Nations humanitarian appeal for
Gaza for 2017 calls for $25 million in new funding to
meet the most critical priorities — almost $11 million
of which remains unmet. I urge donors to support the
appeal in order to save lives. Last week, as co-Chair
of the Ad-Hoc Liaison Committee, Norway convened a
donor meeting in Ramallah to discuss how to support

2/6

17-39012

20/11/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8108

returning Gaza under Palestinian Authority control.
The discussion focused on three themes.

risk a dangerous escalation that could destroy the
prospects for intra-Palestinian reconciliation.

The first theme was the need to immediately
alleviate the humanitarian situation on the ground,
namely, by increasing electricity supply to at least
pre-crisis levels, and accelerating the delivery of
projects that have direct impact on the lives of Gaza’s
residents. The envoys of the Middle East Quartet have
already tasked the Office of the Quartet with producing
a list of projects that can be expedited. I encourage
donors to do the same. Such actions are necessary to
sustain support for the Cairo-led process on the ground.

In other developments, on 31 October, a 25-yearold Palestinian man was shot dead by Israeli security
forces while in his car near a West Bank settlement.
The Israeli authorities launched an investigation after
an initial IDF probe indicated that the driver did not
appear to have been attempting a vehicular attack
when he was killed. On 17 November, two Israelis
were injured in a ramming attack in the West Bank; the
Palestinian driver was shot and injured by the security
forces. Violence and incitement remain one of the
hallmarks of the conflict, and they need to be addressed
in order to rebuild trust between both sides.

Secondly, the donors also discussed the need to see
a realistic plan by the Palestinian Authority on how it
intends to take up its responsibilities in Gaza, which
the international community can support financially
and technically.
Thirdly, our common goal remains the return
of the Palestinian Authority to Gaza. Difficult
issues — including security and putting all weapons
under Government control, the rule of law and the
functioning of the judiciary, civil service reform and
other complicated challenges — will have to be dealt
with in a step-by-step manner.
Turning to broader political dynamics on the
ground, I welcome the restoration of full security
coordination between Israel and the Palestinian
Authority. It was publicly announced that that started
on 8 November. That is a positive development, as
coordination is critical to the security of Israelis and
Palestinians alike.
In a very worrying development, however, on
30 October, the Israeli Defence Forces (IDF) uncovered
yet another tunnel that extended from Gaza into Israel.
During the operation, at least 12 Palestinian militants
were killed underground. According to statements by
a spokesperson for Islamic Jihad, the group’s aim in
constructing the tunnel was to “kidnap Israeli soldiers,”
and it also stated that it will continue to pursue that goal.
I call on the international community to join
the United Nations in condemning the continued
construction of tunnels and the utterance of such reckless
statements. At a time when Palestinians in Gaza — who
have lived with closures for a decade, survived three
conflicts and have had to struggle to merely exist — are
seeing hope for the future, such actions and statements

Turning to the question of settlements, Israeli
planning authorities have approved building permits
for at least 418 housing units in the East Jerusalem
settlements of Gilo and Ramat Shlomo. They also
issued a conditional approval of 178 housing units in the
settlement of Nof Zion, located in the East Jerusalem
neighbourhood of Jabel Mukaber. On 10 November, the
Israeli Prime Minister pledged to advance $226 million
for the construction of infrastructure in the occupied
West Bank that improves the connectivity of settlements
to Israel, potentially facilitating their expansion.
The United Nations considers all settlement
activities illegal under international law. They
constitute a substantial obstacle to peace and should
cease. Unfortunately, legislative action that undermines
the viability of the two-State solution also continues.
The Knesset considered a legislative amendment that
would require a majority of 80 out of 120 members to
approve any transfer of territory currently included in
Israel’s defined municipal boundaries of Jerusalem to a
“foreign entity”.
Against that backdrop, the Israeli authorities
demolished or seized 30 Palestinian structures,
displacing 53 persons, including 31 children, across the
occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem. Three
Bedouin herding communities in Area C, including
Ain al-Hilweh, Um al Jmal and Jabal al-Baba, are at
risk of having a total of 520 structures demolished after
receiving removal-of-property orders in recent weeks.
Donor-funded structures serving as schools that are also
threatened with demolition are of particular concern.
Turning very briefly to Lebanon, Prime Minister
Hariri’s resignation, while on a trip to Saudi Arabia on
4 November, shocked Lebanon and the region. While

17-390123/6

S/PV.8108

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

new uncertainties have arisen, the people of Lebanon
have united behind President Aoun’s call for Hariri to
return. Following the Secretary-General’s statement
of 5 November, international statements of support
for Lebanon’s security, stability, sovereignty and
independence have been issued at the highest levels.
Prime Minister Hariri is now in Paris and expected to
return to Lebanon later this week. The Officer-in-Charge
of the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator
for Lebanon, my colleague, Philippe Lazzarini, is
scheduled to brief the Council on 29 November.
The security situation in the Golan remains of
concern. Fighting between the Syrian Arab Armed
Forces and armed groups and between different armed
groups in parts of the areas of separation and limitation
on the Bravo side continues. In recent weeks, there were
reported incidents of spillover fire from the Bravo to the
Alpha side and retaliatory fire across the ceasefire line.
Those developments undermine the 1974 Agreement on
Disengagement between Israeli and Syrian Forces and
have the potential to escalate tensions and jeopardize
the long-standing ceasefire between Israel and Syria.
Let me conclude with a few observations on
Palestinian unity efforts. I again commend Egypt for
its leadership throughout the process. Many previous
attempts to bridge the Palestinian divide have failed.
We cannot allow this current effort to become another
missed opportunity. From the outset, I have consistently
engaged with Egypt, the Palestinian Authority, the
region and all stakeholders. Everyone understands
that failure today will destroy hope for the foreseeable
future. That division damages the Palestinian cause
for statehood. Two million Palestinians in Gaza have
high hopes that the Government’s return will improve
their lives. After living in abject misery under Hamas
control and locked in by the closures, their situation is
close to exploding.
With all the difficulties inherent in the Egyptian-led
process and concerns about the timing and modalities of
the Palestinian Authority’s assumption of full civilian
and security control of Gaza, the process must not be
allowed to fail. If it does, it will most likely result in
another devastating conflict. Whether that conflict
would be triggered by a meltdown of law and order in
Gaza, by the reckless action of extremists or by strategic
choice, the result will be the same — devastation and
suffering for all. That cycle must be avoided at all costs.
4/6

20/11/2017

All of us, especially Palestinian leaders, Israel
and the international community, have an important
responsibility to advance the peace efforts. In that
context, I am concerned about the implications of
the latest developments related to the Palestinian
Liberation Organization representative office in the
United States. Only through constructive dialogue can
we hope to advance peace, and I call on all parties to
remain engaged in the peace effort.
I believe and hope that a genuine change in Gaza,
including full security control by the Palestinian
Authority, will contribute to restoring confidence in
the feasibility of a comprehensive peace agreement.
That is a Palestinian-owned process. All Palestinian
factions must seize this opportunity to open a new page
for their people.
The President: I thank Mr. Mladenov for
his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Rosselli Frieri (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
We once again thank the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for
his briefing. Above all, we thank him for his continued
work, for which he can and will continue to count on
the support of Uruguay, including when our term on the
Security Council comes to an end.
Unfortunately, as has happened on numerous other
occasions, we must begin our statement by condemning
a fresh attack. This time, we condemn the attack that
took place on 17 November on the West Bank, which
was carried out by a Palestinian assailant and left two
Israelis injured. Such violence and terrorist attacks, as
well as their incitement and glorification, do nothing
to advance peace, and they endanger the possibility of
reaching a two-State solution.
This year marks many anniversaries related to the
still unresolved conflict. This month marks 100 years
since the Balfour Declaration, which initiated a process
that ended with the partition of Palestine and was then
finalized three decades later through General Assembly
resolution 181 (II), exactly 70 years ago. It has also
been 50 years since the 1967 war and the occupation of
territories that followed.
Despite the numerous multilateral, regional and
unilateral initiatives to try to end the conflict, we
are still far from glimpsing a peaceful and mutually
17-39012

20/11/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

acceptable solution. The two-State solution remains
the only viable option to end the conflict — there is
no alternative plan B. Direct bilateral negotiations
must be relaunched as soon as possible to clarify all
unresolved issues.
To achieve that goal, it is necessary to reverse
current trends on the ground. If not, it will be extremely
difficult for Palestine to consolidate its territory as a
State. Uruguay maintains strong ties with both the State
of Israel and the State of Palestine. We again reaffirm
the right of Israel and Palestine to live peacefully,
within secure and recognized borders, in an atmosphere
of renewed cooperation that is free of any threat or act
that might undermine peace.
Almost a year after the adoption of resolution 2334
(2016), we regret that there has been little progress
in its implementation, and that Israel has continued
and intensified its settlement policy on Palestinian
territory. We condemn that practice and call for its
immediate cessation. We reject the explicit support of
the Israeli authorities for that settlement policy, which
continues to advance at full speed, despite resolution
2334 (2016) and the repeated calls of the entire
international community.
We reiterate that settlements are illegal under
international law and constitute an obstacle to peace
and the two-State solution. That policy is accompanied
by the ongoing demolitions of Palestinian homes
on the West Bank and in East Jerusalem and clearly
illegal initiatives under international law to annex
settlements under Israeli jurisdiction. Those actions
clearly exacerbate tension; other actions and measures
are necessary, which, to date, have not been taken.
Otherwise, it will be increasingly difficult to arrive at a
peaceful and mutually acceptable solution.
We await next month’s presentation of the fourth
quarterly report on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016) by the Special Coordinator. We reiterate
our wish for the report to be circulated in writing
prior to the meeting, so that we are able to analyse its
findings and then voice our opinions following careful
consideration of the document.
On a more positive note, the reconciliation
agreement that was signed in October between the
Hamas and Fatah Palestinian groups undoubtedly
represents an important step towards achieving
Palestinian unity. We thank Egypt for its important
role in that successful process. The recent return of

S/PV. 8108

the Palestinian Authority to the Gaza Strip to retake
control after a decade is very good news, which should
be sufficiently highlighted and commended. The
reunification of Palestine under a single, legitimate
and democratic Government is essential to providing
for the aspirations of the Palestinian people, and could
substantially improve living conditions in an area that
has been engulfed in a serious humanitarian crisis since
the armed conflict of 2007.
For that agreement to be successfully implemented,
it will also be essential that those measures be
accompanied by agreements on security, the
disarmament of Hamas and the renunciation of violence
and the destruction of Israel as a declared objective.
In this still very complex scenario, in which there
is a glimmer of hope, it is necessary, more than ever,
that the Security Council and the entire international
community remain united in their desire to see a peaceful
resolution of all the aspects of the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict. Only then will we be able to exert due pressure
on the authorities to stop the trends that threaten that
process, and ask them to be sufficiently flexible and
reasonable, so that they understand once and for all that
peace is a much more valuable goal than the violence,
hatred and injustice that have characterized the region
over the past few decades.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome the briefing
by Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, the Secretary-General’s
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process.
We are currently attending a further meeting to
address the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question. Over the course of this meeting,
we have not been given very encouraging news, and the
persistent and challenging attitudes of the Government
of Israel towards the international community remain.
For my delegation, it is disheartening that, a little
more than 11 months after the adoption of resolution
2334 (2016), none of the mandates set out therein
have been fulfilled; on the contrary, according to
the statement of the Permanent Observer Mission of
Palestine in its letter to the presidency of the Council,
dated 14 November, earlier this month the Israeli
occupation forces issued demolition orders against 60
homes or infrastructure that are owned by Palestinians
in Palestinian territory.

17-390125/6

S/PV.8108

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Those arbitrary measures that Israel intends to
impose on Palestinian territory, which it has also
forcefully occupied for more than 50 years ago, would
result in the forced dispossession and displacement
of 300 Palestinian civilians from the villages of Ain
al-Hilweh and Um al-Jamal. In that regard, if Israel
achieves its wish, the number of settlers in that region
would increase from 6,000 to at least 12,000, which
would be in direct and repeated violation of Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions.
We note with deep concern the persistent inhuman
blockade that is inflicted by the Government of Israel
against the Palestinian people. We wish to remind that
occupying Power that, since the adoption of resolution
242 (1967), of 22 November, it has acted in contempt of
the primary principles of Article 2 of the Charter of the
United Nations.
With that in mind, we urgently call on all members
of the Security Council to take immediate action,
without further delay, to ensure that Israel ends what was
described in the latest report of the Special Rapporteur on
the situation of human rights in the Palestinian Territory
occupied since 1967 as “the longest-running military
occupation in the modern world”. The occupation
violates the fundamental right of the Palestinian people
to self-determination and undermines the possibility of
a two-State solution.
Bolivia is obliged to recall that, as a result of the
Israeli blockade of the Gaza Strip, an energy crisis
is forcing the Palestinian inhabitants of the region
to live with only four hours of electricity per day.
Due to interruptions in the provision of electricity, a
humanitarian crisis has erupted in the form of an attack
on the human right to health. Hospitals and medical
centres are severely affected as they are forced to
discharge patients prematurely, to mention but one of
the many serious consequences affecting the population.
For example, in August, five cancer patients died while
waiting for permits to be issued by Israel in order to
travel to receive the necessary treatment. Similarly,
according to the aforementioned report, the supply
of water to the Gaza Strip is limited to a few hours
every four to five days, while the desalination plants
operate at just 15 per cent of their capacity. Bolivia
urges Israel to put an immediate and complete end to
the illegal blockade of the Gaza Strip and immediately

6/6

20/11/2017

allow an ongoing and unconditional opening of the
crossing points in order to allow humanitarian aid and
commercial goods to enter and people to leave.
On the other hand, we take this opportunity to
welcome with great optimism the fact that, as a result
of the agreement reached between the parties on
12 October in Cairo, a solution to the intra-Palestinian
conflict has been reached, allowing the Palestinian
Authority to resume full functionality in the territories
of the Gaza Strip. We are pleased that the world is able
to witness this true expression of Palestinian unity. In
this regard, we express our satisfaction and appreciation
to the Government of Egypt and other countries of the
region that are supporting this process to strengthen the
legitimate presence of the democratic and legitimately
Palestinian National Authority in the Gaza Strip so that,
to the extent possible, it may overcome the devastating
humanitarian crisis that persists in the region.
Bolivia, as a pacifist State, believes that the only
way to achieve just and lasting peace in the conflict
between Israel and Palestine is through sincere
dialogue and clear expressions of political will on the
part of both sides to achieve the two-State solution.
To that end, we reiterate our full commitment to
multilateralism within the framework of respect for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States. We
condemn violence, regardless of its origin, and call on
the parties to renounce it.
As on previous occasions, we reiterate our
expectation that the quarterly report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016)
will be provided to us in writing, which would allow us
to see in detail the progress made in its implementation.
We would also like to see updated maps of all the
settlements in occupied Palestinian territories.
Finally, Bolivia reaffirms its support for the selfdetermination of the Palestinian people and their right
to live in a free, sovereign and independent State within
its pre-1967 international borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, in accordance with the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council and the General Assembly.
The President: I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion of
the subject.
The meeting rose at 9.35 a.m.

17-39012
