S/PV.7267

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7267th meeting

Thursday, 18 September 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland  . . . .

Mr. De Antueno
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Lamek
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Maes
Mrs. Ogwu
Ms. Paik Ji-ah
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Sir Mark Lyall Grant

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2014/656)

14-53855 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1453855*

S/PV.7267

The situation in Afghanistan

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

Security Council from Kabul, where my presence has
been requested in support of efforts to achieve a final
breakthrough.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2014/656)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, Canada, Germany,
India, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy, Japan,
Pakistan, Poland, Slovakia, Spain and Turkey to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Ján Kubiš,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan, to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Kubiš,
who is joining today’s meeting via video-teleconference
from Kabul.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2014/656, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.
I now give the floor to Mr. Kubiš.
Mr. Kubiš: The Security Council is meeting today
with the results of Afghanistan’s presidential elections
due to be announced within days but with no political
agreement yet in place on a Government of national
unity. Discussions in recent weeks stretching long
into the night have brought the teams of Mr. Abdullah
Abdullah and Mr. Ghani Ahmadzai close, but some
vital issues still have to be bridged. The protracted
deadlock deepens a crisis that has already taken a heavy
political, security and economic toll on Afghanistan.
That is the reason that I am once again briefing the
2/31

18/09/2014

There is quite simply no better way forward than
a Government of national unity led by an elected
President as certified by the Independent Election
Commission, working in partnership with the new
Chief Executive Officer. All other options are either
accompanied by heavy risks or undermine the
country’s constitutional framework. Both candidates
have previously committed to the concept of such an
administration and to abiding by the election results,
subject to an audit process. Agreeing on the modalities
for such an administration has proved more difficult.
The remaining sticking points include how best to
communicate the results when supporters on both sides
genuinely believe that it is their candidate who won and
will accept no other result, regardless of the audit. If
there is no agreement by the time of the certification of
the results, new dynamics will be set in motion with the
potential to trigger further uncertainty, even the risk of
conflict. The time remaining is now short, and by that I
mean one or two days.
A legitimate, broadly accepted political transition
is needed in order to provide a robust mandate for
tackling the country’s many challenges, which include
a burgeoning insurgency, a looming cash crunch
and an expanding illicit economy, in particular one
powered by narcotics. Finally, it is vital to ensure that
the international community has a credible partner for
sustained commitments of assistance in what remains
one of the most aid-dependent countries in the world.
It was at the request of the two candidates and the
Afghan authorities that the United Nations accepted a
major role in support of the electoral process, even as the
process itself has remained the responsibility of Afghan
election management bodies. The United Nations
accepted that role as a responsibility derived from the
very core of its mandate to support conflict prevention.
It was always understood that the Organization ran
the risk of damaging its reputation. It was, however, a
necessary risk. I want to underscore my appreciation
for the massive support from across the United Nations
family, especially the United Nations Development
Programme and the Department for Political Affairs.
With the Election Commission’s final adjudication
session last Sunday, the supervisory role of the United
Nations came to an end. Our assessment was that the
audit provided a comprehensive and credible check on
14-53855

18/09/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV.7267

the electoral process, one that was unprecedented in
scale, depth and scrutiny. Significant levels of fraud
were detected and eliminated. What was also confirmed
was that millions of women and men had turned out to
vote on 14 June in support of a peaceful, democratic
transfer of power. They have eagerly waited for months
for a long overdue agreement between the two leaders
on establishing a Government of national unity. The
serious and growing challenges that Afghanistan faces
require swift agreement on, and the establishment of,
such a Government.

In reframing and refreshing the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework ahead of the London
ministerial conference planned for November, the
robust engagement of the new administration will
be central to ensuring clear Afghan priorities and
direction. I would urge a greater focus on a pro-poor,
rights-based agenda, including policies that address
a burgeoning and largely untaught youth population.
Mainstreaming efforts to undercut the ever-expanding
narcotics economy will also be vital, including through
intensified regional efforts.

A tactical shift in the insurgency and the
involvement of international terrorist groups have
given rise to attempts not merely to disrupt but also to
exert control over territory across the country. With
ground engagement emerging as the leading cause
of civilian casualties, civilians continue to bear the
brunt of the conflict. In the first eight months of 2014,
civilian casualties rose by 15 per cent as compared with
the same period in 2013, with 2,312 killed and 4,533
injured. Overall, 16 per cent more women and 24 per
cent more children were killed and injured owing to
armed conflict than during the same period in 2013.

Throughout my tenure I have placed particular
emphasis on promoting regional cooperation centred on
Afghanistan. Enhancing economic, infrastructure and
security ties within the neighbourhood will be critical
for Afghanistan’s future sustainability and stability in
a stable and prosperous region. I welcome the strong
lead that China has shown in its preparations for the
Tianjin Conference on the Istanbul Process/Heart of
Asia initiatiave.

Afghan police and army personnel are responding
courageously, and I honour all the brave Afghans killed
or wounded in the service of their country. Afghanistan’s
security institutions will require sustained support.
A new administration will need to rapidly conclude
mutually agreed legal frameworks to ensure the
necessary planning and preparations for continuity
in international assistance. The confirmation of the
intent to provide ongoing support for Afghan security
institutions at the NATO Summit in Wales was most
welcome.
With the conclusion of the International Security
Assistance Force mission at the end of this year, I would
also like to take this opportunity to recognize all of
the nations that have contributed, as well as to pay my
respects to those individuals who have been wounded
and to the families of those killed.
The prolonged deadlock has also contributed to
economic stagnation in Afghanistan, with a dramatic
drop in Government revenues. A new administration
will need to undertake urgent action to avert a cash
crisis and ensure the continued smooth functioning of
Government. That will require emergency support from
donors. Yet it is longer-term economic and governance
reforms that will be vital to improving revenues and
addressing the increasing fiscal gap.

One of Afghanistan’s most important and
challenging relationships is with Pakistan. Under a
new administration a reset may be possible in moving
forward on the shared challenges of border management,
economic development and counter-terrorism. A new
administration may also be a chance to breathe fresh
life into Afghan-led reconciliation efforts, for which
the United Nations stands ready to assist.
This will be my last meeting here as Head of
the Mission. It has been a challenging time to be in
Afghanistan, but it has been my privilege to serve. The
confidence placed in the United Nations by all parties,
domestic and international, even in the midst of current
events and in thinking about future peace efforts, has
been inspiring. Going forward, the United Nations
will continue to have an important role to play in both
Afghanistan and the broader region.
I would like to thank all of the members of the
Council for the support and guidance provided to me,
as well as by other Member States and international
partners, since I started in January 2012.
I also want to recognize my colleagues from the
United Nations, in particular from the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, for their hard work,
robust counsel and genuine commitment. I especially
remember my close adviser, Vadim Nazarov, and others
who have paid with their lives.

14-538553/31

S/PV.7267

The situation in Afghanistan

The aim of all our work and that which keeps
us committed in an often challenging, difficult and
dangerous environment is to support the aspirations of
the Afghan people for a more prosperous and secure
future in a stable and united Afghanistan. It is those
wishes that must be foremost at this critical juncture.
The President: I thank Mr. Kubiš for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Afghanistan.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): I congratulate the United
States on its successful leadership of the Council this
month. I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, for his briefing and for his outstanding
leadership of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan. His tireless work over the past several
months has been essential as Afghanistan grapples with
a challenging election period. As the end of Mr. Kubiš’s
tenure approaches, I wish him every success in his
future endeavours. I also wish to thank the SecretaryGeneral and his team for their support of my country
throughout the election process, and for the SecretaryGeneral’s recent report (S/2014/656) on the situation in
Afghanistan.
On 5 April and 14 June, millions of Afghans cast
their votes to elect the future leader of the country,
risking their lives and defying Afghanistan’s enemies
to exercise their democratic rights. In doing so, they
demonstrated remarkable bravery in the face of
terrorism and a stalwart commitment to a peaceful,
democratic and prosperous Afghanistan. The elections
marked the end of Afghanistan’s transition and the
beginning of the transformation decade — a moment
of tremendous importance as the country emerges
from over 30 years of war. For the Afghan people, the
elections represented an historic opportunity to vote for
hope, democracy and lasting peace.
However, despite the impressive turnout and
enthusiasm of millions of Afghans, the elections have
turned into a protracted, complex and even at times
messy process, with many unforeseeable challenges.
Disputes related to allegations of fraud in the second
round and subsequent political turmoil necessitated
substantial efforts to avoid a crisis. To that end, with
the support of the international community, both
presidential candidates signed a joint declaration
on 8 August, in line with the political and technical
frameworks agreed on 12 July. The declaration detailed

4/31

18/09/2014

their unified vision for a full audit, based on agreed
criteria prepared by the United Nations, and the
formation of a national unity Government consistent
with the Afghan Constitution.
Following the agreement, the Independent Election
Commission, in close collaboration with the United
Nations and the international community, carried out an
audit in accordance with Afghan laws and international
standards. In an exercise unprecedented in scale and
complexity, the Commission evaluated every single
vote cast in the run-off, from 22,828 ballot boxes and all
34 provinces. The audit was conducted under extensive
national and international observation and supervision
to protect the credibility and fairness of the election
results. It has been an immense undertaking, involving
hundreds of United Nations staff, diplomatic personnel,
international and domestic observers, agents from each
campaign and Afghan electoral staff. On behalf of the
Government and the people of Afghanistan, I would
like to express my appreciation to all domestic and
international observers and staff who worked day and
night to complete the audit.
We are grateful to the international community,
particularly the United States and the United
Nations — and namely to President Obama and
Secretary John Kerry, who remained in touch with the
candidates either by phone or directly by travelling to
Afghanistan — as well as to Mr. Ján Kubiš and other
United Nations colleagues for supporting the audit
process and for their role in facilitating negotiations
and cooperation between the two campaign teams. The
Afghan people expect those efforts to bring a successful
and prompt end to the process.
The audit has now been completed, and we await the
announcement of the final results. The Afghan people
are eager to move past this difficult chapter and to see a
new Government start its work, in the spirit of national
unity, to preserve the gains of the past decade and
bring peace and prosperity to all. As President Karzai
reiterated yesterday, the Afghan people urgently need
to see the process come to a close and a new President
and Government inaugurated.
President Hamid Karzai chaired a meeting this
morning with the elders, the jihadi leaders and the heads
of the chief branches of the State to discuss election
issues and the negotiations between the two candidates.
Participants in the meeting expressed concern over a
prolonged election process and said that people have

14-53855

18/09/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

grown restless and are worried. The meeting decided
that the elders would meet with the two candidates
tomorrow morning, Friday, 19 September, to help reach
a quick agreement.
The past six months have been extremely challenging
for the people of Afghanistan. The electoral impasse
has seriously impacted the economy of the country, the
security of the country and the mindset of its people.
In order to ensure future stability, the following issues
require the immediate focus of Afghanistan and its
international partners,
First, the economic situation is increasingly dire,
exacerbated by the political uncertainty surrounding
the elections dispute. The past several months have
seen a steep drop in economic growth, domestic
revenue collection and national income, amounting to
billions of dollars in losses and threatening the longterm stability of the country. The Government is doing
its utmost to keep the financial stability of the country
intact, but it will be difficult to resolve the impending
crisis without international support.
Secondly, the security situation is worsening. The
Taliban and other terrorist and violent extremist groups
took advantage of the electoral impasse to destabilize
the country with violence. Their use of suicide attacks,
improvised explosive devices and rocket mortars in
populated areas have caused a surge in casualties
of civilians and security personnel, making this the
deadliest period for the Afghan National Security
Forces and the Afghan people since 2001. Cross-border
shelling has further contributed to a dismal security
situation and associated loss of life. While the Afghan
National Security Forces have countered the majority
of insurgents, and in doing so demonstrated ability,
professionalism and courage, the shadow of the violence
continues to loom large over Afghanistan.
Thirdly, there is a dangerous atmosphere of
division and fragmentation. The political impasse has
jeopardized the resounding hope and enthusiasm so
prevalent on election day, and with them the Afghan
people’s optimism for the country’s future. We
have worked tirelessly over the past decade to build
national consensus and unity, but over the past several
months, fears of a return to the dark days of the past
have reemerged. The Afghan nation would like to see
humility, reason and restraint triumph over mistrust
and division; only that will allow the country to build a
peaceful and democratic future.

S/PV.7267

While immediate dangers require urgent focus, the
successful conclusion of the election process and the
formation of a new Government will allow for further
progress on Afghanistan’s long-term priorities and
commitments. The country continues to look forward
to advancing towards its goals so that it can realize
sustainable peace, stability and prosperity at last. The
imminent democratic transition offers an opportunity
to reinvigorate efforts towards wider reform, inclusivity
and the participation of all segments of Afghan society
in the country’s future. A new beginning will also allow
for further progress on the peace and reconciliation
agenda so that the armed opposition will lay down
their arms and contribute to a peaceful and prosperous
Afghanistan.
At the same time, regional cooperation will remain
essential, not only to peace and reconciliation, but also
to stability and progress in the wider neighbourhood.
Afghanistan is dedicated to strengthening bilateral
and multilateral engagements to enhance development
and trade and to counter terrorism, extremism and
sources of instability in the region. The upcoming
Istanbul Process conference in Tianjin, China, will
be an important step in that regard, and we appreciate
China’s leadership in moving the initiative forward.
Afghanistan is committed to long-term partnerships
with the international community, which will be
crucial to the success of the transformation decade
and beyond. We welcome the declaration of NATO
in Wales earlier this month that it stands ready to
train, advise and assist the Afghan National Security
Forces after 2014, and its enduring commitment to
the country throughout the transformation decade.
Ongoing support from our international partners is
of vital importance as international forces draw down
and the Afghan forces take full responsibility for
security throughout the country. We also look forward
to enhanced cooperation between Afghanistan and
the donor community. The ministerial development
conference to be held in London on 25 November will
allow us to reaffirm and renew existing commitments
as part of the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework
and to strengthen Afghanistan’s long-term partnership
with the international community.
Nations are building their own future, but in today’s
world the international community has an important
role to play in helping war-affected countries emerging
from conflict. That is why we are here again today
in the Council to debate the situation in Afghanistan.

14-538555/31

S/PV.7267

The situation in Afghanistan

After 13 years of tremendous work and substantial
gains, the Afghan people yearn to live in peace and
security. As we move forward, stability is paramount,
not only to my country and my people, but also to the
wider neighbourhood, and countries in the region have
a major stake in peace and security in Afghanistan. It
is crucial that the country not again become a backdrop
for political rivalries, and that the region and the wider
international community stand by us to support the
successful end of the election process.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank Special
Representative Ján Kubiš for his briefing this morning
and recognise his instrumental and indispensable
contribution to Afghanistan’s transition, as well as
the important role played by the entire United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) team
and the wider United Nations. At this critical juncture,
that role remains central. As always, I also thank
Ambassador Tanin for his briefing.
Three months ago, we congratulated the Afghan
people, who — despite the persistent threat of violence
by terrorists and insurgents — had made clear their
desire for a democratic future by voting in great
numbers. The presidential candidates must now to live
up to the expectations of their own people. The timely,
peaceful, and credible resolution of the electoral process
is vital to Afghanistan’s future stability and prosperity.
The candidates must honour their commitments to
accept the outcome of the full election audit, abide by
its results and work together to form a Government of
national unity. If the political impasse is not resolved
promptly, Afghanistan’s successful transition is at risk,
and that must not happen.
UNAMA and international observers have played
a vital role in supporting the Independent Election
Commission and the Independent Electoral Complaints
Commission throughout the full election audit. We
commend the United Nations for the rapid deployment
of more than 120 election experts. The international
community acted in good faith in responding to the
request from Afghanistan for international supervision
of the audit, and my own country, Australia, was also
pleased to support the audit, which was unprecedented
in its scale and depth of scrutiny.
As we know, the formation of a new Government
will clearly mark a defining point for Afghanistan.
The international community is looking ahead to
the framework for supporting Afghanistan beyond
2014. We welcome the recent NATO Wales Summit
6/31

18/09/2014

Declaration on Afghanistan, which sets key markers for
NATO support for Afghanistan beyond 2014, including
the desirability of Security Council endorsement
for the post-2014 International Security Assistance
Force successor mission. Australia is ready, with our
partners, to work with the new Government to cement
arrangements for the international community’s
ongoing support for Afghanistan.
The latest Secretary General’s report (S/2014/656)
notes an increase in insurgent activity during the period
of political impasse. We have also seen an increase in
civilian casualties, the vast majority of which have been
perpetrated by anti-Government forces. Recent attacks
involving large numbers of fighters are a particularly
worry. We are encouraged that Afghanistan’s army and
police have been able to respond effectively, including
in the provinces. The growing capacity of the Afghan
National Security Forces was also demonstrated
throughout the election period. It is vital that those
forces continue to develop and sustain their capabilities,
particularly in provincial areas.
Australia remains committed to supporting
Afghanistan’s security forces and institutions, and will
provide $300 million over the next few years for that
purpose. Australia also remains ready to contribute to
the post-2014 NATO-led non-combat mission to train,
advise and assist the Afghan National Security Forces.
We urge the new Afghan Government to conclude the
necessary legal arrangements for that mission as an
immediate priority.
The implementation of the commitments and
reforms agreed at the 2012 Tokyo Conference will
also be critical for a stable Afghanistan, which, as
we all know and have repeatedly said, is necessary
for sustainable economic and social development.
Afghanistan has implemented important legal reforms
to combat terrorism, the financing of terrorism, money
laundering and human trafficking. We recognize
that Afghanistan’s current economic challenges are
a significant concern, and further efforts to tackle
corruption and promote fiscal sustainability are an
urgent priority.
It is also imperative that the incoming Administration
make progress in implementing the national action
plan on women, peace and security. Women’s
active participation in Afghanistan’s political and
reconciliation processes — and more primordially,
recognition of and respect for their human rights — will
be a critical test of whether Afghanistan can hope to
14-53855

18/09/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

have a successful future, and whether it will continue
to attract international support. We continue to urge
the full implementation of the law on the elimination of
violence against women so as to build on the gains of
the last decade. We welcome progress with the action
plan for the prevention of underage recruitment, and
look forward to its full implementation. The incoming
Government must also support a strong and independent
Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission.
UNAMA will continue to play a key role in
support of Afghanistan beyond the transition, including
through its good offices, in promoting human rights
and improved governance, in donor coordination and
in facilitating humanitarian assistance. It is clear the
Afghan people desire a democratic and accountable
government. The challenges Afghanistan faces on
the road to a more peaceful and secure future are
equally clear. Australia, along with the international
community, is committed to supporting Afghanistan
throughout that transition. We envisage doing so in
close partnership with a responsive, transparent and
accountable Afghan Government.
Finally, I want to acknowledge the personal
contribution, leadership and empathy of Ján Kubiš as
he concludes his mission, and thank him for what he
has done to help Afghanistan embrace a new future. I
also want to thank him for his support to Australia as
pen-holder on Afghanistan in the Council, and we wish
him every continued success.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Mr. Ján Kubiš for
the briefing on the situation in Afghanistan and
for introducing the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2014/656). We would also like to thank Permanent
Representative Zahir Tanin for his statement.
We share the concerns and anxieties that have
been expressed in this Chamber in regard to the
protracted post-electoral marathon. Today, as a
friendly Afghanistan faces many challenges in various
areas — security, State-building, socioeconomic and
humanitarian — the fact that its long-suffering people
is living in political uncertainty is an unacceptable
luxury. Like all responsible members of the
international community, we are carefully watching
the situation unfolding around the summing up of the
results of the presidential elections. We are grateful that
an important milestone has been passed, the recount
of the second round has taken place, and, in parallel,

S/PV.7267

contacts between the candidates on power-sharing are
continuing, although not always with full success.
We note that in society and the political elite there
is growing awareness of the need to form a Government
of national unity. Without a political agreement
between the candidates in that regard, it will not be
easy for the Afghan people to move forward after so
many years of exhausting war. Repeatedly, the risks
of serious destabilization are growing. We would like
to note, in particular, the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and its
leaders in providing assistance to the Afghan people
in coming out of this electoral impasse. We support
the active involvement of UNAMA, together with civil
society, for its work in Afghanistan. We deem it quite
unacceptable that threats are being made against the
staff of the Mission.
We call on the Afghan authorities to settle the
post-electoral situation through peaceful means. The
results of the people’s choice must be announced to
the people and supported by them and most political
forces in Afghanistan. It is clear that resolving the issue
of the future presidency is an internal matter. For our
part, we are prepared to work with any leadership of
Afghanistan that supports the Afghan people itself.
Afghanistan is going through one of the most
complex periods for its domestic security. The report
notes that fact in particular, and the prospects in that
area are very unclear. Anti-Government elements,
terrorists and extremists of various stripes are stepping
up their activity and may prepare for a decisive surge
once there is no longer a foreign military presence in
the country. In that regard, we reiterate our surprise
that there has been not even one mention of Al-Qaida,
as if that element no longer existed in Afghanistan. We
are convinced that, without an objective view of today’s
current state of affairs, moving forward will be very
challenging.
Ignoring current activities and realities is not an
option, in particular given ever increasing number
of civilian casualties, in particular among women
and children, including as a result of the strikes and
operations of the coalition forces. In the north of the
country in particular, there is an increasingly negative
impact on security and stability, especially of the
Central Asian region. Since we have close allies and
partners, that is of great concern to us.

14-538557/31

S/PV.7267

The situation in Afghanistan

Adding to the uncertainty is the fact that we do
not know the outcome of the attempts of the various
actors to maintain a military presence in Afghanistan.
We believe that any new forms of military presence
should be carefully implemented, be acceptable to the
entire Afghan people and leadership and be endorsed
by the Security Council. In that context, we would
like to remind the leadership of the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) of its obligation
under resolution 2120 (2013) to present to the Security
Council in December a comprehensive, and not simply
anh inconclusive quarterly report, as we are used to,
on the implementation of the mandate of ISAF handed
down to it by the Security Council.
For impartial reasons, in the context of the electoral
impasse, the objective of national reconciliation has
been sidelined. We hope that following the completion
of the electoral cycle, the new Afghan authorities
will move forward with renewed energy with the key
element of normalizing the situation in the country on
the basis of the three well-known principles, namely,
the laying down of arms by the fighters, the recognition
of the Constitution of Afghanistan and the final cutting
of ties with Al-Qaida and other terrorist organizations,
in full compliance with the Al-Qaida and Taliban
sanctions regime.
The reports of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime continur to depict a gloomy picture of the
situation with regard to drug production and illicit drug
traffficking in Afghanistan. It is of concern that the
United Nations has affirmed that there has been a sharp
drop in the eradication of opium crops. Last year, drug
trafficking netted almost $1 billion. It is clear that a
large proportion of that goes to fuelling the subversive
activities of terrorist and criminal groups.
The Security Council is still considering its
counter-narcotics initiative. We need to take into
account the activities of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization, in particular in that area. We should work
constructively with our colleagues on the Council in
order to adopt a comprehensive programme. Combating
the drug problem in Afghanistan is extremely important,
not only in order to prevent the increased funding of
extremist and terrorist activities but also to protect the
lives of our people and to prevent our young people
from becoming dependent on heroin.
We will insist that the new Afghan leadership
and all those that work in the country in support of
Afghanistan pay more attention to the eradciation of
8/31

18/09/2014

the drug threat, which presents a great risk to peace
and security not only in Afghanistan but in the region
and far beyond. That fight requires collective efforts
and the abandonment of double standards and various
ideologies. We can no longer tolerate the upsurge in
drug production that has continued for more than 10
years of foreign presence.
The countries of the region and their cooperation
play an important role in the settlement of the Afghan
situation. In that regard, the development of political
and economic cooperation and dialogue is of particular
importance. We believe that the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO) is vital in that regard, especially
since, as members or observers, Afghanistan and all its
neighbours are involved. That reality was affirmed at
the most recent SCO summit. Only by coordinating the
efforts of the United Nations mission and international
actors will we be able to ensure the sustainable
development and the establishment of a self-sufficient
State that is free from terrorism and drug crime.
In conclusion, I would like to express my
appreciation to Mr. Ján Kubiš for his extensive work
at the head of UNAMA. We hope that his experience,
great professionalism and leadership qualities will still
be needed by the United Nations.
Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I, too,
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Ján Kubiš, for his briefing. Through
him, I would like to pay tribute to the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for the
crucial role that it has played in support of the electoral
process in recent months. I also thank the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador Zahir
Tanin, for his statement.
I associate myself with the statement to be made
during this debate by the observer of the European
Union.
At the most recent debate (see S/PV.7208), we in
this Chamber unanimously welcomed the determination
and outstanding courage of the millions of Afghan men
and women who went to the polls to contribute to the
future of their country in a democratic way. Today, it
is crucial that the hopes placed by the people in the
electoral process be heard and that the common desire
for peace and stability be taken into account.
We want to believe that the candidates for the
presidential election and their supporters will be able to
meet the challenge. More than ever, we call on them to
14-53855

18/09/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

exercise restraint in their statements and their actions
and to make the interests of the Afghan people their
main priority. Specifically, we expect them, as they
have committed to doing, to accept the election results
and to form a national unity Government. There is no
other realistic way.
The national unity Government, once formed, will
face significant challenges. One of those is security. In
that area, the new administration must quickly make
decisions. In particular, it will be important to move
forward as quickly as possible in the establishment of
the legal frameworks necessary for the deployment of
future international assistance missions to the Afghan
National Security Forces. For its part, NATO once
again reiterated its firm commitment to supporting the
Afghan security forces beyond 2014 at the summit in
Newport at the beginning of this month.
Another challenge for Afghanistan is the economy
and the fight against poverty. The implementation
of economic reforms and close cooperation with its
regional partners will be essential to reviving the
economy and to improving the living standards of
Afghans.
A stable and prosperous society also rests on the rule
of law and human rights. In those areas, it is important
to recognize the progress made by Afghanistan over
the past decade without, however, losing sight of the
extent of the outstanding problems, in particular, that
of the status of women. In that respect, we urge the next
government to spare no effort to effectively implement
the law on the elimination of violence against women.
We advocate the improvement of women’s rights in
Afghanistan as one of its priorities.
With regard to the protection of children’s rights,
we welcome the agreement reached on 23 July on the
road map to accelerate the implementation of the action
plan against the recruitment and the use of children in
the Afghan National Security Forces. We encourage
UNAMA to keep the Security Council informed,
through its periodic reports, on the progress made by
the Afghan Government in the implementation of the
road map.
As we see in many conflicts, intensified fighting
is often associated with an increase in the number of
civilian casualties. That axiom is unfortunately true
also in Afghanistan. The civilian population continues
to bear the brunt of the conflict. Women and children are
paying a very heavy price, as the Special Representative

S/PV.7267

reminded us. We are appalled by the significant increase
of 24 per cent in the number of civilian casualties in
the first half of 2014 as compared to the same period
in 2013. Anti-Government forces are responsible for
three quarters of those civilian casualties. We want to
recall here that the parties to the conflict are obliged to
distinguish between civilians and combatants.
In conclusion, I would like to express our
gratitude to the staff of UNAMA for their unwavering
commitment in difficult conditions. It is essential that
UNAMA get the support needed to continue its work
alongside the Afghan people.
Echoing other colleagues, I would like to express
my delegation’s appreciation to Ján Kubiš for the
professionalism and remarkable skill with which he has
fulfilled his mandate as Head of UNAMA at a crucial
time for the Afghan transition. Through his work, he
has embodied the principles and values of
​​ the United
Nations. We warmly thank him for that and wish every
success to his deputy, Nicholas Haysom, who will
succeed him on 1 November.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I too would
like to thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Ján Kubiš, and the representative of
Afghanistan, Mr. Tanin, for their statements.
As Mr. Kubiš recalled a moment ago, Afghanistan
has just experienced an intense phase of electoral
activity. Despite the threats and violence, many voters
went to the polls, showing their desire to contribute to
Afghanistan’s democratic future.
We understand that discussions are ongoing
between the two main candidates on the formation of
a national unity Government, and we hope that those
talks will lead very quickly to a compromise that is
acceptable to all, in the interests of the country and the
Afghan people. It is crucial that the new Government
be able to get to work as soon as possible. The election
audit, which was conducted under the supervision of
the United Nations, with many international observers
participating, was recently completed. We hope that the
election results will be published soon.
Beyond the political process, the signs pointing
to a stabilization in the situation in Afghanistan are
somewhat encouraging, but many challenges remain.
Security remains a particular challenge. Violence
is still very much a reality in the country. The recent
attacks against civilians, Afghan security forces or the

14-538559/31

S/PV.7267

The situation in Afghanistan

staff of the International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) are of particular concern. Those incidents show
the insurgency’s desire, at a time when the international
community is developing its presence in the country, to
lead Afghans and their partners to doubt the robustness
of the progress achieved.
We must not waver in the face of such attempts at
intimidation. While Afghanistan is in transition, the
support and efforts of regional partners will be crucial.
The next ministerial conference of the Istanbul Process
must be an opportunity to move in that direction.
It is clear that the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) will now be at the forefront
of the international community’s involvement. As the
Secretary-General notes in his report (S/2014/656),
UNAMA has already begun to take on that role, as the
transition away from ISAF has entered its final phase.
In particular, it plays a central role in the electoral
crisis, which we recognize today.
In future, UNAMA will be in a more central,
but also more complex, position. The Special
Representative must, through his good offices, embody
the international community in his dialogue with the
Afghan political authorities. The Mission’s mandate
should clearly identify its priority tasks and consolidate
its successes, including the protection of human rights.
To provide the best support to the new Government
in strengthening Afghan sovereignty, support for
the consolidation of the rule of law and democratic
governance must be the first priority in the Mission’s
mandate.
UNAMA’s mandate must also take into account
the major challenges for the country’s stability. In that
regard, the emergence of an illicit economy linked to
drug trafficking will be a point of particular attention
insofar as it is a significant destabilizing factor in the
country, in terms of not only corruption and security
but also public health and development. We believe
that the fight against drug trafficking must be a central
element of the political dialogue between UNAMA and
the Afghan authorities without prejudice to the work of
other United Nations entities in Afghanistan, such as
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.
In that regard, I would like to recall that France,
along with Russia, is also one of the originators of the
Paris Pact, which is the primary multilateral framework
for projects related to the fight against heroin trafficking
from Afghanistan. Phase IV of the Pact was adopted in

10/31

18/09/2014

March 2013 and covers programmes of action for the
period 2013 to 2016, which are focused in particular on
the fight against illicit financial flows from trafficking
and on strengthening regional cooperation.
In conclusion, I too would like to pay tribute to the
work of Mr. Kubiš and, beyond him, to all of the staff of
UNAMA, who are working in very difficult conditions
in Afghanistan. They have brought the United Nations
work in Afghanistan to a level of excellence that does
credit to the Organization. We believe that the United
Nations and UNAMA will have a major role to play in
Afghanistan in the coming years under the leadership
of Nick Haysom, and we welcome the fact that he will
assume that role shortly.
Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): At the outset,
I would like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Ján Kubiš for his briefing. We
appreciate his dedicated work in Afghanistan as Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). I also thank Ambassador Tanin for his
remarks.
Afghanistan is facing a critical moment on its path
towards democracy and stability. The Afghan people
showed their courage and determination to have a
peaceful, democratic transition of leadership in the two
rounds of presidential elections.
However, the prolonged electoral process continues
to affect the political and economic uncertainty of
Afghanistan and the efforts to tackle the multitude
of challenges it faces. The full audit of the vote was
completed by the Afghan Independent Election
Commission, supported by UNAMA and global
electoral observers. As we anticipate its final results
shortly, it is imperative that the two candidates abide
by the result of the audit. At the same time, we urge the
two presidential candidates to conclude an agreement
regarding the formation of a Government of national
unity in accordance with their commitments of 12 July
and the communiqué of 8 August. Both parties should
assume the responsibility to respect the Afghan
people’s desire for a peaceful and prosperous future
and address the many challenges ahead of the nation.
Any acts of incitement and violence during this final
phase of the election process and the establishment of a
new Government must not be tolerated.
With regard to the security situation in Afghanistan,
we remain deeply concerned about deliberately
targeted attacks against civilians and United Nations

14-53855

18/09/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

staff. UNAMA’s mid-year report on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict indicates a 24 per cent
increase in civilian casualties during the first half of
2014 as compared to the same period in 2013. We also
note the worrying trend that engagements on the ground
involving small arms and rockets are increasingly
becoming the leading cause of civilian casualties.
Lastly, with the drawdown of the International
Security Assistance Force from Afghanistan at the
end of 2014, continuous and substantial international
assistance is needed to support not only the Afghan
security forces but also other significant national
institutions. We note that NATO leaders renewed their
financial commitment to support the Afghan security
forces until the end of 2017 at the Summit held in Wales,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
It is critical for the Afghan Government to sign the
necessary security arrangements for the establishment
of a new mission to train and assist the Afghan forces.
In terms of the implementation of the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework, we recognize the Afghan
Government’s efforts to combat the illicit economy and
corruption by enacting the laws on combatting moneylaundering and the financing of terrorism. We call for
their full implementation at the earliest possible date.
The stability of Afghanistan is in the shared interest
of the international community. We support a peaceful
and smooth transition in Afghanistan based on a
government of national unity, with genuine partnership
and inclusiveness. The Afghan people’s aspirations for
peace and prosperity, demonstrated during the electoral
process, must be respected.
Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), and the
Ambassador of Afghanistan, His Excellency Mr. Zahir
Tanin, for their briefings.
Afghanistan has gone through a major turning
point in its political life with the massive turnout of
Afghans to choose their leaders in the elections of
last April and June. Unfortunately, the hope that was
kindled by the elections has evaporated with the postelectoral political impasse that the country now finds
itself in. In that regard, we welcome the role played by
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) to help diffuse the situation by facilitating
the signing of an agreement on an audit of the votes

S/PV.7267

for the two presidential candidates — Mr. Abdullah
Abdullah and Mr. Ashraf Ghani Ahmadzai. We thank
UNAMA for and encourage it in its impartial logistical
and technical support, which enabled the electoral
audit. We also welcome the efforts of Secretary of State
of the United States, Mr. John Kerry, to help the parties
to reach an agreement on national unity following the
announcement of the results.
In the same spirit, Chad supports the call recently
addressed by the Afghan Ulema Council to both
candidates, to rapidly resolve the crisis and form
a national unity Government in order to fulfil the
aspirations of the Afghan people. We reiterate our
encouragement to all sectors of Afghan society — in
particular the political parties, traditional and religious
authorities and civil society — for their willingness
to engage in direct and inclusive dialogue to solve
the problem, which is the only guarantee for the
maintenance of peace in Afghanistan.
The current post-electoral situation should not
overshadow the major challenges Afghanistan is
facing, which require the international community’s
constant support, specifically in the areas of security,
humanitarian issues and combatting drug trafficking,
terrorism and extremism. We welcome the political
and diplomatic efforts that are being carried out at the
regional and international levels for peacebuilding and
increasing security in Afghanistan, and we hope that
actions will continue in that area.
Chad congratulates the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) on its tireless efforts during
and after the elections to ensure security in Afghanistan
and on its remarkable results in combatting drug
trafficking. Given that the Force’s mandate is coming to
an end, we note the importance of rapidly de-escalating
the political situation in Afghanistan so that a lasting
solution to the security issue can be found after ISAF’s
departure.
Chad condemns all violence and terrorist acts
perpetrated by the Taliban, linked with Al-Qaida and
other armed groups. Those inhuman and cruel acts are
serious crimes against humanity, and their perpetrators
should be prosecuted and brought to justice. We believe
that terrorism in all its forms and manifestations is
criminal and unjustifiable, regardless of the motives.
We reaffirm our support to the SecretaryGeneral’s call to increase humanitarian assistance in
Afghanistan and to diffuse the political situation by

14-5385511/31

S/PV.7267

The situation in Afghanistan

accepting the choice expressed by the Afghan people.
We welcome the mediation efforts of the SecretaryGeneral and his Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, who called on both of the
candidates to recognize the election results following
the agreement that they signed. We also reiterate our
request to the international community and the future
government of Afghanistan to take all necessary
measures to strengthen security after the departure of
the ISAF forces from Afghanistan in order to avoid a
situation similar to the current situation in Iraq.
Finally, we pay a well-deserved tribute to
Mr. Ján Kubiš, outgoing Special Representative, for his
courageous and tireless efforts as Head of UNAMA. We
congratulate Mr. Nicholas Haysom on his appointment
and wish him much success in his mission. We would like
to encourage all United Nations staff and humanitarian
actors, who, in spite of the challenging conditions in
which they are working in Afghanistan, continue to
work as best as they can to assist the Afghan people.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for his briefing.
We also thank him for his dedication and unflagging
work alongside the Afghan people. I would also like
to thank the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
Mr. Tanin, for his briefing.
We are closely following the results of the
democratic process in Afghanistan. The Afghan people
have courageously expressed their free will throughout
the historic and transparent elections. We hope that a
national unity Government will be formed as soon as
possible. The Afghan people’s aspiration and optimism
turned to disillusionment and concern about the future
on account of the current electoral crisis. We call on
the candidates to cooperate in a timely fashion in
implementing the technical and political elements
of the 12 July agreement so as to find an appropriate
solution to the crisis. We also call on the candidates
and all Afghan stakeholders to ensure the peaceful
and democratic transfer of power, and to avoid any
escalation of violence, which could have disastrous
consequences for the country’s future.
Afghanistan will surely encounter difficulties
during and after the transition period. There will be
interconnected economic and political challenges,
particularly because the extremist forces seek to sow
lasting instability in the country. International support
12/31

18/09/2014

must therefore be significant, continuous and active
during and after the transition period. The international
community should honour its commitments and
provide the means necessary to strengthen the security
sector because the security situation in Afghanistan
remains difficult. The security forces and civilians are
still exposed to terrorist attacks. There are no words
strong enough to condemn those terrorist acts. The
United Nations must continue its work in Afghanistan,
adapting to the changes on the ground during the period
that lies ahead. We must also strengthen our partnership
with Afghanistan because the international community
cannot sit idly by while the situation deteriorates.
Work in the political and development fields and
efforts to promote reform and update the development
priorities must be coordinated in order to achieve
sustainable development and strengthen the economy.
At this critical stage, the Afghan authorities must
pursue political and economic reforms aimed at
strengthening the rule of law, good governance, the
fight against corruption and the preservation of the
progress achieved over previous years. That includes
progress with respect to the human rights issues, which
should not suffer as a result of the recent crisis. We urge
the next President to take up the many challenges to the
human rights situation in the country.
We hope for increased regional cooperation, a better
understanding between Afghanistan and its neighbours,
and a continuation of forums and meetings aimed at
strengthening opportunities for economic cooperation.
Accordingly, we warmly welcome the positive dynamic
in Afghanistan’s bilateral relations with its neighbours
and we support all efforts aimed at building trust at the
regional level.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I thank you, Madame
President, for organizing this very important debate. I
would also like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Ján Kubiš, for his briefing.
I want to acknowledge the presence of the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador Tanin,
and thank him for his statement, which offers us
considerable hope.
The enthusiastic participation of the people of
Afghanistan in the three-month-long electoral process
is a milestone in the political evolution of the country.
It is also an indication that Afghanistan is on the
path to peace and stability. We commend the efforts
of the Independent Election Commission in ensuring
the integrity of the electoral process. As part of those
14-53855

18/09/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

efforts, 110,784 electoral observers were accredited
by the Commission prior to the run-off election, and
an additional 2,000 polling stations were established
within existing polling centres to improve accessibility.
Out of the 6,365 polling centres that were open on
election day, it is remarkable that only 140 were closed
for security reasons.
We are concerned that the persistent tension
between political leaders has delayed the conclusion
of the electoral process. We therefore commend the
efforts of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), the United States of America
and other partners in resolving the impasse by brokering
an agreement between the candidates on 12 July. We
believe that the agreement, together with the 8 August
communiqué, which called for the audit of all votes
case and a commitment of the parties to abide by the
outcome, is a visible, feasible solution to the impasse.
It is particularly significant that the two presidential
candidates also agreed to form a Government of
national unity. We urge them and their supporters to
respect those agreements and ensure that the ongoing
electoral process is resolved peacefully in the higher
interests of the people of Afghanistan. We welcome
the successful conclusion of the auditing exercise on
4 September and expect that the audited results will
be made public as soon as possible, which will seal
the notable achievement of Afghanistan’s first-ever
democratic transfer of power.
It is disconcerting that the Taliban and other
insurgent groups have decided to take advantage of the
protracted political electoral impasse and the drawdown
of the international military contingent to carry out their
destructive activities around the country. We are even
more concerned that civilians are the worst affected,
with increasing numbers of deaths and injuries among
women and children. We condemn those attacks and
commend the dedication and courage of the Afghan
National Security Forces as they continue to combat
the terrorists. It is essential to consider expanding the
listing procedure in the sanctions regime established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) to include individuals
in the Taliban who are responsible for the new wave of
terror in Afghanistan.
Afghanistan’s continued engagement with its
neighbours in the promotion of regional cooperation in
that regard remains vital. We welcome the plans for the
Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process ministerial conference
in Tianjin, China, designed to deepen regional

S/PV.7267

cooperation and urge the Government of Afghanistan
to seize the moment and maximize the benefits of that
mechanism.
Nigeria commends the renewed efforts of the
Secretary-General and his team in seeking a lasting
solution to the situation in Afghanistan. Most notable is
his recent engagement with the parties in an effort that
is already yielding tangible results.
I would like to join colleagues who have spoken
before me in expressing profound appreciation to
Mr. Kubiš for his astute leadership at the helm of
UNAMA and for his remarkable achievements and
accomplishments. We wish him the best for the future.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the briefings delivered by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ján Kubiš,
and by the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
Ambassador Zahir Tanin.
I begin my statement by underscoring the important
role that the United Nations has played in the vote
counting after accusations of electoral fraud in the
second round of presidential elections in Afghanistan
on 14 June. Further, we join the Secretary-General
in emphasizing the bravery and determination of the
millions of men and women who participated in the
two rounds of elections, either as voters, candidates,
campaign workers or observers.
The efforts of the Afghan people to bring about
a peaceful, transparent and democratic transition in
leadership have been exemplary. However, as indicated
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
all of those efforts could end up meaning nothing if a
Government of national unity is not formed as quickly as
possible. For that reason, the international community
continues to be called upon to play a crucial support
and facilitation role in creating contexts for dialogue
among all Afghans. It is important to promote dialogue,
inclusiveness and consensus among Afghans; it is an
essential factor when it comes to building a country
that is able to stand on its own with solid democratic
institutions and where the rule of law is in force.
With respect to the political process, Chile supports
the process of national reconciliation, which is targeted
at and led by Afghans with the aim of bringing peace
and stability to the country and, naturally, in the region
as a whole. We express our firm support for the active
role of the High Peace Council in promoting efforts to
achieve national reconciliation. Equally important is for

14-5385513/31

S/PV.7267

The situation in Afghanistan

the new Government to respect its public commitments
and to conclude a political agreement on a Government
of national unity. We also hope that the international
community will support the Government and the
people of Afghanistan and work with them to create
an environment that is conducive to the reconciliation
process.
A modern, democratic and prosperous Afghanistan
depends to a large extent on the success of the process
of reconciliation in the framework of a global strategy
for the protection and promotion of human rights, as
well as access for all Afghans to education, health
services and work. It is therefore a priority to ensure
that progress made by Afghanistan in human rights
since 2001 be accelerated and consolidated.
It is the irrefutable responsibility of the Afghan
Government to ensure the full implementation of the
law on the elimination of violence against women
so that the perpetrators of such violence are held
accountable for their acts. Equally important is for the
international community to continue to participate in
long-term partnerships with Afghanistan, supporting
the country’s efforts during the transition period and
beyond 2014.
We reiterate our appeal to the international
community to continue to support the Afghan people
in its efforts to strengthen its capacity to overcome the
country’s security challenges.
In conclusion, we express sincere appreciation
for the work of Mr. Kubiš and wish him the greatest
success in future.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2014/656). I also
thank Special Representative Kubiš for his briefing
and Ambassador Tanin for his remarks this morning.
As this is likely to be the Special Representative’s last
Council meeting, let me pay particularly warm tribute
to Special Representative Ján Kubiš, who, for the past
three years, has worked tirelessly to bring peace and
stability to Afghanistan. We wish him extremely well
in his future endeavours.
I will focus my remarks on four issues: the recent
NATO Summit, the electoral process, the next steps for
Afghanistan and the role of the United Nations and the
international community.
The NATO Summit in Wales, earlier this month,
was an important opportunity to mark the achievements

14/31

18/09/2014

and sacrifices made by the International Security
Assistance Force mission. Afghan forces are now
leading 99 per cent of the combat operations across
Afghanistan and are proving increasingly effective.
The Summit also demonstrated the international
community’s enduring commitment to Afghanistan.
We reaffirmed commitments made at Chicago in
2012 to sustain the Afghan security forces throughout
the transformation decade. The United Kingdom
announced that it will continue to provide more than
$100 million per year to support the Afghan National
Security Forces for the next three years, and we will
work with international partners to train future leaders
through the Officer Academy.
Turning to the electoral process, let me acknowledge
the superb efforts of Special Representative Kubiš and
his team and their work over the past few months in
support of the independent election institutions in
Afghanistan. Together, after a challenging period,
they worked effectively to conclude the audit of
Afghanistan’s presidential election. But as the
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan has made
clear, the situation remains fluid and uncertain. As we
near the end of what has been a protracted process, the
Council must send a firm message to both candidates,
urging them to engage constructively over the coming
days as they seek to calmly resolve their differences
and to work towards an agreement that establishes a
new unity Government. They must continue to act in
the best interests of the Afghan people.
The United Kingdom remains firmly committed to
a lasting partnership with Afghanistan. Together, we
must set out a constructive approach and press ahead
quickly on key reforms and priorities. We look forward
to the signing of the bilateral security agreement
between the Government of Afghanistan and the
United States and the signing of the NATO status-offorces agreement as important steps to secure future
international support.
Afghanistan also faces significant domestic
challenges. Urgent work is needed to stabilize the
economy and to protect the important gains made
in human rights, in particular those of women and
children. An inclusive peace process remains essential.
A new Afghan Government must also continue to
engage with key regional partners through initiatives
such as the Heart of Asia process, in order to sustain the
important progress made to date.

14-53855

18/09/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

The United Kingdom looks forward to co-chairing
the London Conference on Afghanistan later this year.
The Conference will provide a further platform for the
international community to demonstrate its solidarity
with Afghanistan and for a new Government to set
out its vision of the form and delivery of our shared
priorities. The support of the Council and the work of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
will be essential in that effort, both in signalling our
expectations and in delivering key assistance on the
ground.

S/PV.7267

At this crucial moment, Afghanistan needs
continuing international support. In that regard, we
commend Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and United
States Secretary of State John Kerry for their efforts in
engaging both candidates to form a unity Government.

It is an extraordinary time for Afghanistan. On the
verge of a truly historic moment in their history, we urge
all parties in Afghanistan to work in the interests of the
Afghan people. We urge the international community
to offer its full support.

For Afghanistan to realize sustainable stability and
security, we all agree in the Council that there should
be an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process, as
a foundation for peace in Afghanistan and the region.
However, that does not seem possible, given the current
violence perpetuated by the Taliban and other armed
groups, which we strongly condemn. We are reminded
that the prolonged political impasse is also a factor of
instability, as it enhances the spoilers — including the
Taliban — that are taking advantage of the situation to
further destabilize the country.

Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I wish to thank
Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, for his briefing. As this
has been his last intervention in the Council in that
capacity, I take this opportunity to commend him
for his dedication and achievements in Afghanistan,
together with his entire team. I also thank the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan to the United Nations,
Mr. Zahir Tanin, for his statement.

In that respect, we commend the Afghan National
Security Forces, which have demonstrated, since June
of last year, their capability to ensure national security,
despite a number of security incidents, including attacks
on civilians and United Nations staff. The international
community must continue to support the Afghan
forces in enhancing their capacities, in both training
and equipment, especially during the post-2014 period,
in order to enable them to decisively counter ongoing
threats, including organized crime and illicit drugs.

Afghanistan continues to face significant political
and security challenges. As we speak, millions of
Afghans are still patiently awaiting the final outcome
of the presidential elections, which will lead to the
first-ever, democratic transfer of power in the country.
The enthusiastic voter participation amid the grave
security risks has raised hope and has demonstrated the
will of the Afghan people to assume ownership of their
country. It would be unfortunate if the current deadlock
over the election results were to jeopardize the future
of the country.

Noting the 63 per cent decrease in opium production
in 2014, as compared to 2013, attributed to the efforts
of the Afghan National Security Forces, we believe that
sustained collective action is important in the region to
curtail the continuing threat from drugs and organized
crime.

In that regard, Rwanda is encouraged by the
agreement between both candidates on their shared
vision with regard to the elections audit and the
formation of a Government of national unity. While
awaiting the results of the audit, we welcome the
consultations initiated by President Hâmid Karzai with
both campaigns to end the gridlock and ensure that the
current political climate does not lead to Afghanistan
relapsing into conflict. We call on both candidates to
demonstrate leadership and help the process to move
forward.

Regional cooperation, mainly with neighbouring
countries, is paramount in the areas of shared interests,
such as the long-term counter-narcotics campaign,
security,
counter-terrorism,
reconciliation
and
economic development. We believe that the meeting
of the Istanbul Process on Regional Security and
Cooperation for a Secure and Stable Afghanistan, held
in Tianjin, and the leadership of China are important in
that regard.
The political uncertainties and prolonged
electoral period in the country have gravely affected
Afghanistan’s economy, which have led to declining
investor confidence and poor revenue performance.
We welcome, in that respect, the upcoming ministerial
conference on development in Afghanistan, to be held
in London in November. We hope that during the

14-5385515/31

S/PV.7267

The situation in Afghanistan

conference, the donor community will be able to breach
the growing funding gap and that the new Government
will reaffirm its partnership with the donors, in line
with the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework.
In conclusion, we believe that, in order to overcome
the enormous challenges ahead, Afghans need strong
leadership, one that will leave no stone unturned to
ensure economic growth and inclusive governance,
while fighting insecurity and illicit drugs, among other
things.
With the drawdown of the International Security
Assistance Force by the end of the year, we appeal to
the international community and to the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in particular to
continue to support the Afghan people and the new
Administration with a view to helping them to overcome
the multifaceted challenges they face.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I should
like to thank Special Representative Mr. Ján Kubiš for
his briefing. I should like also to thank the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador Tanin, for
his statement.
In recent years, thanks to the hard work of the
people and the Government of Afghanistan, the
peaceful reconstruction of Afghanistan has registered
positive progress. But the country is also facing many
challenges and risks. China hopes that a peaceful
transition will be realized so that the Afghan people
can focus their energy on development.
Here I should like to emphasize the following
points.
First, China welcomes the fact that the two rounds
of presidential elections were held in a largely smooth
manner, marking an important step in the building of
Afghan State institutions and reflecting the aspirations
of the Afghan people to peace and a better life. At the
same time, China has taken note of the disagreement
between the relevant parties over the ballot count in
the second round. We welcome the positive role that
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) has played in the auditing process. We also
sincerely hope that the relevant actors in Afghanistan
will put the fundamental interests of their country and
people first, properly settle their differences through
dialogue and consultation, complete the election process
and form a new Government as soon as possible, and
maintain national stability and unity.

16/31

18/09/2014

Secondly, China staunchly supports the efforts
of the Afghan people towards the realization of an
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned national reconciliation
process. We support the playing of an important role
by the Afghan High Peace Council. We hope that the
international community will help Afghanistan to
independently move forward with the reconciliation
process. We also welcome the constructive assistance
provided by neighbouring countries in this regard.
Thirdly, China is deeply concerned at the
increasing number of security incidents in certain parts
of the country and the mounting civilian casualties. We
support Afghanistan’s efforts to enhance the capacity of
its National Security Forces and police force in order to
respond to the various security threats. We welcome the
continued assistance of the international community in
that regard. At the same time, international initiatives
should appropriately accommodate the reasonable
concerns of the relevant parties, in particular the
countries of the region.
Fourthly, China calls on the international
community to honor its commitment and ensure
uninterrupted economic assistance and support. The
key is to help Afghanistan implement the priorities of
its national development plan, increase its capacity to
achieve independent economic and social development,
and eliminate the sources of terrorism, drug production
and trafficking, and cross-border organized crime.
Fifthly, China supports Afghanistan’s efforts to
participate more intensively in regional cooperation,
and, on the basis of mutual respect, equality and mutual
benefit, enhance mutual trust with the countries of
the region and deepen cooperation in various fields.
We should give full play to the role of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization and other regional
mechanisms so as to achieve common security and
development and allow the question of Afghanistan
to move along its trajectory in line with the common
interests of the Afghan people and the peoples of the
region as a whole.
Sixthly, China supports the United Nations
taking the lead in coordinating international efforts
for the resolution of the question of Afghanistan. We
hope that UNAMA will actively perform its duties
according to its mandate, enhance communication with
the Government, coordinate international assistance
efforts and build the confidence of the international
community in the transition process in Afghanistan.

14-53855

18/09/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

We appreciate the important role played by
Special Representative Ján Kubiš in promoting the
peaceful transition of Afghanistan, and we wish
him all the best in his future endeavours. As one of
Afghanistan’s neighbours, China has always respected
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Afghanistan and respects the path of development
chosen by its people in accordance with their national
reality. We are participating actively in the peaceful
reconstruction of Afghanistan and are committed to
deepening our strategic partnership. We look forward
to a united, stable and friendly Afghanistan that enjoys
sustainable development.
The Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs has
recently appointed a special envoy for Afghanistan in
order to enhance communication. We will maintain
close communication with the Afghan Government and
the relevant stakeholders so as to finalize, as soon as
possible, the dates of the fourth Ministerial Conference
of the Istanbul Process. China stands ready to work
together with the international community to play a
constructive role in helping Afghanistan to achieve
political reconciliation, economic revitalization, lasting
peace and sustainable development.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I would like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Ján
Kubiš, for his briefing and to express my delegation’s
appreciation for his leadership throughout his tenure
at the helm of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I also thank Ambassador
Tanin for his statement.
With the support of the international community,
during the past decade Afghanistan has made significant
progress in a number of areas, including the rule of law,
national capacity-building, human rights, women’s
participation, the educational and health systems, and
infrastructure development. The elections held earlier
this year reaffirmed the desire of the Afghan people to
assume responsibility for the future of their country.
Voter turnout spoke for itself. Many chose to vote in
spite of intimidation and threats to their lives.
As the preliminary results of the presidential runoff
audits are to be announced, we strongly urge the two
contenders — Mr. Abdullah Abdullah and Mr. Ashraf
Ghani — to place the interests of their people above
all else and to translate their political passion for the
future of Afghanistan into the formation of a national
unity Government. The utmost care must be taken to

S/PV.7267

avoid any acts that could derail Afghanistan’s historic
transformation.
The leading role of the United Nations in responding
to Afghan requests for support for the 12 July
agreement is much appreciated. Audit supervision has
been unprecedented in its scale, depth and scrutiny.
UNAMA’s outstanding work and coordination with
International Security Assistance Force, European
Union and Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe teams have been of critical importance to
ensuring an outcome that genuinely reflects the will of
the Afghan people.
The attempts made by terrorist and insurgent
networks to take advantage of the protracted electoral
crisis and the growing levels of violence in the
country are of great concern. The sharp increase in
the number of civilian deaths and injuries in 2014
resulting from escalating ground engagements between
anti-Government elements and the Afghan National
Security Forces, terrorist acts and the use of improvised
explosive devices, particularly in civilian-populated
areas, is a worrying trend.
We urge all parties to uphold their obligations
under international humanitarian and human rights law
to protect the civilian population. The perpetrators of
acts of violence against the civilian population must be
brought to account. We also condemn all incitement and
attacks against United Nations and other international
staff, aid and medical workers, as well as their assets
and facilities. Putting an end to impunity for such
attacks is a must. Accountability must become part and
parcel of how the new Afghanistan operates.
Continued international assistance will be
essential in the years to come in order to sustain
Afghanistan’s transformation. We welcome the Wales
Summit declaration on Afghanistan, which stresses the
importance of the post-2014 Resolute Support mission
contributing to the further development of professional
Afghan security forces, and sends a strong signal on
the necessity of continued international support for
the protection of human rights, the development of the
education, health and social sectors, as well as longterm political and economic cooperation.
In that context, we stress the urgency of concluding
the status-of-forces agreement so that future security
assistance can proceed smoothly. Lithuania remains
committed to supporting Afghanistan’s development
and democracy. Our cooperation with and assistance

14-5385517/31

S/PV.7267

The situation in Afghanistan

to the Afghan people, including financial support to
the Afghan National Security Forces, will continue as
stated at the Chicago Summit, the Tokyo Conference
and other meetings on Afghanistan.
Lithuania will work closely with Afghanistan
beyond 2014 as part of a new training mission once all
the necessary agreements are in place.
We are well aware of the challenges that lie ahead
for Afghanistan. Further progress is needed towards
peace and reconciliation, strengthening regional ties,
including through the Istanbul process and bilaterally,
as well as tackling the illicit economy and advancing
the rule of law. The new Government will have to step
up actions aimed at addressing the country’s economic
situation, combating corruption and drug trafficking,
about which other delegations have spoken, as well
as implementing measures aimed at combating the
financing of terrorism and money-laundering.
With regard to women’s rights, we note that
incidents of violence against women remain
underreported, especially in rural areas, for fear of
social stigma, exclusion or reprisals. We encourage the
Afghan Government, as our colleagues from Australia
and Luxembourg have done, to continue efforts aimed
at implementing the Afghan national action plan on
women, peace and security, the 2013 recommendations
made by the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women, and the 2009 law on
elimination of violence against women.
Women’s genuine and meaningful participation in
peace and reconciliation, including peace jirgas and
provisional councils, is an integral part of fostering
durable peace and development in the country.
Ensuring women’s safety and dignity in the workplace
is key to enabling women to join the civil service. The
recruitment, training and retention of women in the
Afghan national security forces must also be pursued
vigorously.
In conclusion, the presidential candidates’
acceptance of the election results and the formation of
a national unity Government are the most immediate
priorities for Afghanistan today. All eyes are on the
two contenders. They cannot and must not fail the
expectations of a nation that has been through so much.
Afghanistan needs strong leadership and a viable,
capable Government of national unity, a solid partner
for the international community, which stands ready
to continue to work closely with the country to create

18/31

18/09/2014

a sustainable, peaceful and prosperous future for all
Afghan people.
Mr. De Antueno (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank Special Representative Ján Kubiš,
for his briefing on the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2014/656), and the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, Ambassador Tanin, for his statement.
As we await the results of the second round of the
presidential elections, Argentina calls on the candidates
and the parties involved to accept the result of the vote
recount so that Afghanistan can continue to consolidate
its political transition, improve its stability and cement
national unity. The challenges the new authorities will
face are well known and include fulfilling the Afghan
people’s desire for peace in general and for cordial
relations with other countries in the region. In that
regard, we commend the ongoing efforts of the United
Nations and Mr. Kerry, the United States Secretary of
State, to generate dialogue between the presidential
candidates, and to obtain a commitment to a political
transition in the hands of a Government of national
unity. We would also like to highlight the efforts of
Afghanistan and Pakistan to establish better and greater
cooperation over national security, which could also be
extended to other important areas.
Argentina notes with concern the increase in
security incidents that occurred during and as a
result of the second round of presidential elections
in Afghanistan. We regret the attacks by the Taliban,
criminal organizations and international and national
terrorist groups. We note that they were aimed at
civilian targets as well as military ones, resulting
chiefly in innocent victims, particularly women and
children. Like the Secretary-General, we believe in
the importance of the Afghan national security forces,
who have demonstrated their ability and effectiveness
in confronting the country’s many threats to peace.
However, as the Secretary-General’s report eloquently
expresses it, their efforts will require the support of the
international community, to a greater or lesser degree,
in the next few years, if we are to achieve long-term
peace and stability.
We would like to call attention to the importance
of stepping up humanitarian efforts in order to combat
the chronic child malnutrition in Afghanistan. We
emphasize that resources must be allocated through a
common humanitarian fund in order to prioritize the
support and response of the United Nations and other
non-governmental partners in the provinces where
14-53855

18/09/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

malnutrition is most acute and problematic. We also
support the efforts to implement the action plan for the
prevention of underage recruitment.
Argentina supports the efforts to prevent the
production and trafficking of drugs in Afghanistan.
We emphasize the importance of the role of the
United Nations in monitoring the drug situation in
Afghanistan and of its support to national efforts, as
well as the importance of coordinating the system’s
various agencies in order to ensure a comprehensive
approach to the issue. Finally, we emphasize that the
role of the United Nations will continue to be essential,
both in helping a future Government of national unity
to meet its commitments in the areas of development
and security and in cooperating in the coordination
of humanitarian assistance and the fight against the
production and trafficking of drugs. We have full
confidence in the work of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and will continue to support
them in the future.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
I would like to thank Special Representative Kubiš
for his briefing today and for his ongoing leadership in
challenging circumstances. We wish him all the best
and are grateful to him for his service in a very difficult
assignment. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Tanin for a statement that eloquently conveyed the
stakes of the current impasse.
My remarks today will centre on two issues, the
election and the role of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the international
community going forward. First, concerning the
election, as the efforts to finalize its results proceed, we
should not lose sight of the Afghan people’s commitment
to their democracy. Many Afghan voters took real risks
and overcame fears for their safety in order to cast
their ballots. No matter who they voted for, their votes
were an affirmation of Afghans’ desire to shape their
country’s future. We commend the Afghan auditors and
observers for the critically important part they have
played in this process. We also commend the United
Nations, particularly UNAMA and the United Nations
Development Programme, for their constructive role in
the electoral process.
One of the Afghans who voted was Mohammad
Ismail, a tyre shop owner in Kabul. In the June runoff,

S/PV.7267

he brought his six-year-old daughter Nida with him to
the polls. She insisted, he told the New York Times,
that “[w]hen I told her she did not have a voter card,
she told me she would use mine.” He said that he never
thought he would have the chance to bring his daughter
to participate in a vote. The turnout of people like
Mohammad is a measure of the progress Afghanistan
has made in the last 13 years. That progress has come
at a high price, as the suicide attack in Kabul earlier
this week, which killed three people and wounded five
more, brought into stark relief.
So many people have given their lives in order
to build a more democratic, secure and prosperous
Afghanistan, and while there have been some setbacks,
the progress is real. Afghans have seen improved access
to education for all children, including girls. Fewer
than a million students were enrolled in school in 2001,
none of them girls; today, more than 8.3 million attend
school, a third of them girls. Health care has improved
dramatically. A decade ago 10 per cent of the Afghan
people had access to basic health services; today, nearly
two-thirds do. During this decade Afghanistan has
seen the fastest gains in life expectancy and maternal
and child health in the entire world. In 2001 there was
virtually no independent Afghan media, only Taliban
propaganda. Today Afghans can listen to 175 FM radio
stations, watch 75 TV channels and read hundreds of
print publications. All of that progress has changed
people’s lives for the better.
And the admirable patience of most Afghans with
the democratic process, particularly through the recent
recount, is a reflection of that progress as well. All
of that progress now hangs in the balance. Until now,
the candidates have been willing to stay at the table
and work towards a compromise that would avoid the
kind of divisions that could undermine Afghanistan’s
progress towards greater stability. Both have openly
expressed their commitment to putting Afghanistan’s
future first. Our message to them today is to persevere
in that effort and forge a durable compromise.
Secondly, we support UNAMA’s ongoing efforts
to assist the Afghan Government, from building good
governance and strengthening economic development
to promoting regional cooperation. UNAMA has been
Afghanistan’s partner since 2002 and will continue to
play a role in the country’s development. The United
States is also committed to Afghanistan’s ongoing
growth, development and security, and will remain
a close partner of its Government. That commitment

14-5385519/31

S/PV.7267

The situation in Afghanistan

to Afghanistan is rooted in the strategic partnership
we entered into in 2012. We look forward to working
with the new Government to align our development
assistance with its priorities and uphold the Tokyo
Mutual Accountability Framework.
NATO allies and partner nations stand ready to
continue to train, advise and assist the Afghan national
security forces after 2014. Their mission will be based
on the sound legal footing provided by the United
States-Afghanistan bilateral security agreement and
the NATO-Afghanistan status of forces agreement,
which we hope will be concluded soon. The proposed
plan, announced at the recent summit in Wales, is
for the new NATO mission to be conducted in full
partnership with the Government of Afghanistan. In
the coming months, we hope to work with the members
of the Security Council to develop a draft resolution
welcoming the Government of Afghanistan’s decisions
on that agreement.
Not long ago, an election in Afghanistan would in
itself have been unthinkable. Today, a six-year old girl
can insist that her father take her along when he casts
his vote. That should give us all hope for Afghanistan’s
future, and it should inspire the country’s leaders to
reach a political compromise, helping to insure that one
day that girl can cast her own ballot.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Mukerji (India): Let me begin by thanking
you, Madam President, for organizing today’s debate on
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). We thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Ján Kubiš and Ambassador Zahir
Tanin for their briefings. We also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his quarterly report on the situation in
Afghanistan and its implications for international peace
and security (S/2014/656).
Afghanistan is at a historic crossroads, poised as
it is for its first-ever democratic transfer of power. We
must acknowledge the leadership and statesmanship
that have been shown by President Karzai and the
Afghan leadership over the past 13 years, which have
brought Afghanistan to this historic juncture.
I cannot hide the fact that we are concerned by the
present political impasse in Afghanistan surrounding
the election results. We must not forget that the Afghan

20/31

18/09/2014

electorate braved threats from terrorist and extremist
elements to turn out in large numbers during the first and
second rounds of voting. There is no better testimony
to the strong popular support for democracy that exists
in Afghanistan and for preserving the valuable gains of
the past 13 years. We are confident that the two leading
candidates will respect that noble sentiment and the
wish of the Afghan people for a peaceful, stable and
democratic country.
The political transition that will be completed
with the inauguration of the new President will be an
important milestone in Afghan history. It will mark
not only the culmination of a process that is Afghanled, Afghan-owned and Afghan-controlled, but also a
process that carries the hopes and best wishes of the
international community. Recently, on 10 September,
our honourable Minister of External Affairs visited
Kabul. Her words in Kabul during the inauguration
of the flag monument describe our relationship in a
holistic manner:
“India will always be Afghanistan’s first
strategic partner. We are committed to assisting
Afghanistan in whatever way is possible within our
means.”
I would like to reiterate that we do not have the
luxury of an exit strategy in Afghanistan. We are
undeterred by the cowardly attack of 23 May on the
Indian consulate in Herat. That attack reflected the
deep designs of terrorist forces that want to eliminate
every institution that believes in the promotion peace
and stability in Afghanistan. We stand with the Afghan
people in assisting them on the path of growth and
prosperity.
The security situation in Afghanistan remains
fragile. The Secretary-General’s latest report gives
details of that. The report mentions that security
incidents in the south, south-east and east accounted
for 65.3 per cent of total incidents during the reporting
period. Therefore, those areas must be accorded greater
resources and attention to ensure a better security
situation in the days to come. The international
community must render its full support to Afghanistan
to defeat the forces of terrorism, which do not want
peace in Afghanistan.
With respect to the reconciliation process, we would
like to reiterate that it must remain Afghan-led, Afghanowned and Afghan-controlled, while respecting the
agreed red lines. We would never endorse treating the

14-53855

18/09/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV.7267

Government of Afghanistan on a par with the elements
of the erstwhile Taliban regime.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.

The Secretary-General’s report further mentions
that Afghanistan’s economic situation today is of grave
concern. In addition, the report mentions that tackling
Afghanistan’s growing funding gap and ensuring that
recurrent budgetary costs can be met will also be an
immediate challenge for the new administration. It is
reported that the prolonged electoral process, which
saw senior Government positions vacated, months of
campaigning and the severe uncertainty of the postelection impasse, contributed to a precipitous drop in
growth, declining investor confidence and poor revenue
performance. India stands ready to assist Afghanistan
on its path to economic recovery. We must not allow
our attention to be diverted from the equally important
issue of economic development in Afghanistan.

Mr. Sahebzada Ahmed Khan (Pakistan): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Afghanistan, Ján Kubiš, for his statement. Over
the past three years, Special Representative Kubiš has
provided the leadership and the vision that the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
has needed. We also appreciate his recent visits to
Pakistan. Let me also thank Ambassador Zahir Tanin
for his statement.

With respect to the role of UNAMA, we believe that
the Mission has an important role to play in supporting
the activities of the new political institutions of the
Afghan State. No other organization can represent in
full measure the international community’s concern for
Afghanistan and its vision for a peaceful, sovereign,
independent and prosperous Afghanistan. But UNAMA
must also focus on the important role it plays in ensuring
the delivery of valuable humanitarian and development
assistance to Afghanistan. The Mission is uniquely
placed to deploy the professional and physical resources
required to deliver much-needed humanitarian and
development assistance to the remotest corners of
Afghanistan.
India’s commitment to assisting the people
and Government of Afghanistan in consolidating
the impressive gains of the past 13 years to which
you referred, Madam — including political
reconstruction — remains unwavering. India shares
civilizational links with Afghanistan and will stand
by our Afghan brethren as they build a peaceful,
pluralistic, democratic prosperous Afghanistan.
To conclude, we would like to express our full
support for the political, social and economic transition
that is taking place. We sincerely hope that the political
impasse will be over without any further delay, and that
the acceptance of the results by the leaders will provide
a solid foundation on which a new chapter of Afghan
history will be written. We would like to reiterate our
unwavering commitment to the people and Government
of Afghanistan at this critical juncture.

Pakistan supports a peaceful democratic transition
in Afghanistan. We have pursued a policy of neutrality,
stressing that the elections are an Afghan affair.
Members may recall that we enhanced security along
the border during the two rounds. The completion of
the electoral process in a credible and timely manner
will, we hope, bring about a stronger, more stable and
unified Afghanistan. We welcome all sincere efforts
aimed at promoting understanding between the two
presidential candidates. Pakistan has repeatedly
affirmed its commitment to working with whoever
emerges as the democratic choice of the Afghan people.
Pakistan and Afghanistan agree that terrorism
is a common enemy and on the need to strengthen
cooperation and coordination to deal with that common
menace. Pakistan, as members know, is making a
resolute and stern effort against terrorists and their
hideouts through our military operation Zarb-e-Azb.
We expect all possible cooperation from the Afghan
Government to take measures to eliminate terrorist
sanctuaries on their side. Regrettably, we have seen
a proliferation of cross-border attacks into Pakistan
over the past few months. That has been coupled
with unsubstantiated allegations. Our constructive
engagement will, we hope, help build trust. We also
remain committed to working on the economic, trade
and energy linkages envisaged in Prime Minister
Nawaz Sharif’s prosperous neighbourhood strategy.
We agree with the Secretary-General’s assessment
that the Afghan economy is a source of grave
concern. Economic decline would have an impact
on everything — reconstruction, security, refugee
repatriation and peace and stability. It is important that
the international community recommit to supporting
Afghanistan at the London Conference later this year.
“Predictability” and “continuity” are the key words.

14-5385521/31

S/PV.7267

The situation in Afghanistan

Strengthening the capacity of the Afghan National
Security Forces (ANSF) is essential for dealing with
the security challenges pertaining to the situation post2014. It is reassuring that the international community,
at the NATO Summit in Wales, reaffirmed its continuing
engagement with Afghanistan through pledges of
increased financial support to the ANSF. We also
believe that sustainable peace is not possible without
comprehensive national reconciliation. We hope that
proper attention will be paid to an inclusive Afghan-led
and Afghan-owned peace process. That is an essential
pillar of stability that cannot be indefinitely ignored.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2014/656)
mentions the declining rate of refugee return. We hope
that Afghanistan will work on creating the pull factors
necessary for the sustainable return of Afghan refugees.
Another issue of concern for us is the illicit economy.
We agree with the Secretary-General that it has been
both a symptom and a source of uncertainty.
Pakistan continues to be constructively engaged
with regional and international efforts for Afghanistan’s
stability and development. We appreciate the wise
leadership that China is providing for the Istanbul
Process and look forward to the ministerial conference
in Tianjin.
In the end, a peaceful and stable Afghanistan is
in Pakistan’s vital interest. We recommit ourselves
to supporting all endeavours in the cause of peace,
stability and the development of the country.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey): Madam President, I thank
you for organizing this meeting. I would also like to
thank Special Representative Kubiš for his briefing and
Ambassador Tanin for his statement.
With the crucial phase Afghanistan has reached
in terms of the political, security and economic
transformation it is undergoing, our continued support
to Afghanistan is vital for a peaceful, secure and stable
Afghanistan that can effectively serve the needs of its
people. It goes without saying that the international
community should keep investing in positive scenarios
for Afghanistan at this vital juncture.
The Afghan people have demonstrated strong will,
courage and determination to move towards a peaceful,
democratic and stable Afghanistan, by participating
enthusiastically in the presidential and provincial

22/31

18/09/2014

elections despite the security risks. It is time to honour
their wish. The recent completion of the nationwide audit
of the ballots cast in the country’s 14 June presidential
elections run-off is a step in the right direction. We
believe in the capacity of Afghanistan to undertake
a successful political transition, and we believe that
all stakeholders will act responsibly, exercise selfrestraint and show genuine leadership and partnership.
The consequences of the failure of governance efforts
would be too great for any of us to bear.
We deeply regret and condemn the terrorist
attacks that have taken place in Afghanistan in the
reporting period, resulting in the deaths of many
civilians. We believe that those heinous attacks will
not derail Afghanistan’s efforts to achieve a peaceful
transformation. We stand beside Afghanistan in this
difficult period and reiterate our fullest support.
The Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2014/656)
highlights that Afghanistan has continued to engage with
its neighbours in the promotion of regional cooperation.
As international forces are withdrawing, regional
cooperation and commitment become increasingly
vital for transforming the region into a zone of peace,
stability and prosperity. Based on that vision, the region
must come together to transform common problems
into mutual interests. In that context, we appreciate
all bilateral and multilateral dialogue and cooperation
efforts and welcome the positive momentum that has
been reached in the Istanbul Process, including the
senior officials meeting held in Beijing on 10 July. We
are looking forward to the upcoming Istanbul Process
conference in Tianjin, and we would like to thank China
for its leadership in that regard.
I would like to voice our strong support for the crucial
and comprehensive role that the United Nations and the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan will
continue to play in supporting Afghanistan during the
post-transition period. I also want to voice our heartfelt
appreciation to Mr. Kubiš. His tireless efforts and
dedication have undoubtedly brought Afghanistan one
step closer to peace. We would also like to extend our
support to his successor, Mr. Haysom, and wish him
good luck in his endeavours.
To conclude, Turkey will always remain in
solidarity with the Afghan people, and we will
continue to contribute to a safe, secure and prosperous
Afghanistan, as we have done for many decades.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
14-53855

18/09/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I would like to express
my gratitude to you, Madam President, for convening
today’s meeting. At the outset, allow me to thank
Special Representative Ján Kubiš for his unwavering
leadership of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan. I understand that this is his last
appearance in the Security Council. We wish to thank
Mr. Kubiš very much. The Mission led by him has been
playing a vital role in the political process regarding
the development of Afghanistan despite difficult
circumstances on the ground.
I would also like to pay tribute to Mr. John Kerry,
Secretary of State of the United States. Secretary Kerry
has been instrumental in facilitating an agreement
on a Government of national unity between the two
presidential candidates, Mr. Abdullah Abdullah and
Mr. Ashraf Ghani Ahmadzai.
Since the landmark Tokyo conference of January
2002, the international community has been steadfast
in its commitment to the development of Afghanistan.
In the Tokyo Declaration of 2012, Afghanistan and the
international community established the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework. The Framework aims at
strengthening the international partnership for the
sustainable development of Afghanistan throughout the
transformation decade, which starts next year.
Since 2001, Japan has contributed $5.4 billion
towards the security and sustainable development of
Afghanistan. That makes my country the second largest
donor after the United States. As Japan’s first Special
Representative for Afghanistan and Pakistan, I have
had the honour of taking an active part in the process.
As embodied in the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework, the international community’s ability
to sustain support for Afghanistan depends upon
Afghanistan delivering on its own commitments. Longterm international support presupposes a credible and
legitimate partner on the Afghan side. Hence, Japan
expresses its disappointment at the recurrent delays
in the electoral process. More than five months have
already passed since the first round of presidential
elections on 5 April. Nevertheless, consultations
between the two candidates have yet to lead to an
agreement on the establishment of a Government of
national unity.
Afghanistan stands at a crossroads. We do not
wish to see our partnership put in jeopardy by further
domestic political disarray. We therefore reiterate the

S/PV.7267

need for a fair, prompt and peaceful conclusion of the
electoral process. Japan urges both sides to live up
to the commitments made on 12 July and 8 August
by accepting the final election results and forming a
Government of national unity as soon as possible.
A vast array of challenges awaits the new
Government. They include the consolidation of
an inclusive political system, fighting corruption,
guaranteeing the safety of the Afghan people, securing
a stable budget and achieving sustainable growth. We
hope that a Government of national unity, supported by
a broad national consensus, will tackle those challenges
without delay.
At the Tokyo Conference on Afghanistan in July
2012, Japan committed to providing up to $3 billion
over a five-year period, starting from 2012. Of that
$3 billion, $2 billion have already been disbursed. Japan
looks forward to the day, in a not-so-distant future,
when it can work with a new and legitimate Government
of Afghanistan on its path towards achieving lasting
stability and prosperity.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. MayrHarting.
Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union and its member States. The
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Iceland, Serbia and Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Armenia and
Georgia align themselves with this statement.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for
his
comprehensive
report
(S/2014/656),
Special Representative Kubiš for his briefing and
Ambassador Tanin for his statement.
With so many competing issues, it is particularly
important to ensure there is continued focus on
Afghanistan and the difficult times faced by the Afghan
people. Let me start by reiterating our full support for
the important continuing role played by the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
and all the United Nations agencies in supporting the
Afghan people and in coordinating the international
community’s assistance. The role of the United Nations
will be even more important in the years to come.
We would like to acknowledge the role played by
the United Nations in supervising the unprecedented
audit of all the votes cast in the run-off presidential
election. Both United States Secretary of State Kerry

14-5385523/31

S/PV.7267

The situation in Afghanistan

and Special Representative Kubiš deserve praise for
their tireless efforts regarding the election process.
The European Union is pleased that we were able to
play our part in mobilizing the required observers to
satisfy Afghans’ desire for an international observation
capacity. It remains important that the electoral process
be completed in as transparent a way as possible. It is
now urgent that both candidates put the national interests
of Afghanistan first and live up to their commitments
to establish a Government of national unity.
The new Government will face many immediate
challenges. It needs to be unified and robust in tackling
them head on and in not allowing vested interests to
divert its sense of purpose. Afghans have shown that
they are hungry for reform, both to safeguard the
progress that has been made in the past thirteen 13 and
to use that platform as a basis for renewed progress. We
look forward to the London Conference on Afghanistan
in November as an opportunity to reaffirm our
partnership with a new Government on the basis of
their commitment to reform.
I want to highlight three critical areas, namely,
security, economic and human development, and the
rule of law and human rights.
Afghans must be assured that their security will be
maintained. The early signing of the bilateral security
agreement between Afghanistan and the United States
is of key importance in that regard. The agreement is
critical for a continued international presence to support
Afghans in their endeavours. The role of neighbouring
countries is also important in ensuring that insurgents
are unable to undermine hard-won gains and cause
instability that could threaten peace and security in the
region.
Security is a necessity for the continuation of the
economic and human development that has taken place
in Afghanistan. Progress has been impressive in many
areas, but the new Government will need to take rapid
action to improve confidence in the economy. Above
all, it has to take quick action in order to overcome the
reform backlog and to tackle the current fiscal crisis.
Beyond that, the new Government should prioritize the
rural economy, which remains the lifeblood of the vast
majority of Afghans. It also needs to increase the rule
of law while fostering transparency and combatting
corruption. The rule of law is critical to progress
in many areas, none more so than human rights, in
particular the rights of women and girls.

24/31

18/09/2014

It is worth recalling that 13 years ago women and
girls were treated as second-class citizens. They were
not allowed to work or go to school. They could not leave
their house, except in the company of a male relative.
Today, Afghans, and Afghan women in particular, are
to be applauded for the progress that has been achieved.
But there is still much to be done. In many areas, the
statutory framework is no longer the problem. But
consistent and routine application of the law remains
an area where sustained action is needed. We believe
that must be a clear priority for the new Government.
In conclusion, all those challenges will require a
strong commitment from both the new Government and
the international community. The European Union and
its member States will remain steadfast partners, as set
out in our new comprehensive strategy for Afghanistan,
which was endorsed in June.
Finally, like others, I would like to pay tribute
to Special Representative Kubiš for his tremendous
contribution to a better future for all Afghans — the
future they want and that they deserve.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Zamaninia (Islamic Republic of Iran):
I would like to thank you, Madam President, for
organizing this timely meeting. I also wish to thank
Ambassador Tanin for his statement and Mr. Ján Kubiš,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, for presnting the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2014/656) and for briefing on key political
and security developments and on regional and
international events related to Afghanistan. We
continue to support him and his team in the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
and their outstanding services. Afghanistan and its
neighbours will remember the services Mr. Kubiš has
rendered to Afghanistan for a better life in that country.
UNAMA is playing a very crucial role at this critical
moment of political transition in Afghanistan, and
definitely needs further support from the international
community in order to enhance peace, security and
stability in the country and promote sustainable
socioeconomic development in Afghanistan. The
Islamic Republic of Iran is indeed very eager to see a
peaceful and prosperous Afghanistan as its neighbour.
We are ready to do everything in our power to that end,
since security in Afghanistan directly and indirectly
affects security in the region, including my country.

14-53855

18/09/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

We commend the Afghan people for their broadbased participation in the presidential elections
despite the threat by extremist and terrorist groups.
We hope that the stalemate in the election process
can be overcome soon. The prolonged and contested
electoral process tends to exacerbate economic
uncertainty and encourages extremist groups, terrorists
and their associated networks to take advantage of
the protracted political crisis and to indefinitely
increase their activities. We urge both presidential
candidates, Mr. Abdullah Abdullah and Mr. Ashraf
Ghani Ahmadzai, to conclude their negotiations on
the formation of a Government of national unity and
thus pave the way for a stable political transition that
is consistent with the Afghan-led and Afghan-owned
reconciliation proces. We also urge them to reach a
political settlement in the country as soon as possible.
During the most recent visit by Mr. Kubiš to Iran, in
August, we emphasized that the establishment of a
Government of national unity was a matter of urgency
and priority for Afghanistan and the region.
The continuing engagement between Afghanistan
and its neighbours and regional partners in the areas
of trade, economic exchanges and development projects
must be further supported and strengthened. We firmly
believe that more economic ties will reinforce the
stability in Afghanistan and its surroundings.
We continue to expand our bilateral cooperation,
particularly on security matters, counter-narcotics
efforts, developing projects and economic cooperation
in the fields of infrastructures and agriculture, as well
as for a durable solution for Afghan refugees. The recent
visit of the Iranian Deputy Foreign Minister for Asia
and the Pacific and his meetings with President Karzai
and other Afghan officials was aimed at developing and
strengthening bilateral relations in all fields.
The international support for the Triangular
Initiative on cooperation on countering narcotics among
Afghanistan, Iran and Pakistan is essential, not only to
strengthen the security and stability of Afghanistan but
also to alleviate the serious concerns of neighbouring
States and transit and destination countries with regard
to drug trafficking.
In conclusion, the Islamic Republic of Iran once
again reiterates its continued support for the promotion
of security, stability and comprehensive and sustainable
development in Afghanistan.

S/PV.7267

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Thoms (Germany): Let me thank the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive report (S/2014/656).
I would also like to express our deep gratitude to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ján Kubiš, for his tireless efforts during the past
years and, particularly, for the constructive role that
he most recently played during the election process.
We welcome the appointment of Mr. Nicholas Haysom
as the new Special Representative and look forward
to continuing our close cooperation with him in his
new capacity. I also appreciate Ambassador Tanin’s
presence in the Council today.
My Government aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union earlier
in this debate.
It is now more than three months since the Afghan
people cast their votes in the presidential elections in
June. The Afghans — including, most encouragingly,
millions of women — have shown tremendous courage
in making use of their constitutional right to actively
participate in the elections, defying the Taliban threats
to disrupt the process. The most comprehensive audit
process, to which Germany contributed substantially,
has been undertaken. We are also very grateful for the
role that the United Nations has assumed in the process.
Mr. Ghani and Mr. Abdullah have agreed to establish
a unity Government. It is now time to deliver on their
commitments. As Foreign Minister Frank-Walter
Steinmeier recently underlined during his recent visit
to Afghanistan, both candidates must embrace their
responsibility for the future of Afghanistan. Only a
united Afghanistan will be able to overcome the many
challenges lying ahead.
I would like to mention four important points, also
with a view to the role of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in supporting
Afghanistan in tackling those manifold challenges.
First, the impact of the current electoral conflict
is far-reaching. Afghanistan is showing symptoms of
a true State crisis. Even if the candidates agree on a
Government of unity, cooperation will be an immense
challenge after the difficult process of the past months.
It will take hard work to restore the confidence of
the Afghan people in the political elite and in public
institutions.

14-5385525/31

S/PV.7267

The situation in Afghanistan

Secondly, necessary economic and political
reforms were put on hold while the election was being
audited. That further exacerbated the current economic
and fiscal crisis. The new Government urgently needs
to tackle the reform backlog.
Thirdly, a new Government is the precondition for
the full implementation of the civilian and military
commitments of the international community. As long
as there is no new Government, the envisaged NATO
post-International Security Assistance Force Resolute
Support mission cannot be put into force. In our opinion,
it is also crucial that the new mission be founded on a
sound legal basis. It should ideally be supported by a
Security Council resolution.
Fourthly, once there is a legitimate Government,
the international community should continue to
support Afghanistan’s reconstruction and development.
With a shift of responsibilities in Afghanistan and the
immense challenges lying ahead, the commitment of
the United Nations will become even more important.
It is indispensable that UNAMA have a comprehensive
mandate and work on a financially sound basis to be
able to support Afghanistan in the aforementioned
areas. It is also important that UNAMA not only be
present in Kabul but also continue to work throughout
the country.
Let me finish by saying that Germany stands ready
to continue its support for Afghanistan. We very much
hope that the new Government will work towards uniting
the country in building a stable political environment
for a peaceful, secure and prosperous Afghanistan.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
The Security Council is meeting again to discuss the
situation in Afghanistan. The situation is slightly
different than the one we considered three months ago
(see S/PV.7208), as we can see from the briefing by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
Spain is a friend of Afghanistan. The people and
the Government of my country have demonstrated
that all these years. Spain has responded throughout
the 12 years with constant actions to the requests of
Afghans. We stand by Afghanistan and will continue to
do so. My delegation fully endorses the statement made
earlier by the Head of the Delegation of the European
Union, but I wish to add a number of considerations on
various issues with regard to, first, the elections and,
26/31

18/09/2014

secondly, aspects of the security, the economy and the
regional and international dimensions.
With regard to the elections, the men and women
of Afghanistan recently demonstrated great courage on
5 April and 14 June. We are at a crucial point. It is clear
that we must strengthen the political process. Only a
renewed and strengthened leadership will be able to
provide a hopeful future for the people of Afghanistan.
Regarding the security situation, we note with
concern the information outlined by Secretary-General
in his report (S/2014/656), in particular the 24-per-cent
increase in the number of civilian victims. We take
this opportunity to convey our regret to Ambassador
Tanin following the attack by the Taliban in the centre
of Kabul two days ago.
With regard to the economic situation, we are
concerned about the deterioration noted in the
performance of the Afghan economy. That perhaps goes
hand in hand with the worsening security situation.
However, we are sure that the ministerial conference,
to be held in Tokyo, will yield results for the economic
situation in Afghanistan.
Finally, we believe that regional efforts are
absolutely key. There are great expectations. In Spain’s
view, there is a hopeful future with the ministerial
conference to be held in Tianjin, the People’s Republic
of China.
We once again reiterate our support for the
Government and people of Afghanistan, through
Ambassador Tanin, who is present. In conclusion, on
behalf of the Spanish delegation, I would express our
gratitude for the efforts and outstanding work of Mr. Ján
Kubiš during all these years as head of UNAMA.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2014/656) and Special Representative Ján Kubis for
his briefing. Italy fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the observer of the European Union
and would like to add a few remarks in my national
capacity.
The uncertainty of the results of the Afghan elections
and the continued absence of a new President, in the
context of the last phase of the transition process — a
very delicate juncture for Afghanistan — are a source
of grave concern for the future of the country. That
14-53855

18/09/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

is why it is crucial for the electoral process to reach a
positive outcome in the short term that is accepted and
trusted by a majority of the Afghan people. The pursuit
of the necessary dialogue between the parties should
be driven by the highest interest of the country. It is
therefore our strong hope that the efforts undertaken by
the international community, in particular the United
States and Special Representative Kubiš, whom we fully
support, will be crowned with success. To achieve that
goal, all stakeholders must show great moderation and
a sense of responsibility and avoid divisive initiatives
that might undermine an agreement.
We expect the commitment of the two presidential
candidates that was reiterated in the message addressed
to the NATO Heads of State and Government at the Celtic
Manor Summit to be realized as quickly as possible so
as to create a solid foundation for the socioeconomic
development, peaceful settlement and stabilization of
Afghanistan. Today, it is more urgent than ever that the
electoral process be finalized through the installation of
a new President and a new Government. That will also
reward the widespread action and commitment of the
Afghan National Security Forces (ANSF) to guarantee
to the Afghan people the right to express their wishes
at the ballot box and to limit the insurgency’s attempts
at destabilization.
The insurgency continues to be a dangerous force,
as demonstrated by the fresh wave of terrorist acts
in recent months. That is why Italy, together with its
partners, has affirmed the commitment that it made in
Chicago two years ago and reiterated most recently at
the Celtic Manor Summit of NATO Heads of State and
Government, to support the ANSF in the transition to
the post-International Security Assistance Force phase.
At the same time, however, Afghanistan should
implement transparency and accountability criteria in
the management of the resources allocated to it. The
prompt signature of the bilateral security agreement
between Afghanistan and the United States and of the
status of forces agreement with NATO is imperative if
the resolute support mission is to start. The purpose
of those agreements is to provide the necessary legal
framework for the presence of international troops in
the country.
My country reiterates its wish to carry on its
more than decade-long commitment to foster the
development and stabilization of Afghanistan, in
coordination with the broader action of the international
community. Consistent with the legacy of Tokyo, the

S/PV.7267

conditions for that to happen are based on concrete
and measurable progress by the Afghan parties in the
field of human rights, particularly those of women,
democratic principles, the fight against corruption and
drug trafficking, and administrative and economic
governance. In those areas, thanks also to the ISAF
mission, Afghanistan has made giant steps forward,
though much remains to be done.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Ružička (Slovakia): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ján Kubiš for
his comprehensive briefing today.
Let me align myself with the statement delivered
earlier on behalf of the European Union, but let me also
make some comments in my national capacity.
These are historic times for Afghanistan. We have
all been closely watching the key events of the past few
months. Further development cannot be achieved in any
country in a politically unstable environment. We call
upon the Afghan political leaders to engage in mutual
dialogue and to uphold the commitments they have
undertaken. Only a leader with a stable mandate and
internal political support will be suited to address the
remaining challenges the country is facing.
The acceptance of the election results, fulfilment
of commitments and formation of the Government of
national unity are the means of setting the country on
the right track. An inclusive political concept reflecting
the diversity of the Afghan population is crucial. We
therefore welcome the candidates’ joint statement
addressed to the NATO summit pledging to form a
national unity Government.
Political stability and economic prosperity are
inseparably linked. Economic situations are sensitive
and reflect political realities, while investors carefully
observe any political mistrust. Despite the continuing
challenges that will require the immediate attention of
the new Government, we have faith that the steps needed
to promote the licit economy and achieve a transparent
and balanced budget will be taken in a timely manner.
The parameters of post-2014 international security
support should be agreed upon as soon as possible,
especially in the light of current events and the mandate
of the International Security Assistance Force coming
to the end. The extremist groups never refrain from
taking advantage of any political crisis. We commend

14-5385527/31

S/PV.7267

The situation in Afghanistan

the work undertaken by the Afghan National Security
Forces in the challenging current circumstances. It will
be crucial to further focus on developing their quality,
loyalty and professionalism. The Slovak Republic is
determined to further participate in that process, be
it through training of the Afghan National Security
Forces or direct financial help.
Apart from the engagement of the international
community in the areas of peace and security,
comprehensive development assistance remains vital
for the country’s stability. International assistance
should be multifaceted, long-term and tailor made. It
should encompass humanitarian aid, investments in
institutional and economic development and the rule of
law. Internationally targeted projects aligned with the
priorities of the Afghan Government can improve the
daily lives of the Afghan people.
For Slovakia, Afghanistan remains among the
top three priority programme countries for Slovak
official development assistance. The target areas of
our assistance for the upcoming years are threefold:
the improvement of education, the modernization of
the agricultural sector, and the building of capacities
in the area of security sector reform. However, lasting
success will be very difficult without Afghanistan’s
neighbours actively engaging in regional cooperation.
The common interplay between Afghan stability and
regional security is obvious. A stable Afghanistan is a
precondition for a secure region. Durable constructive
engagement by regional partners is a precondition for a
stable Afghanistan.
The pivotal role of the United Nations remains
essential, and we encourage Afghan political leaders
to profit from the huge potential that lies in effective
cooperation with the United Nations. Nevertheless,
outside support itself cannot guarantee progress or a
democratic transition for the country. The ultimate
responsibility for the citizenry rests upon State leaders.
In recent months, the Afghan people demonstrated an
extraordinary amount of bravery when, despite the
threats and attacks of extremist groups, they cast their
votes.
Against the current backdrop of political
uncertainty, let us not forget about all the tremendous
progress the country has achieved in its democratic
transition, from assuming security responsibility to
taking steps towards gender equality. Those important
victories represent the base our future efforts can be
built upon.
28/31

18/09/2014

Let me conclude by expressing our sincere
gratitude to the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative, Mr. Kubiš, for their dedication
and leadership. I congratulate the United Nations
for its action that it undertook in supervising the
unprecedented election audit. I also wish to thank
the team of the Mission for their professional work in
uneasy conditions and reiterate the full support of my
country for the irreplaceable role of UNAMA.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
Mr. Winid (Poland): I would like to thank the
United States for convening this debate on the situation
in Afghanistan. I am glad that Poland can contribute to
this important discussion.
Poland aligns itself with the statement delivered on
behalf of the European Union and would like to offer a
couple of additional remarks.
The first one is quite sad. Just two days ago, the
forty-fourth Polish soldier to die in Afghanistan since
the beginning of our engagement in the International
Security Assistance Force mission passed away. Platoon
leader Rafal Celebudzki was killed in a suicide attack
on the streets of Kabul, together with two American
soldiers. He left behind a wife and two young children.
We pay tribute to his memory, which serves as a symbol
of the sacrifice of many Polish families who send their
sons and daughters to help rebuild a stable, safe and
prosperous Afghanistan.
The Government of Poland reiterates its
determination to combat all forms of terrorism and
strongly condemns all acts of terror, especially when
directed against those who work towards the country’s
stability and security. Recalling resolution 2145 (2014)
and previous resolutions on Afghanistan, we want to
reaffirm our strong commitment to the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and national unity of
Afghanistan.
Our debate today is the best opportunity to underline
the role that the United Nations plays in the process of
the stabilization and reconstruction of Afghanistan.
The coordinating role of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the activities
undertaken by the Special Representative, Mr. Ján
Kubiš, enjoy our full support and respect. I would like
to join all our colleagues in congratulating and thanking
him the great work he performs in Afghanistan.

14-53855

18/09/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

Poland welcomes the recent NATO summit’s
conclusions on Afghanistan, and we hope that the
decisions made by member States will help that
country to achieve security and prosperity. We also
reaffirm our continued support for the Government
and people of Afghanistan as they rebuild their country
and strengthen the foundations of democracy. For the
first time in the Afghan electoral process, independent
observers could be present for the audit of every
single ballot box utilized in the presidential run-off.
We believe that the compromise solution proposed by
United States Secretary of State John Kerry is a step in
the right direction and hope that both candidates will
honour their pledges. Poland would like to underline
the role of professional international observers from the
European Union Election Assessment Team, various
non-government organizations and 17 diplomatic
missions in Afghanistan who participated in the
process.
We are convinced that the election process
should not be further delayed, especially taking
into account the fact that the audit process has been
concluded. Prolonging the debate on the division of
power is harmful to the stability of Afghanistan. We
encourage all sides to accept the results of the audit
and start cooperating fully with the newly elected
authorities. That is especially important in the light of a
deteriorating security situation, not only in the southern
and eastern parts of the country, but also, for example,
in Ghor province in the west, Logar province in central
Afghanistan and Kunduz province in the north, not
to mention Kabul, where a tragic terrorist attack took
place just two days ago.
Poland is worried about the budgetary stability of
Afghanistan. There is a growing funding gap, which
would become an immediate challenge for the new
Administration. We hope that the Afghan Government
can resolve the problem as soon as possible and act
decisively to avoid such issues in the future. Poland’s
involvement in Afghanistan results from our sense of
responsibility for the situation in that country. Since
2001, we have been an active participant in various
international mechanisms and regional cooperation
initiatives supporting the reconstruction of Afghanistan,
mainly within the framework of the Istanbul Process.
Strengthening regional cooperation is the best way
to tackle problems of a cross-border nature, such as
terrorism, drug trafficking or natural disasters.

S/PV.7267

The Polish provincial reconstruction team in
Ghazni has executed almost 200 projects, spending
over $26 million to help build roads, water and sanitary
installations, bridges, schools, power plants and other
infrastructure. Let me also add that the Joint Force
Training Centre in Bydgoszcz, Poland, has trained
over 1,000 soldiers and police officers of the Afghan
National Security Forces. Afghanistan is the second
biggest recipient of Polish development aid.
In conclusion, Poland is ready to support Afghan
security forces in 2015 and beyond. We will focus on
helping the Afghan police force through the Law and
Order Trust Fund for Afghanistan. We are ready to
take part in the Resolute Support mission. We therefore
urge the Afghan Government to sign the Security and
Defense Cooperation Agreement and the NATO status
of forces agreement.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French): I
wish to thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Ján Kubiš and his team in Afghanistan for all
their efforts of recent months.
(spoke in English)
The past few months have shown the strength of the
commitment of the Afghan people and the international
community to the democratic process in Afghanistan.
That has not been an easy road. We were initially
buoyed by the excellent turnout of Afghan men and
women in the April 2014 presidential election and the
run-off vote in June, in spite of threats of disruption,
and then were disappointed and concerned by the
allegations of fraud, which threatened to undermine
confidence in the democratic process. While there are
still issues to be resolved, we recognize our unified and
unprecedented effort in the election audit observation
process supporting that historic event.
This effort has been remarkable, both in scale and
in the level of resources applied. Canadian election
observers joined hundreds of colleagues from the
international community to work with their Afghan
counterparts on a full-scale audit of the election. We are
proud of the cooperation of the international community
and the Afghan people in this historical undertaking. We
especially commend the United Nations coordination
of this complex and very challenging task.

14-5385529/31

S/PV.7267

The situation in Afghanistan

(spoke in French)
We urge parties on all sides in Afghanistan to put
aside their differences and to focus on what brings them
together — working towards a safer, more secure and
more prosperous future for all Afghans. We remain
steadfast in our commitment to the Afghan people in
our support of these efforts.
As NATO leaders acknowledged earlier this
month, despite continuing challenges, the Afghan
National Security Forces (ANSF) have demonstrated
that they are an effective force, gaining the respect and
confidence of the Afghan people in the battle against
the insurgents. The ANSF will take full responsibility
for Afghanistan’s security by the end of 2014, which is
an example of the real and tangible progress achieved
through the shared efforts carried out in the framework
of the mission of the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF). The international community has
helped to train over 335,000 ANSF personnel; that is
an extraordinary achievement. With the ISAF mission
ending this year, the need to ensure that the ANSF is
trained and equipped to protect and secure Afghanistan
is greater than ever.
The international community’s support to
Afghanistan will endure beyond ISAF, including
through its collective contribution to the financial
sustainment of the ANSF from 2015 to 2017. To that
end, we strongly urge the Government of Afghanistan
to sign the United States-Afghanistan bilateral security
agreement and to conclude the NATO Afghanistan
status of forces agreement as soon as possible. Those
agreements are essential to enabling the international
community to plan for the next phase of military
assistance to Afghanistan and to maintaining strict
accountability and transparency measures for the
sustainment of international funding to the ANSF.
(spoke in English)
Canada remains committed to supporting the ANSF,
including the Afghan National Army and the Afghan
National Police, in order to strengthen its capacity to
respond to threats and provide security for the Afghan
people. We will therefore contribute $330 million over
three years to the NATO fund for the ANSF, starting in
2015, subject to overall conditionality of transparency,
accountability and cost-effectiveness. That will help
to ensure lasting results for the hard-won progress that
Canadians have made in Afghanistan. We welcome
the international community donors’ renewal of their

30/31

18/09/2014

financial commitments to supporting the Government
of Afghanistan in sustaining a sufficient and capable
ANSF.
Our funding builds on the legacy of Canada’s
substantial efforts to promote the rule of law and
develop capable, professional security forces in which
Afghans can take pride. More than 40,000 members of
the Canadian Armed Forces have served in Afghanistan
for over the past 12 years. In the Afghan province of
Kandahar, Canadians have trained and mentored the
Afghan National Army and the Afghan National Police.
Canada provided up to 950 military personnel at a time
in the NATO Training Mission-Afghanistan to help
train the ANSF, and our civilian police have trained
and mentored approximately 23,000 effectives of the
Afghan National Police over the past 11 years.
Afghanistan’s new leadership will face a number
of urgent issues. Leaders will need to move quickly
to address the range of economic challenges facing
it, particularly given the significant impact of recent
events, such as the electoral uncertainty on business
and financial investment confidence. Gross domestic
product growth has slowed considerably due to reduced
economic activity, and will likely decline further
with the expected reduction in international aid and
spending after 2014, thereby putting further pressure on
Government finances. We hope to see the Government
turn its efforts to improvements that will encourage
economic growth and investment, including through
the development of its extractive sector. We also need
to see robust efforts by the Afghan Government to
increase accountability and transparency across all its
ministries.
Canada will continue to help Afghans build
Afghanistan into a viable country that is better governed,
more stable and secure through investing in: the future
of Afghan children and youth through programming in
education and health, including for maternal, newborn
and child health; advancing security, the rule of law
and human rights through support and training to the
ANSF, and the civil and political participation and
economic empowerment of women; promoting regional
diplomacy, and through humanitarian assistance.
Canada’s $227 million in development assistance
between 2014 and 2017, committed to in Tokyo in 2012,
is contingent upon the achievement of essential reforms
by the new Government of Afghanistan. Canada
encourages the new Afghan leadership to redouble

14-53855

18/09/2014

The situation in Afghanistan

efforts to fulfil its commitments under the Tokyo
Mutual Accountability Framework.
Afghans have a right to chart a course forward to
build the future they demand — free of the country’s
warlords, free of regional interference, which only
leads to chaos, and free of the endemic corruption that
must be routed at every part of national life. It is clear
that with the range of challenges ahead, the resolve
and commitment of the Government must be strong.
The strength of Afghanistan lies in its people: those
who support and strive for a safer, more secure and
prosperous future in a country where all their views are
represented and all their voices are heard. That includes
Afghanistan’s women, who are a vibrant, vital and equal
part of Afghan society. We call on Afghanistan’s new
leadership to truly respect its citizens, particularly by
promoting and protecting the rights of women and girls.
We call upon the new Government to work actively
towards increasing the participation of women in
Afghanistan Government institutions at all levels, in
accordance with its commitment on resolution 1325
(2000). We also call for the government to meet its

S/PV.7267

international commitments by supporting the passage
and implementation of the Elimination of Violence
Against Women Law, to ensure the protection of Afghan
women and girls from all forms of violence and abuse,
and children from early and forced marriage.
We will continue to stand with the Afghan people
as they strive for a safee, more secure and prosperous
future for their country. This decade of transformation
will see both changes and challenges for Afghanistan,
its partners and the region. We remain steadfast in
our commitment to Afghanistan. Canada calls on
Afghanistan’s leaders to work for, and with, all Afghans
to improve security, bolster democracy, increase
transparency and protect the human rights of all those
within its borders.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m.

14-5385531/31
