S/2021/843

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 October 2021
Original: English

Situation concerning Western Sahara
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2548
(2020), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Mission
for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO) until 31 October 2021 and
requested me to submit a report on the situation in Western Sahara before the end of
the mandate period. The report covers developments that have occurred between
1 September 2020 and 31 August 2021 since the issuance of my previous report of
23 September 2020 (S/2020/938) and describes the situation on the ground, the status
of political negotiations on Western Sahara, the implementation of resolution 2548
(2020) and the existing challenges to the Mission’s operations and steps taken to
address them.

II. Recent developments
2.
The situation in Western Sahara has significantly deteriorated since my previous
report. The resumption of hostilities between Morocco and the Frente Popular para la
Liberación de Saguía el-Hamra y de Río de Oro (Frente POLISARIO) and the ongoing
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic have considerably changed the
operational environment of MINURSO, limiting the Mission’s ability to implement
its mandate.
3.
Between 18 and 29 October 2020, MINURSO observed nine generally peaceful
protests by groups of up to 80 Sahrawi civilians, including women and children, near
the berm and at MINURSO team sites in Agwanit, Bir Lahlou, Mehaires, Mijek and
Tifariti. The demonstrators conveyed to MINURSO a number of demands, including
that “a referendum be held” and a solution be found to the status of the Territory; that
the road in the buffer strip at Guerguerat be permanently closed; and that “Sahrawi
political prisoners be released from Moroccan jails”. In each instance, the protests
dispersed peacefully on the same day without security incidents.
4.
On 21 October 2020, MINURSO observed that a group of approximately
50 people, including women and at least 1 child, were present in the buffer strip at
Guerguerat. Demonstrators set up a roadblock at the paved portion of the ro ad inside
the buffer strip, obstructing all traffic between the Territory and Mauritania. The same

21-14004 (E)

081021

*2114004*

S/2021/843

day, MINURSO implemented enhanced monitoring measures to keep abreast of
developments and liaised with the parties to call for calm.
5.
On the same day, in a letter addressed to my Special Representative for Western
Sahara, the Moroccan Coordinator with MINURSO expressed concern regarding the
demonstration “sent by the Frente POLISARIO” and called on my Special
Representative to “demand the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of polisario
from the buffer strip”, while noting that Morocco “reserve[d] the right to take any
necessary actions, including intervention on the ground, to ensure the free circulation
of civilian and commercial traffic and to re-establish the status quo ante”. In a written
communication to my Special Representative on the same day, the Frente
POLISARIO representative in New York, then also in his capacity as Acting
Coordinator with MINURSO, denied their involvement in the demonstration .
6.
On 22 October, in addition to the daily presence of military observers and
regular helicopter reconnaissance, MINURSO deployed a civilian -military team to
the buffer strip at Guerguerat to help defuse tensions. MINURSO was obstructed by
the protestors from moving beyond the roadblocks to conduct a full on-the-ground
verification of the area. The protestors reiterated the demands that had been presented
to MINURSO earlier in the month during the demonstrations east of the berm (see
para. 3 above).
7.
On 22 October, in a letter addressed to me, the Secretary-General of Frente
POLISARIO, Brahim Ghali, stated that the “presence of Sahrawi civilians in the
buffer strip at Guerguerat [was] not a violation of any military agreement”.
8.
From 22 to 29 October, MINURSO helicopter reconnaissance over Guerguerat
observed the presence in the buffer strip of up to 12 armed Frente POLISARIO
personnel in military uniform and up to eight military -style light vehicles, two of
which had mounted heavy weapons. The Frente POLISARIO representative in New
York and then Acting Coordinator of Frente POLISARIO with MINURSO informed
my Special Representative that these military elements were deployed exclusively to
protect the civilian protesters. My Special Representative advise d Frente
POLISARIO that this would nonetheless be in violation of military agreement No. 1
and urged Frente POLISARIO to withdraw its military personnel and vehicles from
the buffer strip. On 29 October, MINURSO aerial reconnaissance observed that some,
but not all, of the vehicles had been withdrawn.
9.
Starting on 26 October, MINURSO helicopter reconnaissance observed 16
Royal Moroccan Army vehicles west of the berm, carrying heavy -duty earth-moving
machinery in the direction of Guerguerat. To reduce te nsions, and as no construction
or maintenance requests had been authorized in the Bir Gandouz sector at the time,
the Mission, in accordance with its role under military agreement No. 1, requested
that the Royal Moroccan Army withdraw the equipment. The Ro yal Moroccan Army
assured MINURSO that it would comply, although no withdrawal was observed.
10. On 6 November, MINURSO helicopter reconnaissance observed the arrival of
a Royal Moroccan Army military force comprising approximately 250 vehicles, many
with heavy weapons, about 12 km north-east of Guerguerat in the area defined under
military agreement No. 1 as the restricted area. MINURSO advised the Royal
Moroccan Army that military agreement No. 1 stipulated that such concentrations of
forces in that area would constitute a violation and therefore urged the Army to
withdraw.
11. On 7 November, King Mohammed VI of Morocco delivered a speech on the
occasion of the forty-fifth anniversary of the Green March rejecting the “unacceptable
practices designed to disrupt the normal flow of traffic between Morocco and
Mauritania” and asserting that Morocco would “respond, with the utmost firmness
2/19

21-14004

S/2021/843

and resolve, to any practices or attempts designed to undermine the security and
stability of its southern provinces”.
12. In a letter dated 12 November, King Mohammed VI urged me to “redouble” my
efforts to find a prompt and definitive end to the “acts of intolerable and destabilizing
provocations” by Frente POLISARIO in the buffer strip at Guerguerat. The letter
added that “the Kingdom of Morocco…by virtue of its responsibilities and in full
compliance with international legality, reserve[d] the right to act, at the time and in
the manner it deem[ed] necessary, in order to safeguard the status of the zone and
restore free movement”.
13. On the morning of 13 November, MINURSO observed the protestors in the
buffer strip at Guerguerat and the armed Frente POLISARIO elements abruptly
departing the site of the demonstration. Shortly thereafter, an exchange of fire was
heard, including two gunshots from the direction of Frente POLISARIO positions and
heavy weapons fire from the direction of the berm adjacent to where the Royal
Moroccan Army had deployed (see paras. 9 and 10 above). Royal Moroccan Army
elements were then observed arriving at the site the protestors had held in the buffer
strip. No casualties were reported to MINURSO from the day’s events. That evening,
MINURSO helicopter reconnaissance, which could not fly earlier due to the live -fire
conditions, observed three new breaches across the berm south-east of Guerguerat.
Approximately 6 km east of the paved road, MINURSO helicopter reconnaissance
observed that Royal Moroccan Army bulldozers had begun constructing a new sand
wall through the buffer strip.
14. In a letter addressed to me the same day, Mr. Ghali condemned “the brutal attack
on unarmed Sahrawi civilians” noting that “the military operation by Moroccan forces
[was] an act of aggression and a flagrant violation of the ceasefire”, which “the United
Nations and the Security Council should condemn in the strongest terms”. In a
statement issued the same day, the Moroccan Minister for Foreign Affairs noted that
Moroccan actions at Guerguerat took place in a “peaceful manner, without clashes or
threat to the safety of civilians”.
15. On 14 November, Mr. Ghali issued a “decree” declaring “an end of [the Frente
POLISARIO] commitment to the ceasefire”, and “the consequent resumption of
armed struggle in defence of the legitimate rights of [the Sahrawi] people”.
16. Since then, low-intensity hostilities have continued, with regular reports by the
Royal Moroccan Army and Frente POLISARIO of shots fired across the berm.
According to MINURSO calculations based on reporting by the parties, the incidence
of reported firing has decreased since January and has primarily been concentrated in
the north of the Territory near Mahbas. While MINURSO did not identify major
discrepancies in the number and the location of the firing incidents reported by the
parties, their impact is the subject of contradicting claims. Frente POLISARIO has
regularly claimed in their communiqués to be inflicting significant damage to the
Moroccan side. Morocco has publicly refuted such claims and the Royal Moroccan
Army has conveyed to MINURSO that they only return fire “in cases of direct threat
against [Royal Moroccan Army] troops” and “always in proportion to actions” of
Frente POLISARIO. On 1 February, the Frente POLISARIO Coordinator stated in a
written communication to MINURSO that “since 13 November 2020, the entire
Territory of Western Sahara has become a zone of open war”. In a letter addressed to
me on 23 February, the Permanent Representative of Morocco to the United Nations
asserted that there was a “total absence of any armed conflict”.
17. During the reporting period, Bahrain, Burkina Faso, Equatorial Guinea,
Eswatini, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Jordan, Libya, Malawi, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Suriname, the United Arab Emirates and Zambia inaugurated or announced their
intention to inaugurate “Consulates General” in Laayoune or Dakhla. In letters
21-14004

3/19

S/2021/843

addressed to me on 23 October 2020, 28 October 2020, 4 November 2020,
15 December 2020, 17 December 2020, 19 December 2020, 5 March 2021, 6 April
2021 and 30 August 2021, Mr. Ghali called these diplomatic representat ions a
“violation of international law and…breach of the international legal status of
Western Sahara as a Non-Self-Governing Territory”.
18. On 10 December 2020, in a presidential proclamation, the United States of
America recognized “Moroccan sovereignty over the entire Western Sahara territory”
and reaffirmed its “support for Morocco’s serious, credible and realistic autonomy
proposal as the only basis for a just and lasting solution to the dispute”. In a letter
sent on 17 December, the Acting Coordinator of Frente POLISARIO underscored that
the proclamation was “a regrettable and unilateral position that violate[d] the [United
Nations] Charter and resolutions”. On 24 December, the United States announced that
it would inaugurate a “virtual presence post for Western Sahara”.
19. West of the berm, Morocco continued investing in infrastructure development
during the reporting period. On 30 April 2021, Moroccan authorities announced the
winner of a bid to construct the Dakhla Atlantic Port and construction i s now under
way. Furthermore, work on building an expressway linking Tiznit in Morocco to
Dakhla continued. On 24 and 26 June, diplomatic delegations from Jordan, Oman,
Saudi Arabia and Yemen visited Dakhla and Laayoune to explore investment
opportunities. Frente POLISARIO considers such investments an attempt “to
consolidate and normalize [the] military occupation and the illegal annexation of parts
of Western Sahara” (S/2020/938, para. 8).
20. On 24 August, Algeria announced it was severing diplomatic relations with
Morocco, citing, inter alia, “Morocco’s abandonment of the commitment made by
King Hassan II in a joint communiqué” 1 to support “a just and final solution to the
Western Sahara conflict through holding a free and fair referendum that allows the
Sahrawi people to decide their future in full credibility and without any restraints”.
The same day, the Moroccan Ministry of Foreign Affairs issued a statement taking
note of “the unilateral decision of Algeria to sever diplomatic relations with
Morocco”, which it “regret[ted] as completely unjustified”.
21. On 27 August, I announced the appointment of Alexander Ivanko (Russian
Federation) as my new Special Representative for Western Sahara and Head of
MINURSO, to succeed Colin Stewart (Canada), who completed his assignment on
26 August.

III. Political activities
22. On 30 October 2020, the same day as the adoption by the Security Council of
resolution 2548 (2020), Frente POLISARIO issued a press release reaffirming its
decision of 30 October 2019 to “reconsider its engagement” in the political process
on Western Sahara and stating that it would “intensify the national liberation struggle
in face of inaction of the United Nations to ensure MINURSO implementation of its
mandate”.
23. In the days leading up to the events of 13 November 2020, the United Nations
was involved in multiple initiatives and contacts with the parties, neighbours and
other stakeholders to avoid an escalation of the situation and to warn against
violations of the ceasefire and the serious conseq uences of any changes to the status
quo. On 19 November, I wrote to King Mohammed VI urging Morocco to exercise
maximal restraint to avoid further escalation and to return to the status quo ante. On
__________________
1

4/19

For the text of the joint communiqué issued by Algeria and Morocco on 16 May 1988, see
A/43/366, annex.
21-14004

S/2021/843

the same day, in a letter to Mr. Ghali, I urged Frente POLISARIO to avoid any further
escalation and allow space for the political process to resume. Responding to my
letter, on 21 November, King Mohammed VI asserted that the actions of Morocco at
Guerguerat were “irreversible” while noting that Morocco remained “committed to
the ceasefire”. Separately, in a letter to me on 2 December 2020, Mr. Ghali stated that
Frente POLISARIO “ha[d] been left with no other option but to exercise its sacred
right to self-defence”.

IV. Activities of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum
in Western Sahara
A.

Operational activities
24. The overall impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on MINURSO operational
activities remained moderate. At its headquarters in Laayoune, MINURSO
implemented telecommuting wherever feasible. On 1 July 2021, the Mission started
implementing a return-to-work plan, allowing up to 75 per cent of its staff to resume
work in the MINURSO headquarters offices. Owing to an upsurge in COVID -19 cases
in the Territory in August, return-to-work arrangements have been suspended until
further notice. On 30 August 2021, MINURSO recorded the first death of a staff
member from the virus. Rotations, repatriations and deployments of uniformed
personnel resumed in August 2020, in close cooperation with the Secreta riat and in
collaboration with Morocco, Frente POLISARIO and Member States. Despite
persisting difficulties in international travel and other pandemic -related restrictions,
the rotation of 174 military observers was completed during the reporting period.
25. The Government of Morocco, Frente POLISARIO and the Government of
Algeria cooperated fully with MINURSO during the pandemic. The Governments of
Morocco and Algeria supported MINURSO civilian and military staff travelling to
and from their duty stations in the Territory and in Tindouf, Algeria, by granting
access to special international commercial flights. Since February 2021, MINURSO
military and civilian staff have begun receiving vaccinations provided in the Territory
west of the berm by the Royal Moroccan Army and the Ministry of Health of
Morocco, and in Tindouf by the Algerian health authorities. As at 31 August, 76 per
cent of all international civilian and 80 per cent of military staff had received both
doses of the vaccine.
26. As at 31 August, the military component of MINURSO consisted of 196
personnel, 43 of them women. MINURSO has continually strengthened its efforts to
improve its gender balance. As a result, the percentage of women observers has
increased from less than 5 per cent in 2016 (S/2016/355, para. 31) to 24 per cent,
although recruitment slowed considerably during the COVID -19 pandemic. From
1 September 2020 to 31 August 2021, MINURSO conducted approximately
393,411 km of ground patrols and 975 hours of air patrols. MINURSO team sites
visited on average 970 headquarters, units, subunits, strong points and observation
posts east and west of the berm on a monthly basis for a total of 9,516 visits west of
the berm and 2,125 visits east of the berm by ground or air patrols, including 14
investigations.
27. West of the berm, the Royal Moroccan Army regularly reiterated to MINURSO
its commitment, in principle, to the ceasefire, while exercising the right to respond to
actions by Frente POLISARIO. MINURSO continued to exercise its freedom of
movement west of the berm, although, owing to security and safety concerns, ground
patrols and helicopter reconnaissance flights were only able to operate at a safe
distance of initially 30 km and 15 km away from the berm, respectively, until 19 July,

21-14004

5/19

S/2021/843

when limited ground patrols resumed to up to 2 km from the berm in areas where no
exchanges of fire were reported. Cooperation and communications at the strategic
level between the MINURSO Force Commander and the Commander of the Royal
Moroccan Army in the southern sector in Agadir, Morocco, remained unaltered.
28. East of the berm, MINURSO has encountered significant limitations to its
freedom of movement. In his letter of 1 February (see para. 16 above), th e Frente
POLISARIO Coordinator informed MINURSO that, to “ensure the security and
safety of MINURSO personnel”, there was “reasonable ground for believing that
conducting ground convoys remain[ed] highly risky and therefore inadvisable”. The
same was reiterated in a letter from the Staff Coordinator of the Frente POLISARIO
military forces to the MINURSO Force Commander on 1 June.
29. As a result, MINURSO has been unable to conduct ground patrols beyond a
20 km radius from each team site east of the berm, or any helicopter reconnaissance.
Ground patrols have also not been possible inside the units of Frente POLISARIO
and have been required to remain at least 200 m from them. Helicopter resupply
flights to team sites have been allowed at relatively regular int ervals, approximately
twice a month, subject to prior approval by Frente POLISARIO before each flight.
No logistical and maintenance ground convoys have been permitted since
13 November 2020. MINURSO has reduced the number of military observers in its
team sites east of the berm by 30 per cent. As at 31 August 2021, the MINURSO
Force Commander has been unable to establish direct contact with the leadership of
the Frente POLISARIO armed forces, and all communications have been conducted
in writing only.
30. My Special Representative for Western Sahara and the MINURSO Force
Commander repeatedly protested these restrictions. In numerous written
communications, Frente POLISARIO justified these measures as necessary to ensure
the safety and security of MINURSO personnel while the “state of war” persisted.
31. As a result of these limitations, MINURSO was unable to directly observe the
exchange of fire across the berm or verify the specific details of individual incidents.
Instead, the Mission relied on information provided daily by the parties, which it
could not independently verify.
32. MINURSO continued complementing its observation activity with the use of
geospatial imagery and analysis obtained through bilateral support from the European
Union and the United States, in line with Action for Peacekeeping co mmitments on
performance.
33. Between 1 September 2020 and 12 November 2020, the violations working
group of MINURSO did not declare any violations of military agreement No. 1. The
mechanism was suspended following the events of November 2020, and possible
violations by the parties since that date have not been formally addressed. On
15 September 2020, Frente POLISARIO reported two reconnaissance flights by the
Royal Moroccan Army in Bir Lahlou. On 17 November, Frente POLISARIO reported
firing by the Royal Moroccan Army against one of its observation posts in Mijek.
MINURSO was unable to independently verify these reports.
34. During the reporting period, MINURSO received 46 requests for approval for
maintenance and construction works (10 for maintenance of the berm, 4 for
renovations, 12 for construction and 20 for time extensions) from the Royal Moroccan
Army and none from Frente POLISARIO. Of the requests, 24 were approved, 15 were
not approved and 7 remain pending. The Royal Moroccan Army also sent MINUR SO
192 notifications of activities during the reporting period, referencing military
agreement No. 1, while Frente POLISARIO sent 1 prior to 13 November 2020.

6/19

21-14004

S/2021/843

35. The Mission continued to observe and record reports of any changes in the
military presence and installations by the parties despite the suspension of the
violations working group. With the construction of an approximately 20 km long new
sand wall at Guerguerat, the Royal Moroccan Army has consolidated its presence over
some 40 km 2 of land in the buffer strip. The portion of the road that was left unpaved
in 2016 has since been upgraded, but not paved. MINURSO has been unable to
confirm reports by Frente POLISARIO that new mines were laid in the area.
36. On 15 November 2020, MINURSO received reports of the relocation of a
number of artillery pieces from Tifariti by Frente POLISARIO military forces, while
on 23 November, MINURSO observed that three motorized infantry battalions of the
Royal Moroccan Army were relocated from Smara to Mahbas. As at 10 July 2021,
two of the three Royal Moroccan Army battalions were observed to have returned to
Smara, while one was reported by the Royal Moroccan Army to have reinforced Royal
Moroccan Army positions along the berm (southeast of Mahbas).
37. Between 13 November 2020 and 31 August 2021, the Royal Moroccan Army
reported to MINURSO 1,099 incidents involving firing from a distance against its
units at or near the berm, 83 per cent of which were concentrated in Mahbas. The
Royal Moroccan Army also reported 22 “infiltration attempts” at the berm and 724
reconnaissance flights by unmanned aerial vehicles operated by Frente POLISARIO,
88 per cent of which were reported in the Mahbas and Awsard areas. Through the
analysis of satellite imagery, MINURSO identified sites that appeared to be impact
craters caused by artillery fire on both sides of the berm. On -the-ground verification
by MINURSO could not be conducted owing to the security situation.
38. During the same period, Frente POLISARIO issued regular communicat ions
regarding the alleged targeting of and attacks on Royal Moroccan Army positions
along the berm. On 23 January 2021, MINURSO received reports of shelling by
Frente POLISARIO in the Guerguerat area, which was confirmed by both parties. No
casualties were reported. There were also reports in the Sahrawi media of attacks
conducted by Royal Moroccan Army unmanned aerial vehicles: one on 6 April, which
allegedly led to the death of the head of the “Gendarmerie” of Frente POLISARIO,
Dah Al-Bendir, and another on 19 April, both near the Erni River in Tifariti. The
Royal Moroccan Army denied the use of combat or surveillance drones east of the
berm. MINURSO was unable to verify these reports.
39. On 8 February, Frente POLISARIO publicly claimed an attack on Roya l
Moroccan Army soldiers guarding the 2nd Battalion of the 9th Armoured Corps HQ,
in Agha Sector, Morocco. On 11 February, the Prime Minister of Morocco, Saad Eddine El Othmani, was reported in the media as having denied the alleged attack.
On 21 August, the Frente POLISARIO representative in New York sent a letter to me
stating that on 18 August, Morocco had fired upon a convoy of Sahrawi civilians east
of the berm, destroying a truck.

B.

Mine action
40. Events in the Territory significantly affected MINURSO mine action operations
during the reporting period. On 3 October 2020, mine action activities resumed east
of the berm, after they had been previously suspended at the start of the COVID -19
pandemic owing to the closure of the border between Algeria and Western Sahara on
20 March 2020 (S/2020/938, para. 37). After only five weeks, regular mine action
activities were once again suspended east of the berm as a result of the resump tion of
hostilities in November 2020.
41. During the reporting period, mine action activities were limited to an emergency
explosive ordnance disposal response team conducting emergency disposal of

21-14004

7/19

S/2021/843

explosive ordnance, route verification and combined explo sive ordnance risk
education and COVID-19 prevention messaging for civilians. Owing to the
suspension of operations, no land release activities could be conducted.
42. Despite significant challenges to its operations, mine action activities continued
in order to mitigate the threats posed by landmines and explosive remnants of war,
and route surveys were conducted to ensure the safety of United Nations personnel,
logistical convoys and property. Vehicle-assisted surveys and enhanced community
liaison activities covering an area of 13,680 km 2 were conducted, and eight new
hazardous areas were identified. As at 31 August 2021, 42 of the 527 known cluster
strike areas and 24 of the 61 known minefields remained to be addressed east of the
berm. Also as at 31 August, the Mine Action Service had assessed 887.2 km of routes
and facilitated the safe movement of military observers moving between MINURSO
team sites.
43. The MINURSO mine action service, through its cooperation east of the berm
with the Sahrawi Mine Action Coordination Office, remained in contact with Frente
POLISARIO on matters related to mine action while continuing to provide the Office
with technical assistance and programme and data management.
44. The MINURSO mine action service delivered 33 explosive ordnance risk
education sessions for 176 MINURSO civilian and military personnel (137 men and
39 women) at Mission headquarters and at the team sites. Similar sessions were also
conducted for 4,781 men, women, boys and girls east of the berm in Sahra wi refugee
camps and at border crossings between the Territory and Algeria.
45. Despite these efforts, between 1 September 2020 and 31 July 2021 the Royal
Moroccan Army reported 20 landmine and explosive remnants of war incidents that
injured 4 civilians and 20 military personnel. East of the berm, one explosive remnant
of war incident was recorded, resulting in the injury of one boy. These incidents were
recorded in the Information Management System for Mine Action.
46. The Royal Moroccan Army reported the release of over 145 million m 2 of land
west of the berm and the destruction of 1,014 items of explosive remnants of war and
31 anti-personnel and anti-tank mines. The Mission continued to promote enhanced
cooperation between the Royal Moroccan Army and MINURSO mine action.

C.

Security
47. The security environment in the four security areas of MINURSO (Laayoune,
Tindouf, west of the berm and east of the berm) remained unpredictable. From
1 September 2020 to 15 July 2021, 406 security-related incidents were reported, of
which only 11 affected United Nations personnel, premises and assets. These
incidents included five cases of harassment of United Nations personnel, three of
which were against women in Laayoune. The 11 incidents affecting United Nations
personnel represent an 81 per cent decrease compared with the previous year, owing
primarily to limited movements during the lockdown period.
48. The security situation in the Mission’s area of operations near the berm changed
significantly after November 2020. In this area, the principal threat to the United
Nations was assessed as stemming from possible non-targeted incidents, such as
crossfire or collateral damage. Nevertheless, both sides have reaffirmed their
commitment to the safety and security of MINURSO personnel and premises.
49. To address the new security concerns, the Mission introduced a number of
preventative measures. Ground patrols and helicopter reconnaissance west of the
berm maintained a safe distance from the live-fire areas. East of the berm, existing
restrictions to ground patrols and helicopter reconnaissance flights also contributed

8/19

21-14004

S/2021/843

to a lower security risk. Flights that did occur were carefully coordinated with both
sides. Based on the assessed residual risk to United Nations security management
system personnel, operations and installations, the general threat assessment levels of
the four security areas (Laayoune, Tindouf, west of the berm and east of the berm)
remained unchanged at low to moderate.
50. The presence of drug smugglers and other criminal elements in the Territory, as
well as the risk of possible terrorist attacks, remained of concern (S/2020/938, paras. 44
and 45).
51. Morocco and Frente POLISARIO retained primary responsibility for the safety
and security of United Nations personnel, assets and resources west and east of the
berm, respectively, and MINURSO continued to have confidence in the commitment
and capability of both parties. The sharing of security-related information by
interlocutors remained limited, which continued to affect the ability of MINURSO to
maintain its own situational awareness.

D.

Substantive civilian activities
52. In accordance with its mandate, MINURSO continued to monitor, analyse and
report on developments in and affecting Western Sahara. The Mission’s liaison office
in Tindouf followed developments in and around the Sahrawi refugee camps as part
of this analysis.
53. Owing to the COVID-19 pandemic, representatives of Member States could not
visit MINURSO offices in Laayoune and in Tindouf as regularly as before. My
Special Representative continued to regularly brief Member States in Rabat and in
New York by videoconference and in person when feasible.
54. In the refugee camps near Tindouf, MINURSO and United Nations humanitarian
staff maintained unimpeded access to the refugees and other local and international
interlocutors. However, owing to the COVID-19 pandemic, field visits to the camps
by MINURSO and United Nations humanitarian personnel were reduced to the
provision of essential needs. MINURSO continued its efforts to maintain its analysis
and early warning capabilities by monitoring information from local, humanitarian
and social media sources.
55. During the reporting period, in line with the Action for Peacekeeping initiative,
MINURSO continued implementation of the Comprehensive Planning and
Performance Assessment System. Following the events of November 2020,
MINURSO used the System to assess the changed context and revised its integrated
mission plan, collected and analysed data to monitor progress towards that plan and
assessed its performance in delivering mandated tasks and its impact in its area of
responsibility.

E.

Challenges to the operations of the Mission
56. The Mission continued to experience limitations in its operational activities as
a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Worldwide travel restrictions posed challenges
to rotations and the repatriation and deployment of military personnel and the travel
of international civilian staff in and out of the Mission area. Movements of
MINURSO personnel between Laayoune and Tindouf remained limited, and regular
MINURSO flights have been suspended since March 2020 between the two locations.
Operational activities continued at a reduced rate while logistics and maintenance
services continued on the basis of amended arrangements ( S/2020/938, para. 17).

21-14004

9/19

S/2021/843

57. As assessed through the Comprehensive Planning and Performance Assessment
System in June, overall mandate implementation was significantly affected by the
events of November 2020, which are considered likely to have led to an increase in
explosive remnants of war across the Territory, including in areas previously deemed
safe, posing a threat to MINURSO personnel and logistical convoys as well as to the
general public.
58. Constraints to the MINURSO logistical supply and maintenance chain to team
sites east of the berm became increasingly challenging. Since November 2020, no
logistical and maintenance ground convoys have been permitted east of the berm by
Frente POLISARIO, which cites security concerns. This has affected the delivery of
fuel, the repair and maintenance of equipment and accommodations, the rotation of
vehicles and the transportation of heavy equipment that cannot be airlifted. The
limitations to resupply flights to MINURSO team sites east of the berm (see para. 28
above) have also affected food resupply and the provision of technical support,
including in the areas of preventative maintenance of vehicles, generators and
infrastructure. MINURSO continued to actively engage with Frente POLISARIO to
gain the necessary logistical access to the team sites east of the berm.
59. Lack of access to the areas near the berm where hostilities were ongoing
continued to pose significant challenges to MINURSO observation activities, which
could only be partially compensated for with the use of satellite imagery.
60. All flights between Laayoune and Tindouf have been discontinued since the start
of the COVID-19 pandemic, affecting the transportation of equipment and supplies
to the MINURSO liaison office in Tindouf as well as the movement of international
personnel between Tindouf and Laayoune.
61. The Mission’s lack of access to local interlocutors west of the berm continued
to severely limit its ability to independently collect reliable situational awareness
information and to assess and report on developments across its area of responsibility.
62. MINURSO personnel, operations and assets remained vulnerable to threats
related to terrorism and organized crime, especially in the vast uninhabited desert area
east of the berm.
63. The general perception by the population of the Mission’s impartiality also
continued to be affected by the requirement of Morocco that MINURSO use
Moroccan vehicle number plates west of the berm, in contravention of the status -ofmission agreement. In March 2014, my Special Representative reached a verbal
agreement with the Government of Morocco to gradually replace Moroccan licence
plates with United Nations licence plates (S/2014/258, para. 50). The agreement has
yet to be implemented. This pending issue, together with the stamping of MINURSO
passports by Morocco, continues to be the subject of frequent objections from Frente
POLISARIO.

V. Humanitarian activities and human rights
A.

Persons unaccounted for in the conflict
64. The question of individuals who are still unaccounted for, in relation to past
hostilities, remained a major humanitarian concern. The International Committee of
the Red Cross remained ready to act as a neutral intermediary between the parties and
play an advisory role on the issue.

10/19

21-14004

S/2021/843

B.

Assistance to the protection of Western Saharan refugees
65. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
continued to provide international protection and, together with the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and the World Food Programme (WFP), delivered
humanitarian assistance to the Sahrawi refugees living in the five camps near Tindouf,
Algeria.
66. The already fragile socioeconomic situation in the camps further deteriorated as
a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. In March 2021, the camps were affected by a
second wave, and in mid-July a third wave, the worst to date, resulting in more than
1,040 cases, including 48 fatalities. Camp-based Sahrawi refugees continued to report
widespread losses of income, jobs and shortages of cash, resulting in reduced
purchasing power and thus increased difficulties in addressing their basic needs.
Access to health, sanitation, energy and food were of pressing concern among the
refugee population. The overall nutritional situation of the Sahrawi refugees remained
precarious as the related indicators have steadily declined over the years. The results
of a WFP-led post-distribution monitoring exercise of over 500 refugee households
in October 2020 showed an increase in the rate of families that had borderline and
poor food consumption scores, with 31.5 per cent of households being borderline and
5.2 per cent being poor, compared with 1.2 per cent the previous year.
67. Throughout the COVID-19 waves, humanitarian actors maintained the delivery
of essential, life-saving assistance to Sahrawi refugees. To strengthen the testing
capacities in the camps and prevent the further spread of COVID -19, UNHCR
provided 10,000 rapid antigen tests as well as personal protective equipment.
Humanitarian actors operating in the camps have also ensured the regular disinfection
of public spaces and households and the provision of soap, bleach and hydroalcoholic
gel as well as isolation structures since the onset of the pandemic. To adapt health
facilities to the new COVID-19 context, UNHCR rehabilitated and equipped the
central hospital of Rabouni, including a central oxygen system to service key wards,
and finished the construction of a new hospital in Boujdour camp. In addition, to curb
the spread of COVID-19 and increase the active participation of refugee women in
educational, professional and social activities, UNHCR and partners distributed
hygiene kits to women and girls of reproductive age.
68. UNHCR and WFP continued to work together to mitigate and prevent rising
malnutrition among the vulnerable population, especially pregnant and lactating
women, and children. WFP provided a monthly food basket of commodities and fresh
food vouchers as well as school meals for almost 40,000 refugee children. These
efforts were complemented by the distribution by UNHCR of fresh food during the
month of Ramadan, along with the monthly distribution of yeast and core relief items
such as cooking gas refills and new, safe and efficient cooking stoves. This joint
response helped diversify the diets of the refugee population, though they continued
to be almost entirely dependent on humanitarian assistance. New procedures for the
distribution of food and vouchers in compliance with social distancing guidelines
have been implemented.
69. UNICEF provided support for maternal and child health programmes in the
Sahrawi refugee camps, including capacity-building for teachers, the construction of
three lower secondary schools and a primary school in the camps of Laayoune, Smara
and Dakhla, and the provision of school kits. UNICEF also supported the setting up
of distance learning courses through local television and conducted an analysis on
out-of-school children and the education management information system, which will
serve as the foundation for a five-year strategy for the Sahrawi education sector. To

21-14004

11/19

S/2021/843

support social distancing measures at schools, UNHCR procured additional textbooks,
with the aim of achieving the ratio of one book per child.
70. Innovative livelihood activities such as a fish farm and other agriculture projects
continued to be implemented by WFP. To improve refugees’ access to water and
reduce the need for water trucking, UNHCR developed a sustai nable water
distribution network in Awsard camp. As a result, water is being adequately stored
and health conditions in the camp have improved significantly.
71. In 2020, there was a notable increase in humanitarian contributions following
the launch of the COVID-19 joint appeal for approximately $15 million issued by
UNHCR, WFP, UNICEF and five non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in April
2020. The three agencies received approximately 60 per cent of their overall needs in
response to the COVID-19 situation. Nevertheless, the programme for the camps in
Tindouf remains extremely vulnerable.

C. Confidence-building measures
72. The confidence-building measures, pursuant to Security Council resolution
1282 (1999) and subsequent resolutions, to allow family links between Sahrawi
refugees in the Tindouf camps and their communities of origin in the Territory of
Western Sahara, remained on hold.

D.

Human rights
73. In its resolution 2548 (2020), the Security Council strongly encouraged
enhancing cooperation with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights (OHCHR), including through facilitating visits to the region. OHCHR
was unable to conduct any visits to the region for the sixth consecutive year. Lack of
access by OHCHR to Western Sahara continued to result in substantial gaps in human
rights monitoring in the Territory.
74. OHCHR remained concerned by reports of undue restrictions imposed by
Morocco on the rights to freedom of expression, peaceful assembly and association
in Western Sahara, especially following the developments in November 2020, 2 as well
as reports of unnecessary and disproportionate use of force by Mo roccan security
forces to disperse protests and the conduct of house raids without warrants, arbitrary
arrests and detention, unlawful and arbitrary surveillance, harassment, intimidation
and destruction of property. Special procedure mandate holders of th e Human Rights
Council sent three communications in relation to allegations of torture and
ill-treatment of protestors, journalists, bloggers, lawyers and human rights defenders
during the reporting period. 3 On 1 July 2021, the Special Rapporteur on the situation
of human rights defenders issued a press release calling on Morocco to stop targeting
human rights defenders and journalists in Western Sahara, and allow them to work
without reprisals. 4 The press release further referred to the case of a human rights
defender who was allegedly kept under house arrest for months in Laayoune,
physically and sexually assaulted, and subjected to unlawful and arbitrary
surveillance by Moroccan security forces.

__________________

See also A/HRC/48/28, annex II.
See special procedure mandate holders’ allegation letters JAL MAR 5/2020 and the response of
the Government of Morocco, JAL MAR 4/2021 and urgent appeal letter JUA MAR 5/2021.
4
See “Morocco: UN human rights expert decries “clampdown” on human rights defenders”, 1 July
2021. Available at www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=27244.
2
3

12/19

21-14004

S/2021/843

75. On 25 November 2020, the Moroccan Court of Cassation upheld the 2017 Rabat
Court of Appeal’s decision, which found the Gdeim Izik group of prisoners guilty of
the deaths of 11 security force members in clashes that occurred during the
dismantling of the Gdeim Izik camp. Members of this group reportedly went on
hunger strikes on several occasions to protest their ill-treatment, including solitary
confinement and the lack of medical care provided to them and to other prisoners.
Reportedly, these prisoners were kept incommunicado and prevented from
communicating with relatives, legal representatives and others.
76. On 28 July 2021, I received a letter from Frente POLISARIO on “the
increasingly alarming situation in Western Sahara” and alleged human rights
violations in Western Sahara in the aftermath of 13 November 2020. I received letters
from Morocco on 9 August, 13 August and 31 August 2021 that provided information
concerning efforts “to promote and protect human rights and fundamental freedoms”
in the Territory. These included information on the specific incidents outlined in my
regular reports to the Security Council, as well as information regarding “manoeuvres
of political instrumentalization of the events of Gdeim Izik” and information
regarding alleged human rights violations in the Tin douf camps.
77. On 28 July and 4 August 2021, Morocco provided information to OHCHR on
the human rights situation and economic development in the Territory, including
measures taken in response to COVID-19. Morocco also drew attention in these
letters to alleged human rights violations perpetrated against civilians in the Tindouf
camps.
78. The COVID-19 crisis continued to have an adverse impact on the human rights
of Sahrawi civilians in the camps in Tindouf, which was reportedly compounded by
limited access to humanitarian aid. While the effects of the pandemic further
decreased the commercial and economic activities of the camps, OHCHR received
allegations from Morocco and NGOs that Frente POLISARIO had misappropriated
funds and aid in the camps. Special procedure mandate holders transmitted a
communication in relation to the alleged extrajudicial executions of two Sahrawi
refugees by the Algerian security forces at a mining site near the Dakhla camp in
October 2020. 5

VI. African Union
79. On 6 December 2020, the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
African Union held its fourteenth extraordinary session on Silencing the Guns in
Africa. In paragraph 15 of its decision 1 (XIV), the Assembly “expresse[d] deep
concern over the escalating military tensions between Morocco and the Sahrawi
Republic” in Guerguerat. The declaration, inter alia, “calls on the United Nations
Secretary-General to appoint a Special Envoy for Western Sahara”. On 9 March 2021,
the African Union Peace and Security Council held its 984th meeting on the follow -up
on the implementation of paragraph 15 of the decision on Silencing the Guns of the
fourteenth extraordinary session.

VII. Financial aspects
80. By its resolution 2548 (2020), the Security Council extended the mandate of
MINURSO until 31 October 2021.
__________________
5

21-14004

See, for example, special procedure mandate holders’ allegation letter JAL DZA 7/2020 and the
response of the Government of Algeria.
13/19

S/2021/843

81. The General Assembly, in its resolution 75/305, appropriated the amount of
$56.5 million for the maintenance of the Mission for the period from 1 July 2021 to
30 June 2022. Should the Security Council decide to extend the mandate of
MINURSO beyond 31 October 2021, the cost of maintaining the Mission would be
limited to the amounts approved by the Assembly.
82. As at 27 August 2021, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special Account for
MINURSO amounted to $63.1 million. The total outstanding assessed contributions
for all peacekeeping operations as at that date amounted to $4,031.1 million.
83. Reimbursement of troop costs and the costs of contingent-owned major
equipment and self-sustainment has been made for the period up to 31 March 2021 in
accordance with the quarterly payment schedule.

VIII. Observations and recommendations
84. I am deeply concerned by the developments in Western Sahara during the
reporting period. The status of the buffer strip as a demilitarized zone remains a
cornerstone of a peaceful solution to the situation of Western Sahara. The resumption
of hostilities between Morocco and Frente POLISARIO is a major setback to the
achievement of a political solution to this longstanding dispute. Since then, daily
incursions into this zone and hostilities between the parties have significantly
undermined the arrangements that have been the basis for a ceasefire for the past 30
years. There remains a clear risk of escalation while hostilities persist. I therefore call
on the parties to de-escalate the situation and immediately cease hostilities. In this
context, the resumption of the political process could not be more urgent. It remains
absolutely essential for the parties to agree on the appointment of a Personal Envoy
to relaunch the political dialogue on Western Sahara.
85. I remain confident that a solution is possible despite the recent significant
setback. Now more than ever, finding a just, lasting and mutually acceptable political
solution that will provide for the self-determination of the people of Western Sahara
in accordance with resolutions 2440 (2018), 2468 (2019), 2494 (2019) and 2548
(2020) requires strong political will from the parties, as well as from the international
community. I reiterate my call on Security Council members, friends of Western
Sahara and other relevant actors to encourage Morocco and Frente POLISARIO to
engage in good faith and without preconditions in the political process as soon as my
new Personal Envoy is appointed.
86. In addition, the lack of trust between the parties has continued to be exacerbated
by unilateral assertive actions and symbolic gestures in the Territor y which have had
a negative impact on the situation. Such gestures and actions are a source of increased
tension and run contrary to the spirit of a negotiated solution. I urge the parties to
refrain from rhetoric and actions that are harmful, and for West ern Sahara’s
international partners to continue to reiterate their support for the achievement of a
just, lasting and mutually acceptable political solution to the question of Western
Sahara through negotiation.
87. Neighbouring states have a vital role in the achievement of a solution to the
question of Western Sahara. In this connection, the deterioration in relations between
Morocco and Algeria is of concern. I encourage the two neighbouring countries to
find a way forward to mend relations, including in support of regional cooperation
and peace and security.
88. MINURSO military observers have not been able to safely access areas at or
near the berm or the buffer strip. Combined with additional movement restrictions
east of the berm, the ability of MINURSO to observe the situation in the entire
14/19

21-14004

S/2021/843

Territory and to provide important maintenance to its team sites is significantly
hampered. If these constraints are not removed, MINURSO team sites east of the
berm risk becoming unsustainable. It is essential tha t Frente POLISARIO
immediately remove all limitations to the free movement of MINURSO ground
convoys, air assets and personnel east of the berm, and allow a free flow of logistics
and maintenance services.
89. Unfortunately, both parties have continued to limit their engagement with the
leadership of MINURSO. It has now been more than two years since either party has
met with my Special Representative, and in the case of Frente POLISARIO, more
than three years since it has met with the Force Commander. In the interests of all, I
reiterate my call on the parties to remain committed and to maintain regular contacts
with MINURSO leadership, both civilian and military.
90. It is of concern that the developments in the Territory have led to a suspension
of regular mine action operations east of the berm with the exception of emergency
services. I encourage a resumption of the work, and for both parties to engage more
closely with the Mine Action Service on the removal of landmines and explosive
remnants of war throughout the Territory, and to ensure adherence to international
humanitarian mine action standards to increase the effectiveness of removal activities.
91. I am convinced that the increased participation of women in peacekeeping
improves the performance of United Nations peace operations and strengthens their
effectiveness. In line with the objectives of the Action for Peacekeeping initiative, I
extend my appreciation to the Mission’s troop-contributing countries for their support
in helping MINURSO be a model in this regard, and I encourage them to continue.
92. I reiterate my call to the parties to respect, protect and promote the human rights
of all people in Western Sahara, including by addressing outstanding human rights
issues and enhancing cooperation with OHCHR and the United Nations human rights
mechanisms, and to facilitate their monitoring missions. Independent, impartial,
comprehensive and sustained monitoring of the human rights situation is necessary
to ensure the protection of all people in Western Sahara.
93. I would like to express my sincere gratitude to Morocco, Frente POLISARIO
and Algeria for their cooperation during the COVID-19 pandemic and my
appreciation for the generosity of Morocco and Algeria in providing vaccines to the
civilian and military staff of MINURSO. I further applaud Algeria for including
refugees in its vaccination programme, and I encourage the continuation of these
efforts. Recovery from the pandemic requires that vaccines be available to everyone.
94. Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, humanitarian actors have maintained the
delivery of essential, life-saving assistance to Sahrawi refugees. I commend the staff
of UNHCR, WFP and UNICEF, as well as NGO partners, for their dedication. I thank
the international community for its support to the COVID-19 response through the
joint appeal to assist the Sahrawi refugees living in the Tindouf camps, and I
encourage the international community to continue to contribute to the humanitarian
operations in the Tindouf camps, which have been chronically underfunded, to protect
the vulnerable population, including women and children.
95. Despite the significant challenges described in the present report, MINURSO
remains the main and often sole source of impartial information and advic e to me, the
Security Council, the Member States and the Secretariat concerning developments in
the Territory. In this regard, it continues to provide visible and enduring testimony to
the commitment of the United Nations and the international community to wards
achieving a just, lasting and mutually acceptable political solution to the conflict in
Western Sahara in accordance with resolutions 2440 (2018), 2468 (2019), 2494

21-14004

15/19

S/2021/843

(2019) and 2548 (2020). I therefore recommend that the Council extend the mandate
of MINURSO for another year, until 31 October 2022.
96. I extend my deepest gratitude to the women and men of MINURSO for their
relentless commitment to the Mission and the goals and purposes of the United
Nations, including in the face of challenges arising from the COVID -19 pandemic
and the resumption of hostilities. I welcome my new Special Representative for
Western Sahara and Head of MINURSO, Alexander Ivanko, and wish to express my
sincere appreciation to his predecessor, Colin Stewart, as well as to the Force
Commander, Major General Zia Ur Rehman, for their exemplary leadership under
particularly challenging circumstances.

16/19

21-14004

S/2021/843

Annex I
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
Contributions as at 30 September 2021
Military observers a

Troops a

Civilian police b

Total

Argentina

3

–

–

3

Austria

6

–

–

6

Bangladesh

7

20

–

27

Bhutan

2

–

–

2

Brazil

11

–

–

11

Chad

2

–

–

2

China

11

–

–

11

Colombia

2

–

–

2

Côte d’Ivoire

2

–

–

2

Croatia

9

–

–

9

Ecuador

2

–

–

2

Egypt

25

–

–

25

El Salvador

1

–

–

1

France

2

–

–

2

Germany

3

–

–

3

Ghana

10

7

–

17

Guinea

4

–

–

4

Honduras

10

–

–

10

Hungary

6

–

–

6

India

4

–

–

4

Indonesia

3

–

–

3

Italy

4

–

–

4

Jordan

2

–

–

2

Kazakhstan

7

–

–

7

Malawi

4

–

–

4

Malaysia

9

–

–

9

Mexico

6

–

–

6

Mongolia

3

–

–

3

Montenegro

1

–

–

1

Nepal

4

–

–

4

Nigeria

5

–

–

5

Pakistan

13

–

–

13

Poland

1

–

–

1

Republic of Korea

6

–

–

6

Russian Federation

10

–

–

10

Sri Lanka

2

–

–

2

Sweden

2

–

–

2

Country

21-14004

17/19

S/2021/843
Military observers a

Troops a

Civilian police b

Total

Switzerland

2

–

–

2

Togo

2

–

–

2

208

27

–

235 c

Country

Total
a

Authorized strength is 245, including the Force Commander.
Authorized strength is 12.
c
Actual strength on the ground, for military and civilian police, including the Force Commander.

b

18/19

21-14004

S/2021/843

Annex II
Map

21-14004

19/19
