S/2005/331

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 May 2005
Original: English

Letter dated 23 May 2005 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to my first semi-annual report on the implementation
of Security Council resolution 1559 (2004) (S/2005/272), in which I informed the
Council that I had dispatched a technical military team to Lebanon to verify the full
and complete withdrawal of all Syrian troops, military assets and intelligence
apparatus. I hereby transmit to the Council the report of the verification team (see
annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

05-35548 (E) 260505

*0535548*

S/2005/331

Annex
Report of the United Nations mission to verify the full and
complete withdrawal of Syrian forces from Lebanon
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1559 (2004) —
26 April to 13 May 2005
I.

Introduction
1.
In the first semi-annual report of the Secretary-General to the Security Council
on the implementation of resolution 1559 (2004) (S/2005/272) it was noted that a
United Nations mission was despatched to verify the full and complete withdrawal
of Syrian troops, military assets and intelligence apparatus from Lebanon.
2.
The mission was carried out by a technical team of three United Nations
military staff members: Brigadier General Elhadji Mouhamadou Kandji, the Deputy
Military Adviser from the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the team
leader; Colonel Ian Sinclair, the Chief of Staff of the United Nations Force in
Cyprus; Commander Kari Makinen, a staff officer in the Military Division of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations; and Galal Zeid, a United Nations
interpreter. United Nations security personnel also supported the team.

II.

Preliminary work (26-30 April 2005)
3.
On 26 April 2005, the team deployed to Damascus, where the officers joined
up with their interpreter and security personnel. On 27 and 28 April, the team held
meetings with the Syrian military authorities to obtain relevant information on
Syria’s previous military and intelligence presence in Lebanon. The Syrian
delegation consisted of Major General Adeeb Qasim, the Deputy Chief of Staff of
the Syrian Army; Major General Fayz Haffar, the last commander of Syrian forces
in Lebanon; and Brigadier General Darwish, Head of the Senior Syrian Arab
Delegates.
4.
At the team leader’s request, the Syrian military authorities provided the
mission with documents and a marked map (1:50,000 scale) depicting the positions
that Syrian forces and military intelligence had occupied before their final
withdrawal in April 2005. The Syrian military authorities cooperated fully with the
mission and provided an initial database of information from which the team could
plan its verification work.
5.
The mission then moved to Beirut by road on 28 April 2005, visiting on the
way the former headquarters of Syrian forces in Lebanon, which had been located in
Syrian territory, a few kilometres before the border crossing point on the highway to
Lebanon. During this visit, the team also saw some Syrian forces and vehicles that
had reportedly been withdrawn recently from Lebanon. After its arrival in Beirut,
the team consulted with the Lebanese military authorities on 29 and 30 April,
meeting Lieutenant General Michel Sleiman, the Chief of Staff of the Lebanese
Armed Forces, and Brigadier General Emad Anka, who would accompany the team
during its stay in Lebanon.
6.
The Lebanese military authorities furnished the team with documents and
maps showing former Syrian positions in Lebanon. The team then cross-referenced

2

S/2005/331

these documents and maps with the information provided by the Syrian military
authorities, thereby developing their database of information. Lieutenant General
Sleiman assigned a team of military officers, led by Brigadier General Anka, to
accompany the mission. In addition, military police were assigned to protect the
team throughout its stay in Lebanon. The Lebanese military authorities cooperated
fully with the mission and their support facilitated its work considerably.
7.
The team also consulted with members of the defence attachés’ community in
Beirut on 29 April 2005 in order to develop further its understanding of the former
Syrian military presence in Lebanon.
8.
By the end of this series of consultations, the team had compiled a database of
information on where Syrian military forces, assets and intelligence apparatus had
been located in Lebanon before their final withdrawal. These locations were
concentrated in two areas: the coastal strip to the west of Mount Lebanon around
Beirut and Tripoli; and the Bekaa valley to the east.
9.

The Syrian withdrawal was conducted in two phases:

(a) In the first phase, in March 2005, the majority of Syrian forces were
withdrawn from the areas west of Mount Lebanon and concentrated in the Bekaa
valley.
(b) In the second phase, which was apparently complete by 26 April 2005,
the Syrians withdrew all military forces from the Bekaa valley and all remaining
forces west of Mount Lebanon back to Syrian territory. A military ceremony was
held on 26 April 2005 at Rayak airbase in the Bekaa valley to mark the final
withdrawal of Syrian forces from Lebanon.
10. The team then completed its mission analysis and subsequent planning for the
verification task. The concept was to verify the Syrian withdrawal by visiting on the
ground all of the former Syrian military locations that had been identified in the
database of information. The verification was to be facilitated by the team of
Lebanese military officers travelling with the mission and by local commanding
officers and intelligence officers, who were able to guide the team in their respective
sectors.

III.
A.

Conduct of the mission (1-13 May 2005)
General
11. The team began its verification activities on 1 May 2005 and for the following
10 days conducted verification on the ground throughout Lebanon. In addition to
verifying locations in the database, the team also verified further locations when
supplementary information came to light. Verification on the ground was conducted
in three phases:
(a) In phase one (1-2 May), the team visited former Syrian locations to the
west of Mount Lebanon, which were mostly concentrated in Beirut, Tripoli and the
coastal areas north and south of the cities. Many of these positions had been vacated
several years ago but a few had been recently abandoned.
(b) In phase two (3-7 May), the team verified the withdrawal of Syrian
forces from the Bekaa valley, where signs of more recent presence were apparent.

3

S/2005/331

(c) In phase three (10 May), the team carried out a final sweep of possible
former Syrian locations south of Beirut and in the capital city.
12. The team conducted final meetings with the Lebanese military authorities on
11 May in Beirut and with the Syrian military authorities on 12 May at the border,
before departing from Lebanon on 13 May 2005.
13. The team made a detailed register of the verification work, recording each
position visited, confirming the geographic location accurately by the use of both
map and global positioning system (GPS), recording the number of photographs
taken of the position and noting any remarks about the position. The team took over
600 photographs to confirm what had been seen and collected evidence of former
Syrian military presence whenever it was found. The team also recorded the status
of abandoned Syrian defence works, in order to advise on their disposal or
destruction, and noted the current use of former Syrian defence positions by
Lebanese military forces.
B.

Noteworthy verification events
14. On 4 May, the team visited the area of Qoussaya, where reports had indicated
that Syrian military personnel or equipment might be found. Qoussaya is a
Palestinian-controlled area in the eastern hills of the central Bekaa valley, not far
from the border with the Syrian Arab Republic. At 0920 the team approached an
entrance to the Palestinian camp, which was guarded by two armed Palestinians.
One guard at once ordered the mission to leave. Despite assurances from the team’s
Lebanese escorts, the guard cocked his weapon to deny the team access. As the
mission withdrew, the guard fired warning shots into the air. Access to Qoussaya
was clearly denied to the team, which was therefore unable to verify Syrian
withdrawal from that location. This incident was widely reported in the media and
was the subject of a statement by the Secretary-General on 5 May.1
15. On 5 May, the mission was visiting the Deir Al-Ashayr area near the border
with the Syrian Arab Republic in the east. The team noticed a military position,
which turned out to be a Syrian battalion, apparently in Lebanese territory,
according to the maps provided by both the Syrian and Lebanese military
authorities. The team at once visited the location without escort. The Syrian
commander (a Brigadier General) claimed that the position was inside the Syrian
Arab Republic, pointing out a line of stone mounds in front of the location that
allegedly marked the border. It should be noted that the Governments of the Syrian
Arab Republic and Lebanon have not yet agreed the demarcation of their border and
are currently considering the issue at the highest political level. Although border
demarcation was not a task of the mission, the lack of a defined border in the Deir
Al-Ashayr area meant that the team was unable to verify whether the Syrian
battalion was in Syrian or Lebanese territory.
16. The team was also concerned that Syrian military forces rather than border
guards were occupying a position close to the border. The Syrian military authorities
in Damascus had informed the team that all military units had returned to their
barracks in the Syrian Arab Republic as from 26 April 2005 and only border guards
remained in the border area. The team leader sought clarification from the Syrian

__________________
1 Press release SG/SM/9854, dated 4 May 2005.

4

S/2005/331

military authorities on this point and he was informed that a lack of border guards
had required the use of a military unit in the area.
17. On 10 May, the team visited a small valley in the area of Naame, 15 kilometres
south of Beirut, where reports had indicated that Syrian military personnel or
equipment might be found. The valley was a Palestinian-controlled area. The
Lebanese military authorities contacted the Palestinians to ensure safe passage for
the team to enter the valley. The team was met on arrival, escorted up the valley and
invited to enter a tunnel that had been built into the side of the valley. Palestinian
representatives indicated that the team were the first outsiders to enter the complex,
regretted any misunderstanding at Qoussaya and afforded the team every assistance
at Naame. The representatives assured the team that there were no Syrian troops or
equipment in the position. The team carried out a short tour of the tunnel and
verified this statement to the extent possible, before returning down the valley and
departing.
18. By the end of the day on 10 May, the team had visited almost every single
location in its database of information, omitting only a few unimportant sites.

IV.

Observations
19. The activities of the mission were of great interest to the Lebanese people and
were closely reported by national and international media. The reason was the link
made between the verification and three major issues of concern: the assassination
of Rafiq Hariri, the border demarcation issue and the presence of Palestinian armed
elements.
20. The team noted the long-standing military cooperation between the Syrian and
Lebanese armies, which continues today even after the withdrawal. Lebanese
officers still travel to the Syrian Arab Republic under this programme of
cooperation and it is possible that Syrian military officers may visit Lebanon.
21. In some of the locations previously occupied by the Syrian military
intelligence, such as the Hotel Beau Rivage in Beirut, the Villa Jaber outside Beirut
and the American School in the Tripoli area, cells were found where it was apparent
that prisoners had been held.

V.

Conclusions and recommendations
22. After travelling more than 1,500 kilometres in Lebanon and visiting
133 former Syrian troop and military intelligence positions, the team found no
Syrian military forces, assets or intelligence apparatus in Lebanese territory, with
the exception of one Syrian battalion deployed near Deir Al-Ashayr. Eleven former
Syrian positions had already been taken over by the Lebanese army. The mission has
therefore concluded, to the best of its ability, with the possible exception of the Deir
Al-Ashayr area, the status of which is unclear (see below), that Syrian troops and
military assets have been fully and completely withdrawn from Lebanese territory.
23. There is no border agreement between the Governments of the Syrian Arab
Republic and Lebanon, with no clear demarcation line on the ground. As a result,
the team was unable to verify whether the Syrian military unit in the Deir Al-Ashayr

5

S/2005/331

area was in Syrian or Lebanese territory. The status of that unit will be clarified
once the two Governments have concluded a border agreement.
24. The withdrawal of the Syrian intelligence apparatus has been harder to verify
because intelligence activities are by nature often clandestine. The team visited all
the locations formerly used by the Syrian military intelligence apparatus and found
them empty. The team has therefore concluded, to the best of its ability, that no
Syrian military intelligence personnel remain in Lebanon in known locations or in
military uniform. But the team has been unable to conclude with certainty that all
the intelligence apparatus has been withdrawn.
25. The team encountered numerous earthworks and defences formerly used by
Syrian forces, particularly in the Bekaa valley. In most cases, the earthworks
consisted of earth walls but the mission also found underground bunkers and troop
trenches. It is recommended that the Lebanese authorities dismantle any earthworks
and defences that are assessed to pose a risk to Lebanese civilians.
26. The mission was required to assess whether a more comprehensive verification
mission would be required. The team believes that such a mission would only
retrace this team’s steps in Lebanon and would still be unable to verify the complete
withdrawal of clandestine intelligence apparatus. It is therefore recommended that a
further verification mission is not required at this stage.
27. The team would like to record its thanks and appreciation to the Governments
and military authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic and Lebanon for the hospitality
and support provided to the mission throughout its stay in the region. Without this
support, the planning and execution of the mission in Lebanon would have been
made considerably more difficult. The team would also like to record its thanks to
the United Nations organizations on the ground for their administrative and logistic
support, which was essential to the success of the mission.
(Signed) Elhadji Mouhamadou Kandji
Deputy Military Adviser,
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, Military Division
Verification team leader
New York, 23 May 2005

6
