u
1101 (XI). Modernlzation of the Palaie dee
Nadom
The General Assnnbly,
Hau'!f considered the reports of the SecretaryGeneral and of the Advisory Cornmittee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions•• on the modernization of the Palais des Nations,
Havsng been infonned of the offer of the Swiss Federal Council, subject to approval by the Swiss Parliament, to lend the United Nations, free of interest, up
to a maximum of 4 million Swiss francs to finance
the modernization programme as outlined in the report
of the Secretary-General,
1. Expresses its appreciation of the generous offer
of the Swiss Federal Council;
2. Apprwes the programme for the modernization
of the Palais des Nations as set out in the report of
the Secretary-General ;
3. Autho,ues the Secretary-General to accept the
offer of the Swiss Federal Council of a loan of 4 million
Swiss francs ;
4. Authorües the Secretary-General to proceed with
the execution of the programme;
S. Jnstructs the Secretary-General to include in
his budget estimates for the years 1957 to 1966 pro.. Official Records of the General Assembl:v, Eleventh
SessioK, ÂKKeses, agenda item 43, documents A/C.5/659 and
Add.1.
"Ibid., documents A/3379 and Add.1.

vision for ten equal instalments of $121,000 per annum
to finance the modernization programme and repay the
Joan.
662nd plenary meeting,
27 FebrUMy 1957.

1102 (XI). United Natione International Sehool
The General Assembly,
Havsng considered the report of the Secretary-Genera1411 on the United Nations International School,
N oting with satisfaction the improvement in the
situation of the School, whereby it is not in need of
budgetary assistance from the United Nations this ycar,
Recognizing the continued functioning of the School
as one of the important non-financial factors contributing to the recruitment and retention of international staff,
1. Endorses the view that suitable accommodations
in a convenient location are urgently needed by the
United Nations International School;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to present his
proposed study of the suggestions of the Board of
Trustees of the School to the General Assembly at its
twelfth session.
662nd plenary meeting,
27 February 1957.
'"Ibid., document A/C.5/703.
