asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6909

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6909th meeting
Thursday, 24 January 2013, 10.25 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Masood Khan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Pakistan)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Estreme
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Tian Lin
Mr. Briens
Mr. Briz Gutiérrez
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Kim Sook
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Menan
Mr. Shearman
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Burundi
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Office in Burundi
(S/2013/36)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

13-21583 (E)

*1321583*

S/PV.6909

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Burundi
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Office in Burundi (S/2013/36)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Burundi to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Security Council, I welcome His
Excellency Mr. Alberto Shingiro, Permanent Secretary
at the Ministery for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Burundi.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Office in Burundi, to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Paul Seger, Chairperson of the peacebuilding
configuration for Burundi of the Peacebuilding
Commission and Permanent Representative of
Switzerland, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of the members of
the Security Council to document S/2013/36, which
contains the report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Office in Burundi.
I now give the floor to Mr. Onanga-Anyanga.
Mr. Onanga-Anyanga: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the Security
Council on Burundi as it considers the SecretaryGeneral’s latest report (S/2013/36).
It gives me great pleasure and privilege to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
Janueary. Under your skilled leadership, the Council
is in very good hands. As this is the first time that I
am briefing the Council on Burundi, I would beg your
indulgence in using the full time alloted to me.

2

As the Council knows, the Burundi has traveled a
long path out of the cycle of violence that plagued it for
more than four decades. The United Nations has been
at Burundi’s side every step of the way. The people and
Government of Burundi have the greatest appreciation
for that support. As I begin my presentation, allow me,
Mr. President, to thank the Government and people of
Burundi for the very high esteem in which they hold
the United Nations. I have been humbled by the warm
welcome I have received and the cordial relationships
we have established since my arrival in their beautiful
country. The work of the United Nations in Burundi
is both respected and valued. It is in appreciation of
the priceless support of the United Nations to their
country that the Government of Burundi has made it
a duty to reciprocate and give back to the community
of nations, in particular by providing critical forces to
peacekeeping operations, most notably in Somalia, and
often at a high human cost. We will never be able to
thank them enough for their sacrifice.
On behalf of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, and all the
members of the Security Council for your dedication in
the search for lasting peace in our ever more global and
complex world, most specifically in Burundi.
Throughout 2012, Burundi continued to make
further progress in consolidating peace and stability.
By comparison with the situation that prevailed
during the years of war, today’s Burundi is a far better
place to be in and to live in. Historians and observers
may tell members that never before has the country
witnessed such a long and uninterrupted period of
democratic experience and stability. The Government
and people of Burundi need to be commended for that
major achievement in a post-conflict context. They
deserve our continued support. That is not to say that
the country has overcome all of its challenges. I will
discuss both achievements and challenges with the
Council today, through the lens of the benchmarks that
the Council asked the Secretary-General to submit to it,
and measure Burundi’s progress against.
A number of the positive trends reported by my
predecessor, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Karin Landgren, to whom I am ever grateful,
during the previous briefing on Burundi to the Council
in July 2012 (see S/PV.6799) have been further
consolidated. Determined to overcome the effects of the
long-standing conflict, Burundi has continued to make
progress on its path towards a more peaceful, more just

13-21583

S/PV.6909

and more cohesive society. However, the impact of the
boycott of the 2010 elections continues, unquestionably,
to affect negatively Burundi’s political landscape.
The political standoff between the Government and
the extra-parliamentary opposition has led to tense
relationships — sometimes with a violent edge to
them — thereby putting an unnecessary and regrettable
strain on political space. Needless to say, that is
contrary to the letter and spirit of the consensus that
has animated the peace-consolidation process since the
Arusha Accords. Burundi’s long-term stability — and,
more immediately, the successful preparations and
conduct of the 2015 elections — hinge, critically, on
maintaining both.
Burundi is to be commended for its efforts in
strengthening governance and institution-building,
leading to continued improvements in mechanisms to
fight corruption and build accountability. Burundi’s
new Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) was
finalized and adopted in January 2012, and the new
United Nations Development Assistance Framework in
January 2013. We congratulate Burundi for the clearly
articulated vision and excellent road map that those
documents provides us with.
The conference of Burundi’s development partners
that took place at the end of October in Geneva helped
to mobilize major support for the implementation of
the new PRSP, in an impressive show of confidence by
Burundi’s international partners. The many partners and
friends of Burundi who attended the conference could
see for themselves that Burundi had travelled a long
path. Democratic elections were held twice since the
end of the conflict. And the efforts that the Government
has been making to strengthen good governance and
the accountability of institutions are beginning to pay
off. Burundi, on the other hand, restated in Geneva, and
in subsequent statements by its highest authorities, its
commitment to the principles of democracy, inclusion,
human rights and reconciliation.
As I mentioned earlier, the report of the SecretaryGeneral before the Council contains an evaluation of
the progress made against each of the eight benchmarks.
Allow me to briefly highlight key points from the
assessment.
(spoke in French)
The democratic process in Burundi continues to
take on strength, despite the fact that, as I said a few
moments ago, the impact of the boycott of the 2010

13-21583

elections is still being felt. The majority of the most
important institutions continue to improve and to
carry out their responsibilities with greater confidence
and efficiency. We can be pleased that today that
the opposition’s rejection of the legitimacy of the
institutions that emerged from the elections appears to
be waning.
One of the negative aspects of the boycott was a
decrease in the diversity and representative character of
legislative bodies, thereby circumscribing the chances
for genuine debate and the search for consensus in
addressing major issues of national concern. As nature
abhors a vacuum, we have also witnessed a shift from
the opposition to civil society when it comes to the
Government’s actions, with civil society increasingly
being on the frontlines in opposition.
In spite of that tension and the divergence of views
on a great number of issues that are severely testing
Burundi’s experience of democracy, the discussion
between the Government and the extra-parliamentary
opposition is continuing. For example, we should
welcome the fact that the controversy surrounding the
appointment of the members of the new independent
National Electoral Commission has been overcome.
Everything must now be done to support the work of
that important institution, so as to allow it to organize
the 2015 elections in an atmosphere of calm.
Generally speaking, I would like to commend the
receptiveness of Burundi’s authorities and opposition
leaders to our humble advice and suggestions to be
more accommodating.
In spite of those political challenges, Burundi
continues to enjoy an outstanding level of security and
stability. That is undoubtedly due, in large part, to the
successful reform of Burundi’s army and its growing
professionalization. Now that things are calmer within
its borders, Burundi has become an important actor
in international efforts at peace, including efforts led
or supported by the United Nations. Working with
international partners, the United Nations has continued
to provide the necessary support to strengthen the
professionalism and accountability of the security
sector, including people’s confidence in Burundi’s
security forces.
While the overall security situation has remained
stable, cross-border incursions by armed group
continued throughout 2012, leading to armed clashes
with Burundi’s security forces. Although most were

3

S/PV.6909

low-level clashes, those incidents nevertheless reveal
that there are still Burundians who will turn to armed
violence to achieve political goals. The SecretaryGeneral unreservedly condemns all recourse to armed
violence as a means or tool of political expression,
and calls on all Burundian political forces to choose
dialogue and turn to democratic institutions over
violence. When it comes to cross-border movements of
armed groups, it is crucial to foment greater stability
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. That is an essential element of a comprehensive
strategy to build lasting peace in Burundi.
It is also essential to put an end once and for all
to acts of intimidation and factional violence in the
context of Burundi’s political landscape. Burundi,
which has suffered too much from exclusion and clan
mentality, continues to show the world that it has the
necessary maturity to overcome its differences through
dialogue. That was the right choice in Arusha in 2000,
and it continues to be the right choice today.
Achieving a process of transitional justice that
meets the dual objectives of reconciliation and providing
justice is indeed crucial, but as yet incomplete under
the Arusha Accords. The Mechanisms of Transitional
Justice is at the very heart of the absolute need to take
responsibility for the past by each Burundian and by
the country as a whole. In that regard, transitional
justice is an essential element of national restoration
and reconstruction. There is national consensus on
putting in place the basics. The country’s President
has on many occasions underscored the willingness
of the Government to set up a truth and reconciliation
commission. A bill that has garnered the attention
of the entire country is currently before the National
Assembly for consideration. Throughout 2012, the
United Nations Office in Burundi (BNUB) and the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights stressed the need to address this issue in a
manner consistent with international norms and best
practices, as well as in line with national expectations.
Accordingly, BNUB submitted its comments on the
draft law to the President of the National Assembly.
We are hopeful that, in its wisdom, that body will
strike a constructive balance between the essential
need to promote national reconciliation with the need
to provide justice in order to put an end to impunity
and overcome the deep divisions that have afflicted the
people of Burundi for so long.

4

For the same reasons, all stakeholders should
ensure that the truth and reconciliation commission to
be established be viewed as independent, legitimate and
credible in the eyes of all Burundians, first and foremost,
but also in the eyes of the country’s international
partners. The United Nations has supported Burundi
since the beginning of the process and remains prepared
to support a Truth and Reconciliation Commission
that is fully in line with international principles and
common aspirations.
Significant progress has been achieved with respect
to governance and the strengthening of institutions,
allowing ongoing improvement in anti-corruption
mechanisms and enhanced accountability for
institutions. As proof of this, Burundi has been ranked
highly in several global and regional ratings systems.
The National Strategy on Good Governance and the
Fight against Corruption has begun to yeild concrete
results, and the positive performance of the Burundi
Revenue Authority is clear to all. The commitment
of the President to pursuing his zero-tolerance policy
against corruption lends significant political credibility
to such efforts.
There is no need to stress the essential role that
the judicial system can play in helping to establish a
Burundian society based on respect for the rule of law,
peacebuilding and stability. It is therefore important to
enhance it and to ensure that it is representative, while
also shoring up the publics’s trust in it. However, we
must recognize that the judicial system also continues
to encounter major challenges.
I will now turn to human rights. The human
rights situation showed some encouraging signs of
improvement in 2012 compared with the two previous
years. For example, the number of extrajudicial,
summary or arbitrary executions and/or deaths that
could be considered as politically motivated, as well
as cases of torture documented by BNUB, decreased
significantly compared with the previous year,
although the number of instances of abuse continues
to increase overall. BNUB and the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights have worked
tirelessly to support the Government in ensuring
national capacity-building in promoting and protecting
human rights in Burundi. This has been accomplished,
inter alia, through close cooperation with the Ministry
of Human Rights and support to the Independent
National Human Rights Commission that was set up
in July 2011. The Commission has seen a significant

13-21583

S/PV.6909

increase in the number of cases recorded, studied and
completed this year. It has also opened three regional
offices, which has expanded its scope and enhanced its
efficiency.
Civil society organizations continued their
outreach work on relevant issues, including human
rights, corruption and social issues such as the
increase in food prices. While it is clear that tensions
continue to plague the work of such organizations, we
must welcome the positive examples of cooperation
between the Government and civil society. We must
also stress that the existence of a dynamic civil
society and independent media are valuable assets for
Burundian society. We must do our utmost to ensure
that those stakeholders continue to play their essential
role of monitoring and outreach, ethically and in a
responsible manner, in order to contribute to enhancing
democracy gains and to achieving the national strategic
development objectives.
The eighth criterion, which deals with economic
and social development, is without doubt that to which
the Government of Burundi is giving the highest
priority, and rightly so. Burundi continues to face
major challenges. Despite the incredible progress
that has been achieved, Burundi remains one of the
poorest countries in the world. For too long, the peace
dividends that could have served as a solid basis for
development have not met expectations. Now more than
ever, the country needs the support of all its partners
in order to win the fight against the extreme poverty
that still affects the overwhelming majority of its
people, despite their courage and industriousness. Joint
efforts of the international community are therefore
absolutely essential to help the country improve its
productivity and promote economic growth towards
shared prosperity.
In the short term, the country needs significant
budgetary support to allow it to deal with the many
challenges that are inherent to the functioning of a
post-conflict society. The further commitment of the
private sector through investment is also essential in
potentially productive sectors such as energy, the food
industry, infrastructure or mining resources.
I would like to express my sincere admiration
and appreciation for Ambassador Paul Seger, as Chair
of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for the truly decisive role he has played
and continues to play in enhancing the international

13-21583

community’s awareness of the absolute need to support
Burundi’s efforts to fight poverty and pursue growth.
Once again, I reiterate that I am fully prepared to work
with him in carrying out his noble mission. We are
particularly grateful to the Peacebuilding Commission
for its efforts to prepare and ensure the successful
organization of the donors conference in Geneva and
for its support to the peacebuilding process in Burundi,
in particular through the Peacebuilding Fund, which
has been so skilfully managed by my colleague, UnderSecretary-General Judy Cheng-Hopkins.
(spoke in English)
Lifting a country out of poverty and healing
the wounds of long-term and cyclical violence are
immense challenges. Overcoming them requires the
contributions of all elements of society. I am confident
that the Government of Burundi and its people know
that an open, more democratic Burundi will be better
prepared to respond to the major tasks it faces.
The United Nations has been Burundi’s partner
throughout the long and often arduous peacebuilding
and peace consolidation processes. We remain at
Burundi’s side today. We believe that there is a true
opportunity for Burundi to firmly establish an era of
transformative politics through inclusion, dialogue and
the search for the common good. To move forward,
it is crucial, however, that we not lose sight of the
objectives Burundi set for itself in Arusha and in its
2005 Constitution — building institutions that strive
for good governance and equitable growth, while
forming a society that respects diversity and human
rights — in short, consolidating a vibrant democracy
where all citizens can live in peace and freedom.
With the 2015 electoral campaign just two years
away, it is now essential that both the Government and
the opposition play their parts in ensuring a continuing
consensual approach in dealing with the challenges
ahead. That is why the Secretary-General has called
on all to intensify their efforts to nurture dialogue and
normalize relations and to ensure that the foundations
for a peaceful and participatory campaign period are laid
now. I am confident that, if the remaining challenges in
Burundi’s peace consolidation process are addressed in
such an atmosphere of openness and mutual support,
we will succeed, and that beautiful country will be able
to ensure that those who are children now can exercise
their right to a better future. It is our assessment that
sustained United Nations and international political

5

S/PV.6909

engagement, combined with adequate backing of the
country’s development strategy, are still required to
help achieve that vision.
The Secretary-General therefore recommends
that the mandate of BNUB be extended for one year,
consistent with the views of the Government as set out
in a note verbale of 24 December 2012. In consultations
with the highest authorities of Burundi, I have had the
opportunity to review our collaboration and discuss the
way forward, including with the Permanent Secretary,
who is here with us today. Against this backdrop, the
Secretary-General intends to field a strategic assessment
mission, which will provide a further assessment
of the situation through the existing framework of
benchmarks, and will inform his recommendations
regarding the future presence of the United Nations in
Burundi. He will present the recommendations in his
next report to the Council, taking into account the views
and consultations with the Government of Burundi.
As I conclude my presentation, I would like to
express my sincere appreciation to all my colleagues,
in particular Under-Secretary-General Feltman and
his team in the Department of Political Affairs, and of
course those in Burundi, both in BNUB and colleagues
from the United Nations system, for their dedication
and support in helping Burundi and its people. I would
also be remiss not to thank the very dynamic diplomatic
corps in Bujumbura for their invaluable support.
Allow me in closing to make one last comment on
a rather personal note.
(spoke in French)
From the green hills of Ngozi in the north-east
of Burundi to the banks of the life-giving waters of
the majestic Lake Tanganyika, a powerful and united
outcry is heard. It is that of the men and women of
Burundi, appealing for the emergence of a more
harmonious, just and peaceful society as the basis of a
more prosperous and promising nation for present and
future generations. These men and women, young and
old, from all ethnic backgrounds and of all religious
convictions, will not understand why their legitimate
expectations should be disappointed. Together and in
support of the Burundi Government’s efforts, that hope
can serve as powerful leverage to achieve the strategic
objectives that Burundi has set for itself. I have no
doubt that the Council has heard Burundi’s outcry and
that it will once again be able to respond favourably
with all the strength of its authority.

6

The President: I thank Mr. Onanga-Anyanga for
his comprehensive briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Seger.
Mr. Seger (spoke in French): In my capacity as Chair
of the country-specific configuration on Burundi of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), I thank you, Sir,
for this opportunity to address the Security Council. I
should like to thanksto the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, for
his briefing here today — which I fully endorse — and
for his relentless efforts in assisting Burundi.
I shall structure my remarks around the three
following points. First, I will briefly cover the main
messages of the Conference for Burundi’s Development
Partners, held in Geneva on 29 and 30 October 2012,
and its aftermath. Secondly, I will offer a briefing
on my most recent trip to Bujumbura, which took
place from 14 to 16 January, where I met a wide
variety of stakeholders who gave me a general sense
of the situation in the country, to see for myself how
the follow-up process to the Geneva Conference is
unfolding, and to discuss further PBC engagement
with the relevant authorities. Thirdly, I will explain
to the Security Council why a one-year extension of
the political mandate of the United Nations Office
in Burundi (BNUB), with the option of prolonging it
beyond that, would be of great help to me in my task
of supporting Burundi in my capacity as the countryspecific configuration.
I will try to limit my remarks on the Geneva
Conference to a minimum, which Council members
will certainly remember as I have already described
it in depth a letter sent 28 November 2012. Seeking
to promote Burundi’s second-generation Poverty
Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP-II), the Geneva
meeting in late October 2012 was a success. It also
marked a critical phase in the strengthening and
institutionalization, on the basis on the PRSP-II, of the
partnership between the Government of Burundi and
its international partners, traditional and new alike.
The reinvigorated partnership rests upon two
assumptions. On the one hand, the international
community, through its strong financial and political
commitment, clearly acknowledged the far-reaching
and impressive progress achieved by Burundi so far. On
the other hand, the trust shown by the partners present
in Geneva should encourage the Burundi Government
to redouble its efforts to implement much-needed

13-21583

S/PV.6909

reforms in the political, institutional and socioeconomic
spheres. In that regard, during my meeting with Burundi
President Nkunrunziza in Bujumbura last Wednesday,
I was encouraged by the President’s message that he
regarded the commitments of Geneva as reciprocal. I
recommended that he announce a number of concrete
steps in the coming weeks and months to follow up on
Burundi’s engagements. At the same time, I have asked
all donors to honour their pledges and to continue to
follow Burundi in its reform efforts.
I visited Bujumbura last week, where I met with
the main governmental representatives, including
the President, representatives of all political parties,
including the extra-parlimentary opposition. I also
met with civil society members, the private sector,
the President of the National Independent Electoral
Commission, the President of the Independent National
Human Rights Commission, the Burundi Revenue
Authority and international partners.
The main purpose of my visit, as I mentioned,
was to discuss the future steps of the Configuration’s
engagement with Burundi, including the followup process to the Geneva Conference. Building on
the dynamics of the conference, I proposed to the
governmental authorities that we continue with our
political, institutional and socioeconomic engagement.
The latter relates to the Geneva follow-up process.
From my conversations with the representatives of
Burundi, both in New York and Geneva, I gather that
the Government wants the Burundi configuration of the
PBC to maintain its commitment support until 2015 and
beyond, which I consider to be very positive. I reiterate
my willingness to continue advocating and counselling
Burundi, and I will try my best to ensure that the
pledges made in Geneva will be kept.
From my meetings with the relevant stakeholders, I
learned that the Government, starting in April, intends
to organize sectoral conferences on infrastructure,
transportation and security, the development of the
private sector, health care, good governance and the
environment. While I welcome the Government’s plans,
I urged it to prepare the conferences with utmost care,
even at the price of having to postpone them. Setting
priorities, identifying one’s target audience, and
defining expectations and needs will be crucial aspects
for the success of the conferences. The international
community lend Burundi a strong helping hand in that
regard. Geneva was but the first step; the challenges of
implementing the PRSP-II have only just begun.

13-21583

At the political and institutional level, I recommend
concentrating the configuration’s efforts on the areas in
which we have already been cooperating with Burundi:
dealing with the past; national reconciliation and
transitional justice; widening the political space and
the democratic culture, including political dialogue,
the return of exiled opposition leaders and the 2015
elections; the rule of law, human rights and reform
of the justice sector; and good governance, fighting
corruption and promoting transparency. In all of those
areas, the Peacebuilding Commission can constitute
an important platform for dialogue and exchange and
thereby support the efforts of other actors, such as BNUB
and the United Nations Development Programme. The
strengthening of important institutions, such as the
Independent National Human Rights Commission and
the Ministry of Good Governance, which are doing
terrific work, is also a crucial factor.
Further progress in those four areas is needed and
indispensable. This year will prove decisive for the
consolidation of peace in view of the 2015 elections. An
open and inclusive atmosphere will be essential for the
return of genuine multiparty democracy. The success of
the electoral process depends on the opposition and the
Government alike; all must contribute.
In Bujumbura I sensed a genuine interest from
both sides in not repeating the errors of 2010.
Government representatives emphasized that they want
a real competition in 2015. The extra-parliamentary
opposition is keen on participating, although they
realize that at this stage, victory in 2015 amounts to
wishful thinking, which therefore puts participation in
the elections in a long-term perspective.
Those developments are very positive, but risks still
exist. Maintaining and expanding the political dialogue
between the Government and the extra-parliamentary
opposition will be key in avoiding those risks.
Similarly, the process of dealing with the past is also
critical. It is up to Burundi itself to decide on how the
matter is to be approached; that is clear. Nevertheless,
I urge the Government to be especially sensitive to the
opinions of Burundian society on the issue.
I intend to communicate those priorities to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, His Excellency Mr. Laurent
Kavakure, in a formal letter. If this procedure is
agreeable to Burundi, my letter and his reply could
henceforth form the basis of mutual commitments
between the PBC configuration and Burundi. It could

7

S/PV.6909

replace our outcome document, which has now become
obsolete because, as of June 2013, all the peacebuilding
review processes will be incorporated in the monitoring
and evaluation of the first pillar of the PRSP.
My visit last week also marked an important
step in expanding the Peacebuilding Commission’s
partnership with other relevant actors, particularly
with the international financial institutions. Building
on the success of the Geneva conference, Mr. Philippe
Dongier, Regional Director of the World Bank, and I
met with high-ranking representatives of the Burundian
Government together, including the President and the
Second Vice-President. We explained to them that
socioeconomic development was inseparably linked
to political and institutional progress, which forms the
basis of the Peacebuilding Commission’s work.
In the future, we envisage a continuing increase in
our partnerships. In that connection, I also travelled to
Nairobi to meet with the Director of the World Bank’s
Global Center on Conflict, Security and Development,
Mr. Joel Hellman.
Let me now turn to my third and last point. The
effectiveness of my work as Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission is to
a large extent based on the excellent role played by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and his
team. The collaboration with BNUB, for example, has
been key for the success of the Geneva conference. For
bilateral and multilateral partners, BNUB represents
an institutional guarantee that their money is being
well spent. I have also conveyed that message to the
President himself.
Consequently, from my point of view, a continued
presence of BNUB on the ground is essential. I am
aware that the Government of Burundi would like
its mandate to be extended for another year before it
is transformed into a country team. That decision of
course has to be taken by the Security Council. For my
part, I also strongly argue — and all Steering Group
members have delivered this message to me — for a
sustained BNUB presence, ideally until 2015.
We all know that Burundi is not one of the primary
concerns of the Security Council, but it is often the
“silent” countries that represent the true success stories.
Let us not jeopardize this opportunity by prematurely
withdrawing.

8

If the Government should sense a certain unease
about a prolonged political presence of BNUB and
have the feeling that being on the Security Council’s
agenda may create the impression that Burundi is
not a “normal” country, let me offer a response. The
only “abnormality” regarding Burundi — and on this
I agree completely with Special Representative of the
Secretary-General — is the impressive progress it has
achieved in such a short time. Being on the Council’s
agenda does not give the country a negative image; to
the contrary, it is another aspect of its success story.
Let me conclude with an urgent appeal to all donors
present here today. Due to its difficult economic and
financial environment, Burundi risks encountering
considerable problems in meeting even the most basic
budgetary expenses. That concern has been brought
to my attention not only by the Government, but also
by international partners. I therefore urge all donors
to seriously consider increasing their development
assistance in the form of budgetary support.
I remain at the Council’s disposal for any questions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Burundi.
Mr. Shingiro (Burundi) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to join those who spoke before me
in congratulating you, Mr. President, on behalf of my
delegation, for your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of January 2013.
Allow me to also extend to the members of the Council,
on behalf of the Government of Burundi and on my
own behalf, the warmest greetings of His Excellency
the President of the Republic of Burundi, Mr. Pierre
Nkurunziza.
The peace dividend that the people of Burundi are
now enjoying is the outcome of the joint efforts of its
people and the international community, in particular
the United Nations. The gradual withdrawal of the
forces of the United Nations Operation in Burundi was
the result of a compromise between the United Nations
and Burundi because the political, social and security
situation was increasingly improving. Consequently, it
was necessary to transform that mission into the United
Nations Integrated Office in Burundi, with a mandate
to consolidate peace and strengthen national capacity.
During those events, in 2007 the Government
of Burundi, with the support of the United Nations,
drafted a strategic peacebuilding framework, which

13-21583

S/PV.6909

underscored four priorities: governance, justice and
human rights, security sector reform, and, finally, land
issues and community revival.
The financing of 18 quick-impact projects that
were developed within the framework of implementing
the strategic peacebuilding framework allowed the
people of Burundi to overcome many challenges that
were linked with the integration of former combatants,
national capacity-building in terms of promoting human
rights, combating poverty, and community revival, as
well as the reintegration of thousands of returnees,
most of whom were coming back from neighbouring
countries.
The transformation of the United Nations
Integrated Office in Burundi to the United Nations
Office in Burundi (BNUB), with a light footprint for an
for an initial period of one year beginning on January
2011, was brought about, as representatives all know,
by a political, social and security situation that was
becoming increasingly manageable. Therefore, it was
necessary to continue to consolidate peace and tackle
the fight against poverty, which is the main enemy of
the people of Burundi.
The Office’s mission also included working with
the Government “to develop a set of benchmarks for
the future evolution of the United Nations Office in
Burundi to a United Nations country team” and to
report regularly to the Security Council on progress on
that task. That work was completed, and the SecretaryGeneral presented the Council with the report on
10 May 2012 (S/2012/310, annex).
We take this opportunity to report to the Council
Burundi’s significant progress on many fronts, and we
will make more progress in the future. Burundi already
serves as an example for several struggling countries
around the world. Without outlining all the tangible
results achieved in recent years, I would like to share
some of them with the Council, issue by issue.
In the area of democratic processes, Burundi has
made important progress in strengthening democracy
and resolving political differences through inclusive
dialogue. I will enumerate a few notable achievements
in that sphere. First, in 2010, was the holding of
fair, open, democratic elections in keeping with
international electoral standards. Secondly, we drafted
the law concerning opposition parties, which will
allow all political players to participate in constructive,
organized political dialogue. Thirdly, on a consensus

13-21583

basis and with the Parliament’s approval, we appointed
members of the National Independent Electoral
Commission with a view to preparing in a timely way
for the 2015 elections.
The whole of the Burundian population has
benefited from those achievements. According to a
poll conducted by Gallup World Path, the percentage of
Burundians who have confidence in Burundi’s electoral
process rose from 66 per cent in 2009 to 83 per cent in
2011 — an increase of 17 per cent in less than two years.
In the sphere of security and stability, the
Government of Burundi has continued to improve
its security and defence forces and make them more
professional, with a view to responding effectively to
both national and international security problems while
respecting norms and rights. We can point to a number
of significant achievements in that area.
First, in the framework of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme, the
relevant services were able to collect and destroy more
than 12,000 grenades, over 2,000 rifles and around
4,000 hand guns in 2009. The successful integration
of former rebels into our defence and security corps,
in strict accordance with the Arusha Peace Agreement,
has greatly contributed to stabilizing the country by
providing security and protection for all. Secondly,
at the end of 2012 more than 60 per cent of weapons
belonging to the Police nationale du Burundi were
registered and marked. During the same period, 100 per
cent of the weapons of the Forces de défense nationale
were registered and marked. Those percentages are
compared to 50 per cent and 40 per cent in 2011,
respectively.
A third significant development was the drafting
of the National Security Strategy. Fourthly, again
according to Gallup World Path, the people’s confidence
in the Force national de défence has also increased, from
89 per cent in 2009 to 91 per cent in 2011. The Police
nationale du Burundi have also enjoyed an increase in
popular confidence, from 82 per cent in 2009 to 83 per
cent in 2011.
In the area of strengthening good governance and
national institutions, a number of institutions called
for in Burundi’s Constitution have been established.
Among them are the Anti-corruption Brigade and the
Anti-corruption Court, created in 2006, the National
Communications Council, in 2007, the National
Security Council, in 2008, and the Permanent Forum

9

S/PV.6909

of Political Parties, in 2010. In 2011 the National
Independent Human Rights Commission, the Office of
the Ombudsman and the Burundi Revenue Authority
were established. There are others as well.
In the fight against corruption, according to
Transparency International’s 2012 East African
Bribery Index, Burundi has moved from last place in
East Africa to second place on the list of countries least
affected by corruption in the East African Community.
The recent adoption of our National Strategy on Good
Governance and the Fight against Corruption, together
with the integration of the fight against corruption in
our Constitution and criminal code, leaves no doubt that
our anti-corruption initiative will continue. The call by
the President of the Republic of Burundi for objective
application of a zero-tolerance to anyone found guilty
of financial malfeasance remains our watchword.
With regard to the rule of law, since the 2005
transition period Burundi’s Government has
unflaggingly focused its efforts on fostering the
independence of the judicial sector. For example, the
year 2011 was devoted to developing departmental
policies for the Ministry of Justice for 2011-2015,
an initiative confirming the Government’s firm
commitment to strengthening the independence of the
judicial sector. The year 2011 also saw an increase in
the percentage of the population voicing confidence in
Burundi’s justice system. According, again, to a Gallup
World Path poll, it increased by around 10 per cent
between 2009 and 2011.
As for respect for human rights, the Government
of Burundi has continued to nurture a culture of
protection and promotion. The National Independent
Human Rights Commission continues to conduct
investigations of cases on its docket. In the interest of
greater contact with the public, the Commission has
set up three regional offices in the country’s interior.
Along the same lines, the Government of Burundi
is pleased to continue the ongoing dialogue with the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights,
especially because a number of meetings were held
with that Office on the vital question of human rights.
In the same vein, the Government of Burundi
cannot leave unmentioned the violence routinely done to
women and girls. To address it, a care centre for victims
of sexual abuse — le Centre Humura — has been set up
in the middle of the country, in Gitega. Other measures
have also been taken, notably the creation of a criminal

10

office that is always open so that serious cases can be
judged while the facts are fresh.
As for regional integration, Burundi continues to
focus much effort on being integrated into important
regional entities. It takes part in all meetings of the East
African Community and chaired its 2011 summit with
striking success. To demonstrate its deep commitment
to regional integration, Burundi included that sector
among the eight pillars of its Vision 2025 and gave it
a place of prominence in its second Poverty Reduction
Strategy Paper. The economic benefits of this
integration are many. Internal trade between Burundi
and the EAC has grown by 15 per cent since we joined
the Community, in 2007, and that trend is continuing.
In the area of socioeconomic development, I should
point out that despite the considerable efforts of the
Government of Burundi and its people to improve the
country’s socioeconomic situation and the quality of life
of its citizens, poverty, the lack of land, food insecurity
and high unemployment are still major challenges
that Burundi will have to tackle in the years to come.
In order to achieve that, budgetary support from our
partners, beyond project financing, will continue to be
more essential than ever.
Aware of the extreme poverty that Burundi is
dealing with, the people of Burundi themselves, with
the support of their development partners, have decided
to formulate their strategic framework for growth and
poverty reduction, which integrates some peacebuilding
elements into its first pillar. This is the right moment,
through you, Mr. President, to thank the international
community and the development partners who put
their efforts into ensuring that we received betterthan-expected pledges at the Development Partners
Conference on Burundi held on 29 and 30 October in
Geneva. It was an undisputed success.
It is true that Burundi has made significant
progress in several areas in recent years, but there are
still challenges to be met that require the support of
the international community in general, and of the
United Nations in particular. Regarding the challenges
that remain, Burundi, like the other countries in the
subregion, cannot fully enjoy the peace it has regained
or speak of peacebuilding when the security situation in
the subregion as a whole is not good. The negative forces
that are active in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo portend a troubling security
situation and have led us to remain vigilant and to

13-21583

S/PV.6909

adopt a policy of neither interference not indifference.
The situation in the eastern Congo deserves greater
attention from the Security Council, since it runs the
risk of inflaming the entire region, thereby threatening
international peace and security.
Aware of the part that the international community
has played in restoring peace to our country, the
Government of Burundi will continue to send troops to
other countries in difficulties in order to help them regain
and consolidate peace. That reflects our reciprocity for,
and recognition of, what the international community
has done for Burundi during the difficult periods in our
own history.
I believe the Council will agree that no country in the
world can ever get everything done at once. That is why
the Government of Burundi appeals to the international
community to recognize that our country has made
significant progress in the areas I have mentioned. In
order to accomplish that, my Government’s hope is,
in the best-case scenario, to achieve a new framework
of cooperation with the United Nations through the
progressive transformation of the United Nations Office
in Burundi into a new United Nations country team in
Burundi. The Government believes that a period of
12 months will be more than enough to achieve such
a reconfiguration. The country team could continue
to cooperate with the Government of Burundi in key
areas, including democratic governance, combating

corruption, security sector and justice reform and the
promotion and protection of human rights.
The same applies to the Burundi configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission. While recognizing and
paying tribute the efforts of Ambassador Paul Seger
and his predecessors, Burundi would like to see a more
flexible commitment in terms of the timetable, agreed
on with the Commission, and taking into account the
context of the strategic framework for growth and
poverty reduction and its first pillar, as well as of the
evolving situation in our country.
Concerning the current report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2013/36), the Government of Burundi takes
note of it and reiterates its intention to cooperate fully
with the United Nations in order to meet its remaining
challenges within a framework of good governance,
the rule of law and community restoration. We would
like to take this opportunity to offer our sincere thanks
through you, Mr. President, to the Secretary-General
for producing a balanced report in which he explicitly
acknowledges that the human rights situation in Burundi
improved significantly in 2012 by comparison with the
previous two years. The Government of Burundi, for its
part, is committed to maintaining that trend.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.25 a.m.

13-21583

11
