144

General Assembly-Forty-first Session

Expressing its appreciation to those countries that have
made or pledged voluntary contributions to the Year,
Recognizing that the provision of adequate shelter is essential for the promotion and achievement of national economic and social development and human health,
Recognizing a/so that in order for Governments to ad~r~ss realistically the needs of the poor and disadvantaged,
1t 1s necessary to frame shelter policies that can mobilize
ali possible resources and policy instruments to meet the
objectives of the Year,
Recognizing further that the Year provides an excellent
opportunity for the United Nations and other international agencies to review their contributions to solving the
problem of shelter for the homeless and for bilateral aid
agencies and multilateral financial institutions to evaluate
their role in this sector,
Recalling Commission on Human Settlements resolution 7/9 of 10 May 1984 and the infonnation strategy for
the Internation~l Year of Shelter for the Homeless, which
had been subm1tted to the Commission at its eighth session, 45
1. Endorses the report of the Executive Director of the
United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat)
on the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless and
the Plan of Action for 1986-1987;46
2. Urg_es Governments to demonstrate renewed political comm1tment to the shelter needs ofthe poor and disadvantaged by taking significant measures before 1987, including providing access to land and ensuring security of
t~nure in squatter settlements, adapting codes and regulat1on~ !º t~e n~eds of. the people, facilitating community
parttc1patton, 1mprovmg access to credit and loans and
promoting local and atfordable building materials;
3. A/so urges Governments:
(a)_ To prepare or_review shel~er strategies, taking into
cons1derat1on the opt1ons set out m the documentation for
the Year;
(b) To prepare a programme to implement projects
geared to their chosen shelter strategies;
4. !{equ~s~s- G<;>vernments to submi! detailed reports
on theu act1v1ttes m the Year to the Umted Nations Cent~e _for Hur!1an Settlements (Habitat) as soon as possible,
g1vmg spec1al _attention to measures that will improve the
shelter and ne1ghbourhoods of sorne of the poor and disadvantaged during 1987 and to their strategies to improve
the shelter and neighbourhoods of the poor by the year
2000;
5. Requests ali Governments, bilateral and multilateral
a\d agenci~ and finai:ici~l institutions to review their polic1es and ra1se the pnonty of shelter and settlements improvement programmes;
6. Appeals to all Governments to make or increase
voluntary contributions to the Year and to ali international agencies and financial institutions to provide etfective financial and other support to the programme of the
Year;
7. Decides to devote at least two plenary meetings at its
forty-second session, in 1987, to issues related to shelter
in observance of the International Year of Shelter for th;
Homeless.
100th plenary meeting
8 December 1986
45 HS/C/8/4/ Add. l.
46 HS/C/9/6.

41/191.

Food and agricultura) problems

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration and the Programme of Action
on the Establishment of a New International Economic
Order, contained in its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and
3202 (S-VI) of 1 May 1974, the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States, contained in its resolution
3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, resolution 3362 (SVII) of 16 September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation, and the International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations
Development Decade, contained in the annex to its resolution 35/56 of 5 December 1980,
Reaffirming the Universal Declaration on the Eradication of Hunger and Malnutrition adopted by the World
Food Conference,47
Stressing the imperative need to keep food and agricultural issues at the centre of global attention,
Reaffirming that food and agricultural problems in developing countries should be considered in a comprehensive manner in their ditferent dimensions and in their immediate, short-term and long-term perspectives,
Reaffirming a/so the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development
1986-1990,30 in which the African countries and the international community committed themselves, inter alía, to
give priority attention and increased resources to the
rehabilitation and development of food and agriculture in
Africa,
Noting with concern that the present agricultural trade
~ituation, marked by structural imbalances, protection1sm, heavy direct and indirect subsidies and distortions in
t~e use of resources, is detrimental to ali countries, in particular the developing countries,
Noting the views expressed during its forty-first session
on the issues of international agricultura! trade,
Emphasizing the important role that a reliable and increasing supply of agricultural inputs and manpower develop~ent _could play in enabling food-deficit developing
countnes, m particular the least developed countries, to
inc~ease domesti~ food production and thereby stimulate
nat1onal econom1c growth and social progress in those
countries, especially in Africa,
Reaffirming that the right to food is a universal human
right which should be guaranteed to ali people and, in that
context, believing in the general principie that food should
not be used asan instrument of political pressure, either at
the national or at the international level,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1986/44 of 21 July 1986, entitled "Countries stricken by
desertification and drought in Africa",
Re0;ffirming also that the maintenance of peace and
secunty and the strengthening of international cooperation in food and agriculture are important for improved economic conditions and enhanced food security,
Welcoming the support given by the international donor
comm1:1nity to agricultura! development in developing
countnes, and the etforts of these countries in their food
and agricultura! developments,
Recognizing the positive etforts of developing countries
to intensif): regional and interregional co-operation to increase thetr food and agricultura! production through
47 Reporl of the World Foud Cunference, Rome, 5-16 Novcmber 1974
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.75.11.A.3), chap. L

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

such measures as the harmonization of pricing policies,
the creation of preferential trade mechanisms and the accelerated promotion of regional and subregional food
strategies,
1. Welcomes the conclusions and recommendations, as
adopted, contained in the report ofthe World Food Council on the work of its twelfth ministerial session, held at
Rome from 16 to 19 June 1986; 48
2. Affirms that increasing food production in developing countries will contribute significantly to the elimination of poverty and malnutrition and to the attainment of
self-reliance, and recommends that higher priority be
given to food production in the national development policies of those countries and that the agricultura! sector be
granted a larger part of resources devoted to economic and
social development;
3. Stresses the need to continue and to intensify the
support for programmes and policies for increasing food
and agricultura) production and raising nutritional standards in developing countries, in particular in Africa and
the least developed countries, and in this context urges the
international community, in particular the developed
countries, to take further determined action, in support of
the efforts of developing countries, to increase the flow of
resources, in particular the concessional flow, by, ínter
alia, increasing their contributions to multilateral organizations;
4. Emphasizes, in this context, the particular need to
increase the aid commitments to food and agriculture and
for such assistance to be channelled through existing organizations and programmes;
5. Emphasizes also that the success of efforts of developing countries to solve their food and agricultura! problems in immediate, medium-term and long-term perspectives depends overwhelmingly on their economic growth,
which, in turn, requires an international climate favourable to development, and calls for further concrete international action towards that end;
6. Urges ali Governments, organizations ofthe United
Nations system and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations to take etfective action for the
rapid and full implementation ofthe United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and
Development 1986-1990, in which the international community recognized that the African countries needed additional externa) resources and in that context committed itself to making every effort to provide sufficient resources
to support and supplement the efforts ofthe African countries in achieving the growth and development of the food
and agricultura) sector through the promotion of national
and regional food strategies, particularly taking into account the role that improvement in that sector could play
in Africa's overall development and noting in this regard
the four-point programme of action endorsed in September 1986 by the Fourteenth Regional Conference for
Africa of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations;49
7. Stresses the urgent need to provide the International
Development Association with adequate financia) resources for its eighth general replenishment in order to
meet the increasing demand for assistance from that

48 Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-first Session,
Su¡¡iement No. 19 (A/41/19), part one.
See Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
Report of the Fourteenth FAO Regional Conference for A/rica,
Yamoussoukro (Cote d'Ivoire), 2-11 September 1986 (ARC/86/REP),
paras. 21 and 46 to 55 and annex H.

145

source, especially for the development of food and agriculture;
8. Appeals to the international community to contribute generously to the achievement ofthe target for World
Food Programme pledges for the period 1987-1988, as set
out in General Assembly resolution 40/176 of 17 December 1985, and urges the international community to fulfil
the unmet food aid needs ofthe African countries atfected
by drought and famine;
9. Urges the international community to give its full
and enduring support to the lnternational Fund for
Agricultura) Development by providing it with a firm financial basis and, in this context, appeals for increased
contributions for the implementation of the Special Programme for Sub-Saharan African Countries Affected by
Drought and Desertification of the Fund;
10. Appeals to donor countries to increase, within and
consistent with their development assistance programmes,
the provision of essential agricultura) inputs;
11. We/comes the commitments agreed upon at the
special ministerial session ofthe Contracting Parties to the
General Agreement on Taritfs and Trade held at Punta del
Este, Uruguay, from 15 to 20 September 1986, on standstill and roll-back, also applicable to agricultura) trade,
and recognizes that the new round of multilateral trade
negotiations, taking into account all the general principies
governing those negotiations, including the principie of
differential and more favourable treatment, embodied in
part IV of the General Agreement, as well as other relevant provisions thereof, will address agricultura! trade issues with the aim of achieving greater liberalization of
trade in agriculture as well as in tropical products;
12. Recognizes that further consideration of the problems which impede liberalization of intemational agricultura) trade is necessary, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to keep these problems under review, to report
orally to the Economic and Social Council at its second
regular session of 1987 and to make available to the General Assembly at its forty-second session, through the Economic and Social Council at its second regular session of
1987, the relevant reports prepared by various competent
organs, organizations and bodies within the United Nations system;
13. Stresses the importance of competent international
organizations and agencies according high priority to human resources development with a focus on professional
training in agricultura) production and research and rural
development, especially at the farm level;
14. Emphasizes the urgency of strengthening international co-operation in the field of transfer of agricultura)
technologies to developing countries and of enhancing research so as to allow constant innovation and technological improvement adaptable to climate, soil and agricultura) systems, strengthening advisory services and
increasing support in this regard and to facilitate free exchange ofinformation on experience and technology relating to food production, processing and storage;
15. Encourages efforts to increase productivity of
small farmers and to optimize employment possibilities in
rural areas through adoption, where appropriate, of labour-intensive technologies;
16. Stresses the need for promoting co-ordinated international action to tackle the longer-term problems of migratory pest control, particularly in Africa, and calls upon
donors to continue to give high priority to the implementation and co-ordination by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations of emergency control
programrnes against grasshoppers and locusts at present

146

General Assembly-Forty•first Session

affecting vast areas of Africa, and to remain prepared to
provide assistance to affected countries at short notice, as
necessary;
17. Supports the establishment of effective earlywarning systems and national, subregional and regional
food security arrangements in developing countries to
combat future food emergencies;
18. Urges Governments to ensure and enhance the
participation of women in the formulation and implementation of national food policies. plans and projects, in view
of the importance accorded to food and the acknowledged
role of women farmers in food production, marketing and
family nutrition and in view of the consensus achieved on
the Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement of Women;SO
19. Invites the World Food Council within its mandate:
(a) To assess the impact of economic adjustment policies in developing countries on the nutrition levels of lowincome groups and to suggest, where necessary, remedia!
measures in this area, including ways to stimulate the
provision of resources to alleviate the sufferings of these
groups;
(b) To assess the impact of the present agricultura!
trade situation in all its aspects and to maintain an active
interest in the progress and outcome of multilateral negotiations on agricultura! trade issues;
(e) To assist in accelerating the promotion of regional
and subregional food strategies by stimulating vigorous
follow-up action with ali parties concerned in order to implement the recommendations adopted at the regional and
interregional consultations organized by the World Food
Council in 1986;
(el) To stimulate progress in and contribute actively to
the implementation of the food policy and programme
components of the United Nations Programme of Action
for African Economic Recovery and Development
1986-1990, particularly in increasing food production and
reducing hunger, and to assist African Governments in
implementing the mutually agreed food-sector priorities
through concrete and accelerated assistance in support of
food strategies and policies.
100th plenary meeting
8 December 1986

41/192.

Special programmes of economic assistance

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on enhancing the efficiency and effectiveness of the special
programmes of economic assistance, 51
Affirming the validity of the concept of special programmes of economic assistance and the need to enhance
their efficiency,
1. Takes note with appreciation ofthe report ofthe Secretary-General;
2. Endorses the recommendation made by the Secretary-General that special programmes of economic assistance should be limited to countries genuinely in need of
such assistance and to special circumstances falling out50 Report of the World Conference to Review and Appraise the
Achievements of the United Nations Decade Jor Women: Equality.
Development and Peace, Nairobi, 15-26 Ju/y 1985 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.85.IV.10), chap. 1, sect. A, paras. 174-188.
51 A/41/308-E/1986/67.

side the competence of the regular programmes of the
United Nations system;5 2
3. Also endorses the recommendation that the special
programme of economic assistance for a country should
be of limited duration and should be terminated after the
review mission and, where the special circumstances that
gave rise to the special programme of economic assistance
remain, any continuing assistance should then be channelled through the regular programmes of the system; 52
4. Recommends that efforts to transfer the implementation of the special programmes of economic assistance to
other United Nations bodies should be continued, if practicable;
5. Affirms that special programmes of economic assistance should be drawn up in consultation with the recipient Governments concerned and recommends that the
programmes should, as far as possible, be established and
reviewed through the field offices of the United Nations
system.
100th plenary meeting
8 December 1986

41/193.

Assistance to Solomon lslands

The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned at the devastation in Solomon Islands
caused by cyclone "Namu" from 17 to 19 May 1986,
which resulted in loss of life, destruction of housing and
extensive damage to the economic and social infrastructures and to the agricultura!, stock-farming, transport and
industrial sectors,
Concerned at the negative impact of this damage on the
development efforts of Solomon Islands,
Noting with appreciation the emergency assistance provided by severa! States, international and regional organizations, specialized agencies and voluntary agencies,
Noting the efforts of the people and Government of Solomon Islands to deal with the emergency situation and to
initiate a reconstruction and rehabilitation programme,
Affirming the need for prompt and concerted international action to assist the people and Government of Solomon Islands in carrying out the reconstruction and
rehabilitation of the affected regions and sectors,
1. Expresses its gratitude to the States, programmes
and organizations of the United Nations system and intergovernmental, non-governmental and voluntary organizations that provided assistance to Solomon Islands during
the emergency;
2. Urges ali States to participate generously through
bilateral or multilateral channels in projects and programmes for the reconstruction and rehabilitation of Solomon Islands;
3. Requests international organizations, in particular
the relevant organs and bodies of the United Nations system, regional organizations and voluntary agencies to continue and increase their assistance in response to the reconstruction, rehabilitation and development needs of
Solomon Islands;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary steps, in collaboration with the Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme, to mobilize the
financia!, technical and material assistance needed for im-

52 /bid.,

sect. 111.B.
