S/PV.8375

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8375th meeting

Thursday, 18 October 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Cordova Soria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bolivia (Plurinational State of))

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Ipo
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mr. Amde
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Ashikbayev
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Ms. Pierce
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-32554 (E)
*1832554*

S/PV.8375

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Bangladesh,
Brazil, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, Indonesia, Iraq, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Japan, Jordan, Lebanon,
Malaysia, Maldives, Morocco, Namibia, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, South Africa,
Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey, Uruguay, Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela and Viet Nam to participate in
this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in this meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General, and Mr. Hagai El-Ad, Executive
Director of B’Tselem.
Mr. Mladenov is joining us via video-teleconference
from Jerusalem.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following individuals to participate in this meeting:
His Excellency Ms. Joanne Adamson, Chargé d’Affairs
a. i. of the European Union to the United Nations; His
Excellency Mr. Cheikh Niang, Chair of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People; and His Excellency Mr. Maged
Abdelfattah Abdelaziz, Permanent Observer, League
of Arab States to the United Nations.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
2/32

18/10/2018

accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Mr. Mladenov.
Mr. Mladenov: Every month, I brief the Council
on the situation in the Middle East and the Palestinian
question. Every month, we speak of how continuing
settlement construction and the demolition of Palestinian
structures in the occupied West Bank undermine the very
foundations of the prospect of a sovereign Palestinian
State. We condemn terror, violence and incitement that
eat away at the trust between Israelis and Palestinians,
and we call for unity and reconciliation. Every month,
we appeal to political leaders on both sides to find their
way back to the table for negotiations, to reverse the
negative trends on the ground and to restore hope that
it is through peaceful negotiations, not violence, that
both Israelis and Palestinians will be able to live side
by side, masters of their own fate.
Day after day, however, we see the situation
on the ground slipping in a different direction. We
see it sliding into a one-State reality of perpetual
occupation and violence that does not serve peace;
we see the international consensus on how to resolve
the Palestinian-Israeli conflict being challenged. Yet
we all understand that without a negotiated resolution
based on the final-status issues — as they have been
defined by Israelis and Palestinians themselves — there
can be no sustainable peace that realizes the national,
historic and religious aspirations of both peoples. It
is our shared responsibility to restore that prospect,
to facilitate negotiations, to help the weaker party, to
insulate the process from radicals and extremists and
to show results.
Before I turn to the most urgent questions related
to the situation in Gaza, I would like to begin with
developments in the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, where violence is on the rise and the
Israeli authorities have continued the demolition
and confiscation of Palestinian-owned structures.
According to the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), 39 structures were
demolished or seized in the West Bank, including five
in East Jerusalem, displacing approximately 33 people
and affecting the livelihoods of over 100 others. Thirty18-32554

18/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

four of the targeted structures were in Area C, including
five installed in solidarity with Khan Al-Ahmar/Abu
Al-Helu, the Bedouin community at imminent risk
of demolition and displacement. On 23 September,
the Israeli authorities requested the residents of Khan
Al-Ahmar/Abu Al-Helu to self-demolish their homes
by 1 October or face demolition by the authorities, in
line with the 5 September final ruling of the Israeli
High Court. On 8 October, the authorities extended
the validity of land requisition orders for roadwork to
enable the demolition. The community was given one
week to object to the order.
Khan Al-Ahmar is among the 18 communities
located in or adjacent to the controversial E-l area,
where plans for new settlement construction would
create a continuous built-up area between the Ma’ale
Adumim and East Jerusalem, undermining the
contiguity of a future Palestinian State. The United
Nations Humanitarian Coordinator, along with the
European Union, France, Germany, Italy, Spain, the
United Kingdom, the League of Arab States and others,
have called on Israel not to go ahead with its plan to
demolish the village. I once again join that call for a
cessation of demolitions and other measures that run
contrary to Israel’s obligations under international law.
All structures lacking permits from the Israeli
authorities in Area C and East Jerusalem, which
are nearly impossible for Palestinians to obtain, are
potentially subject to demolition. While the rate of
demolitions has declined since the beginning of 2017,
over 13,000 demolition orders are pending against
structures in Area C, three-quarters of which are on
private Palestinian land.
Meanwhile, on 14 October the Israeli Government
reportedly approved the allocation of $6 million for
advancing the construction of 31 housing units in the
Jewish settlement in Hebron, which would be the first
new construction there in 16 years. I reiterate the longstanding United Nations position that all settlement
activities are illegal under international law and an
obstacle to peace.
Violent incidents also continued in the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem. Among those, on 7 October an
Israeli man and woman were shot dead by a Palestinian
man in the Barkan Industrial Area in the West Bank.
The assailant fled the scene and the Israeli security
forces are currently carrying out a widespread search
operation in the area. On 12 October, a Palestinian

S/PV. 8375

woman was killed near a checkpoint south of Nablus;
she had been injured by stones allegedly thrown by
Israeli assailants. I extend my condolences to the
bereaved families. Such incidents must be condemned
in the strongest of terms, and I call on everyone to stand
up to violence and condemn terror.
Settler-related violence is also a continuing concern.
There were 23 attacks by Israeli settlers on Palestinians,
resulting in 1 death, 12 injuries and property damage.
To date in 2018, according to OCHA, over 1,600
Palestinian-owned trees have been vandalized across
the West Bank. As the annual olive harvest begins,
concerns are particularly high. I call on the authorities
to ensure smooth access of Palestinian farmers to their
land and that sufficient measures be taken to protect
farmers and their property from attacks.
In recent weeks, protests at the Gaza fence have
expanded to include night demonstrations. Hamas
and other militants continued to send incendiary kites
and balloons across the border, causing fires on the
Israeli side. The Israeli Defence Forces have responded
with riot dispersal means and live fire. Thirty-three
Palestinians, including nine children, have been killed
by Israeli security forces during demonstrations and
other incidents. Soldiers were meanwhile injured.
Intense clashes took place at the Gaza fence during
Friday protests on 12 October, in which an estimated
20,000 Palestinians participated. Seven people were
killed and over 150 injured by live fire on that day alone.
Incendiary kites launched from Gaza started fires, an
improvised explosive device (IED) detonated at the
fence and a group of protesters breached the fence and
entered Israeli territory on that day. In addition, overall
during the reporting period, Palestinian militants fired
two rockets that landed in Israel. Israel responded
by launching 45 missiles and shells at sites in the
Gaza Strip.
In the early hours of 17 October, Palestinian
militants fired a rocket from central Gaza towards
Israel that hit and significantly damaged a residential
house in the Israeli city of Beersheba. The city, some
40 kilometres from Gaza and well beyond the ring of
communities in the immediate vicinity of the Strip, can
be reached only by medium-range rockets. After the
9 August Grad rocket that landed in the outskirts of
Beersheba, that was the second projectile to reach such
a distance since the 2014 conflict. Three Israelis were
reportedly injured. A second rocket landed in the sea

18-325543/32

S/PV.8375

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

south-west of Tel Aviv. The Israeli air force responded
with a series of air strikes, firing at several locations,
most of them identified as military sites around Gaza.
One Palestinian militant was killed and at least two
were injured in a strike on a group that was in the
process of launching rockets.
On 11 October, the Israeli Defence Forces
announced that they had destroyed another tunnel
extending from near the city of Khan Yunis in Gaza,
some 200 meters inside Israeli territory.
In response to violence at the fence, for the third
time since March, on 7 October Israel reduced the
permissible fishing area off the Gaza coast from nine
to six nautical miles. Again on 17 October, following
the rocket attack on Beersheba, Israel further reduced
the fishing zone to three nautical miles and closed all
crossings between Israel and Gaza.
I brief the Council today as we enter a pivotal phase
in Egyptian-led efforts to overcome intra-Palestinian
divisions. I would like to convey two very clear
messages to the Council.

18/10/2018

make every effort to return Gaza to the control of the
legitimate Palestinian Government.
But let me assure the Council that, barring
substantial steps to reverse the current course, this
precarious sense of calm is doomed to give way
under the mounting pressure. It is already beginning
to fray. Recent days have seen tensions and violent
confrontations rising again. That should be of great
concern to all of us. The gravity of the situation compels
us to take decisive action.
The latest rockets that were fired from Gaza
towards Beersheba are a dangerous escalation of the
situation. Unfortunately, they also fit a pattern of
provocations that seek to bring Israel and Gaza into
another deadly conflict. It is our responsibility to do
everything possible to avoid that outcome. I am afraid
that there is no more time for words. Now is the time
for action, and we must see very clear actions on all
sides that de-escalate the situation. Otherwise, the
consequences will be terrible for everyone.

The first is that the situation in Gaza is imploding.
That is not hyperbole; it is not alarmism. It is a reality.
The World Bank recently warned that the Gaza economy
is in free fall, with an official unemployment rate of
53 per cent and over 70 per cent among Palestinian
youth. Every second person in Gaza now lives below
the poverty line. All key indicators — humanitarian,
economic, security and political — continue to
deteriorate. We remain on the brink of another
potentially devastating conflict — a conflict that
nobody claims to want, but a conflict that needs much
more than just words to be prevented.

My second key message is cautiously more
optimistic. There is a growing consensus and
determination among key international and regional
partners on moving forward to defuse the powder keg
that is Gaza. On 27 September, a ministerial meeting
on the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) was held
on the margins of the high-level general debate. Member
States contributed generously to the Agency, raising
some $122 million. This very impressive collective
international effort has prevented an immediate
shutdown of key UNRWA services, including in Gaza.
Nevertheless, a significant funding gap remains.

As I have outlined in detail in recent months,
the United Nations and its partners have engaged, in
response to requests from several Security Council
members, in an extraordinary effort to stabilize the
situation in Gaza and prevent an escalation. We have
done so in full coordination with Egypt and in full
transparency with both Israel and the Palestinian
Authority. The effort has aimed at avoiding war and
facilitating a return to the informal understandings
reached in 2014 to maintain calm. That will not only
alleviate the suffering of 2 million Palestinians, but
will give political leaders time to achieve progress in
reconciliation. Since the beginning of this process,
the United Nations has firmly held that we need to

Also on 27 September, the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee for the Coordination of International
Assistance to Palestinians (AHLC) agreed on the
implementation of an urgent set of humanitarian
projects in Gaza. Those interventions are aimed at
addressing the immediate energy, water, sanitation,
health care and economic needs of the population. The
goals are concrete, realistic and achievable. There is no
discussion of projects such as airports, seaports or sea
channels. I take this opportunity to express my sincere
gratitude and appreciation to the Government of the
State of Qatar for its swift and generous response to
the AHLC call by providing some $60 million for fuel
to increase the supply of electricity in the Gaza Strip.

4/32

18-32554

18/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Relieving the humanitarian pressure on the ground
will reduce the threat of escalation and give space for
Egyptian-led efforts to return the legitimate Palestinian
Government to Gaza. The Middle East Quartet has
also endorsed that approach. Disengaging from
Gaza, plunging it into another conflict or tightening
the closures furthers the divide, with devastating
humanitarian and political consequences for the
Palestinian national cause.
I appeal to all Council members and to all friends
of Israel and Palestine to join the United Nations in
calling on all sides to step back from the brink. All
parties must maintain their continued commitment
to the 2014 ceasefire arrangements. Hamas and other
militant groups must immediately and effectively stop
all provocations and attacks, including rockets and
mortars, IEDs, attempts to breach the fence, incendiary
balloons and kites and tunnel construction, and rein
in all violence at the border. Israel must restore the
delivery of critical supplies to Gaza and improve the
movement and access of goods and people, and Israeli
security forces must exercise maximum restraint in
the use of live ammunition. The Palestinian Authority
must not disengage from Gaza and must continue its
engagement with the international community to help
alleviate the suffering of its people in Gaza. Any effort
by any party to block the provision of critical assistance
designed to relieve humanitarian suffering must not
be tolerated.
These steps are only temporary and aim at avoiding
war. We must never forget that, at its heart, Gaza is
not a humanitarian problem. It is a political problem.
Humanitarian efforts are taking place in coordination
with and in support of Egyptian efforts to bring Gaza
back under the full control of the legitimate Palestinian
Government. The Government’s return to Gaza and
the lifting of the suffocating movement and access
restrictions are necessary for addressing not only the
humanitarian and economic needs of the population
in a sustainable manner, but also the very important
political challenges ahead.
In addition to the unification of all Palestinians under
one single, legitimate Palestinian National Authority,
the bigger picture must also be addressed — an end
to the occupation and the realization of a two-State
solution based on relevant United Nations resolutions,
with Gaza as an integral part. Make no mistake — the
consequences of failure would be severe, just as the
benefits of success would be profound.

S/PV. 8375

Briefly turning to Lebanon, the country has
entered its fifth month without a Government. Prime
Minister-designate Hariri continues consultations
for an agreement on a national unity Government.
I hope that the political stakeholders will soon
overcome their differences and provide Lebanon with
a new Government that can deliver on its commitments
vis-à-vis its citizens and the international community.
While the situation in southern Lebanon and along
the Blue Line remained calm, the rhetoric between
Israel and Lebanon underpins a risk of miscalculation.
It is essential that the parties refrain from provocative
actions and renew their commitment to resolution 1701
(2006) in word and deed. Furthermore, I call on the
Lebanese authorities to complete the investigation into
the 4 August attack on a patrol of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon.
Turning to the situation on the Golan, military
conflict on the Bravo side ceased in late July, with the
Syrian Government regaining control of parts of the
area of separation that had previously been under the
control of various non-State armed opposition groups.
In recent weeks, low levels of military activity have
been observed in the areas of separation and limitation
on the Bravo side. The United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF) has assessed that this is due
to controlled detonations of explosive ordnance as part
of the clearance by Syrian security forces. I personally
visited UNDOF facilities in the Israeli-occupied Golan
on 4 October and was encouraged with the progress
made in implementing the phased UNDOF plan for
the continued return of forces to the Bravo side. I
welcome the reopening on 15 October of the Quneitra
crossing, which was facilitated by the parties to the
1974 Separation of Forces Agreement.
In closing, let me reiterate that we must break out of
the endless cycle of emergency responses and stop-gap
measures. The Palestinian people — whether they live
in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, in Gaza, or
as refugees in the region — deserve sustainable and just
solutions, just as the people of Israel deserve peace and
security. Both deserve to have their national dignity
and identity respected and to build a better future for
themselves and their families. Palestinians deserve
to be masters of their own fate, to be governed by
democratically elected institutions, to have a State of
their own that lives in peace and security with the State
of Israel — without the walls of occupation, without the
fear of reprisal or displacement, and certainly without

18-325545/32

S/PV.8375

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

18/10/2018

the fear that the entirety of their lives will be spent
struggling with no end in sight.

in by an increasing number of new or expanding
Israeli settlements.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Mladenov for his important briefing.

None of that is random. All of it is policy-driven.
Two of the most recent and most conspicuous examples
are Israel’s conduct in the recent protests in Gaza and
its plans for Khan Al-Ahmar, a Palestinian shepherding
community. Some 200 people live in Khan Al-Ahmar,
just a few kilometres east of Jerusalem, in an area
where Israel has long endeavoured to minimize the
Palestinian presence and expand settlements. Israel
plans to raze the entire community, claiming that all
its structures were built illegally. The Government
further claims that it has generously offered to relocate
the community, even going so far as to guarantee that
it would foot the bill for the relocation site. Israel also
contends that its actions are legitimate. The High Court
of Justice had given its seal of approval, had it not? But
such claims are nothing short of distortions, carefully
constructed by eager attorneys building on the unsound
and unjust foundations of hollow legal formalisms.

I now give the floor to Mr. El-Ad.
Mr. El-Ad: It is very difficult, if not impossible, to
fully convey the indignity, the outrage and the pain of a
people denied the benefit of human rights for more than
50 years. Here in this Chamber, it is hard to articulate
the flesh-and-blood meaning of the exposed lives
Palestinians endure under occupation. But no matter
how hard it is to describe, the real hardship is that of
facing such an intolerable existence day in and day out,
trying to live, raise a family and develop a community
under those conditions.
It has been almost two years to the day since I last
had the honour of speaking before the Council — two
more years of occupation, two years in which the
routine of the first 49 years of occupation continued.
Since I last spoke here, 317 Palestinians have been
killed by Israeli security forces and 13 Israelis have
been killed by Palestinians. Israel has demolished 294
Palestinian homes and has continued making arrests on
a daily basis, including of minors. Israeli settlers have
vandalized and uprooted thousands of olive trees and
grapevines. Israeli security forces have continued to
regularly enter Palestinian houses, sometimes coming
in the dead of the night to wake children, register
their names and take their pictures. Palestinians have
lost countless hours waiting at checkpoints with no
explanation. And so, the routine of the occupation
marches on.
All of that is often referred to as the status quo.
Yet, there is nothing static about that reality. It is a
calculated and deliberate process of slowly splitting
up an entire people, while fragmenting their land and
disrupting their lives, separating Gaza from the West
Bank, breaking up the West Bank into small enclaves
and walling off East Jerusalem from the rest of the West
Bank. Eventually, what remains are isolated bits that are
easier to oppress — a family slated for eviction in the
East Jerusalem neighbourhood of Silwan; a community,
such as Urif, south of Nablus, trying against all odds to
hold on to its land and farm it in the face of Israel’s
long arm of unchecked settler violence; and all of Area
A of the West Bank, conveniently said to be under full
Palestinian control, but, in fact, essentially comprising
large bantustans, slowly but surely being hemmed
6/32

First, there is no argument that the homes were built
without permission from the Israeli authorities. But that
is the case not because Palestinians are inherently lawbreakers, as some in Israel suggest; rather it is because
they have no other alternative. It is almost impossible
for Palestinians to obtain building permits from the
Israeli authorities because the Israeli-established
planning regime in the West Bank is meant by design
to serve settlers and dispossess Palestinians.
Secondly, the Government failed to mention that the
two relocation sites that it so generously offered leave
something to be desired. One is beside a garbage dump
and the other is next to a wastewater treatment facility.
Moreover, relocation would completely undermine the
community’s ability to make a living.
Lastly, in its ruling, the High Court completely
ignored the reality of the planning regime in the West
Bank. The fact that the High Court approved the
Government’s decision does not make the demolition
just or even legal. It only makes the justices complicit
by proving that the action is nothing short of the war
crime of the forcible transfer of protected people in an
occupied territory.
With a population of nearly 2 million, the Gaza Strip
has essentially become an open-air prison. Its inmates
have been staging protests for the past six months,
after suffering for more than a decade under an Israeliimposed blockade that has led to economic collapse,
18-32554

18/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

soaring unemployment rates, polluted drinking water,
dwindling power supplies and, ultimately, deep despair.
Since 30 March, more than 5,000 Palestinians have
been injured by live Israeli gunfire and more than 170
have been killed, including at least 31 minors. The
youngest were just little boys. Majdi Al-Satari, Yasser
Abu Al-Naja and Nasser Musabeh were just 11 years
old when they were killed.
As with Khan Al-Ahmar, Israel’s High Court of
Justice found Israeli policies vis-à-vis the Gaza Strip to
be legal on a range of issues, from authorizing various
aspects of the blockade to recently approving rules
of engagement that allow Israeli snipers to continue
firing from a distance at demonstrators inside Gaza.
The only problem with all of that is that none of it is
legal or moral or even remotely acceptable. Yet, as long
as that methodical, relentless process does not trigger
international outrage and international action, Israel
can successfully continue to carry off that contradiction
in terms — oppressing millions, while somehow still
being considered a democracy. That, in a nutshell, is the
pattern that the occupation follows. Israeli institutions, in
which Palestinians have no representation, move pieces
of paper along a well-choreographed disassembly line.
How do we legalize the demolition of that community?
How do we whitewash yet another killing? How do we
take over that plot of Palestinian land?
With more than 50 years of experience, we have
had plenty of time to perfect that well-oiled farce. We
are now quite the experts at constructing a facade of
legality, which has been very successful in allowing
us not to have to deal with any real international
consequences. None of those actions has anything to
do with security, as Israel tries to argue. However, they
affect the amorphous construct called the Middle East
peace process. If one looks beyond the blinders of the
process, it is clear to see how its supposedly yet to be
negotiated outcome is, in reality, being dictated day in
and day out by unilateral Israeli actions.
The only thing being processed here is Palestine.
Consider the following historical analogies. Voter
suppression was a cornerstone of the American
south, under Jim Crow laws. But we have done one
better — delivering no less than voter obliteration.
As the occupied Palestinians remain non-citizens, not
only can they not vote but they have absolutely no
representation in the Israeli institutions that govern
their lives. I will take a look at the discriminatory
planning mechanisms and the separate legal systems in

S/PV. 8375

the occupied territories. They are reminiscent of South
Africa’s grand apartheid. Granted, neither analogy is
a perfect fit but history does not offer us precision.
It offers us a moral compass, which points towards
rejecting Israel’s oppression of Palestinians with the
same unwavering conviction with which humankind’s
conscience rejected those other grand injustices.
Israel, however, appears to be following a different
compass. While doing so, it is also busy removing
any obstacles that might keep it from its objective.
Ongoing efforts to legislate against Israeli human
rights organizations now go hand in hand with the
routine in which opposition to the occupation is
being equated with treason. The Israeli Government’s
statements ahead of today’s Council meeting are just
one more unfortunate example of the spirit of the times.
Therefore, I say to Prime Minister Netanyahu that he
will never silence us or the hundreds of thousands of
Israelis who reject a present founded on supremacy
and oppression and stand for a future built on equality,
freedom and human rights. I am not a traitor, nor am I
a hero. The heroes are the Palestinians who endure the
occupation with courage and perseverance, wake up in
the middle of the night to find soldiers barging into their
homes, know that if a loved one is killed, impunity is
all but guaranteed to the perpetrators and stay on their
land, knowing that it is only a matter of time before the
bulldozers arrive.
I am one of a team of some 40 committed Israelis
and Palestinians. We do not focus on how many is the
right number of States to achieve a solution. Instead,
we focus on the realization of human rights. That is
why we reject the occupation. We reject it because
the current reality is wholly and utterly incompatible
with what is right and what is just. It is a reality
wholly and utterly incompatible with a life of freedom
and dignity for all 13 million people — Israelis and
Palestinians alike — living between the Jordan River
and the Mediterranean Sea. And that is the future we
strive for. Even if it now seems far off, and receding
ever further away, we can make that future a reality.
Assertive international action can make it happen. It is
the only viable non-violent option. The world must let
Israel know that it will no longer stand idly by and that
it will take action against the continued dismantling of
the Palestinian people.
The rules-based international order will not defend
itself, and the successful fragmentation of Palestine is
detrimental to Palestinians and Israelis alike, as well

18-325547/32

S/PV.8375

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

as to international law and the values enshrined in it. It
is the role of the Security Council and the delegations
seated in this Chamber to oversee precisely that. The
stakes are high. The Security Council must take action.
In fact, it has already decided to do so, even if in a very
limited fashion. However, it is a matter of record that
the Secretary-General has so far had little to report to
the Council on the implementation of paragraph 5 of
resolution 2334 (2016).
Before closing, I would like to take us all back to
Khan Al-Ahmar. The need for action there is acute and
urgent. As Israel tests the international community’s
resolve to see how far and how fast it can proceed,
what might happen any day now in Khan Al-Ahmar
will determine the fate of Palestinian communities
all over the West Bank. So far, Israeli preparations to
demolish Khan Al-Ahmar continue unabated. Highlevel international statements have had no impact — not
even the united voice, as expressed on 20 September,
of the five current European members of the Council,
joined by former member Italy and future members
Belgium and Germany. They have my sincerest thanks
and deep appreciation for those statements. Without
their efforts, I doubt if Khan Al-Ahmar would still be
standing today.
Yet, Israel has already answered their call by
continuing with preparations for the demolition. Just a
few days ago, the Minister of Defence described actions
that are nothing short of a forcible transfer as “moving
a small group of people within a several-kilometre
radius”. He called on the Council to stop its “flagrant
interference” in Israel’s plans, as if the forcible
transfer of Khan Al-Ahmar, a strategic step in Israel’s
dismantling project, is somehow an internal and
domestic matter. The members of the Security Council
have spoken, and they have received Israel’s answer.
Action must now follow.
The President: I thank Mr. El-Ad for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): We warmly congratulate
the Plurinational State of Bolivia on acceding to the
presidency of the Security Council and express our
appreciation to you, Madam, for your skilled leadership
of the Council.
I thank Special Coordinator Nikolay Mladenov
for his briefing to the Council today. I also extend
8/32

18/10/2018

our thanks to Mr. Hagai El-Ad, Executive Director of
B’Tselem, for his presentation, further exposing the
dismal realities of the situation and sharing the concerns
of civil society as they witness the distress of a people
whose human rights are being so grossly violated and
the destruction of the chances for peace and stability
for Palestinians and Israelis alike.
Against that backdrop and in view of the many
regrettable developments since our last debate (see
S/PV.8316), including escalating punitive measures
against the Palestinian people and leadership, it is
necessary to clarify certain matters.
Standing up for oneself and one’s rights should never
be equated with disrespect of anyone or misconstrued
as a provocation. It is in fact an utmost expression of
respect for one’s rights and dignity, regardless of the
consequences. When the American patriot Patrick
Henry declared “give me liberty or give me death”, he
was not disrespecting or provoking anyone, but rather
insisting on his right to live freely. It was considered
an act of heroism, moral courage, and reverence for
the liberty due to all humankind. The Charter of the
United Nations has affirmed that right of all peoples to
self-determination.
As Palestinians continue to be deprived of this
right, it has been affirmed and called for in countless
resolutions and declarations endorsed by a vast
majority of States and peoples worldwide. Our right
to self-determination and to live freely is a legitimate
and inalienable right — a right we will never forsake; a
right that we will not negotiate with anyone, nor will we
ask permission to exercise it from anyone. It is the right
of the Palestinian people to exercise it and they will
exercise it alone, as has been the case with all peoples
who have exercised the right to self-determination. Why,
after all these years, considering humankind’s progress
and the understandings reached on the universal desire
and right to freedom, why would the Palestinian people
be expected to be any different? Why would they be
expected to forever submit to foreign occupation and
colonial domination?
Also affirmed in these Halls, year after year,
is the fact that peace can never be realized in the
absence of human rights and can never be built on
the dehumanization of others. That has been proven
repeatedly throughout history. We therefore agree with
a statement made in the recent past by the United States
18-32554

18/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Permanent Representative, Mrs. Haley, before the
Council on Foreign Relations, that
“peace and security cannot be achieved in isolation
from human rights ... Desperate people subject
to humiliation and abuse will inevitably resort
to violence.”
It is true that such a situation can never be a path to
peace, and a peace so imposed will never be viable. The
situation of Palestine is no exception. Yet, despite the
extreme human rights crisis being endured, our people
continue, more often than not, to choose non-violence
and peaceful protest.
What we are witnessing, however, are precisely
such short-sighted, inhumane policies as Israel, the
occupying Power, always chooses violence, brutalizing
the Palestinian civilian population and colonizing its
land, with zero consequence, supplemented by the
recent United States decisions contravening United
Nations resolutions, pressuring and vilifying the
Palestinian leadership, and politicizing desperately
needed humanitarian aid, including for more than
5.4 million Palestine refugees.
As part of an attempt to impose a so-called peace
deal, such policies do nothing to help overcome the
political impasse but rather harden it and cause more
mistrust, which is already at an all-time high. Moreover,
such policies prejudge and undermine just solutions to
the core issues, prolonging the conflict and ensuring
only more instability, insecurity and hardship.
We categorically reject these policies and the
distorted, punitive, negative narratives accompanying
them, which demean the legitimacy of Palestinian
national aspirations and dismiss our rights, including
those of our refugees. We also refute attempts to
discredit the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which operates
on the basis of a strong General Assembly mandate
and has been consistently lauded by host countries
and the international community — including the
United States — for its exemplary humanitarian and
development programmes and proven contribution to
regional stability over the decades.
We refuse to accept such policies and rhetoric
and respectfully stand up for our rights, as enshrined
in universal covenants and countless United Nations
resolutions, including those of the Security Council.
We do so peacefully and unwaveringly, committed to

S/PV. 8375

all political, diplomatic, legal and civil means to secure
our rights. We reject the pretexts used to continue
denying those rights and exempting Israel from its
violations. We cannot accept continued appeasement
and hesitance to hold Israel accountable for its crimes,
even as it flagrantly breaches all obligations as an
occupying Power, threatening the very existence of our
people in their homeland and even boasting of this in
the most sinister of ways.
We cannot accept continued lip service to the
peace process while Israel keeps proving how empty its
commitment to negotiations and the two-State solution
actually is, all the while entrenching its occupation,
mocking the international community and still
demanding privileged treatment. Israel should not be
permitted to continue thwarting credible negotiations
aimed at achieving just solutions to the final status
issues — Jerusalem, refugees, settlements, borders,
security, water and prisoners — solutions which we
all know to be vital to establishing lasting peace and
security between the two peoples.
All who call for negotiations should make it
clear that these must be based on the long-standing
parameters and terms of reference set forth by the
relevant resolutions, the Madrid principles and the Arab
Peace Initiative. These are not preconditions; they are
the foundation and guarantees of a just peace, which
would inherently mean addressing the legitimate rights
and concerns of both sides. Trying to accommodate
illegitimate asks, claims and actions will never solve
the problem; it will only create new ones, as we have
seen over the 25 exhausting and futile years of the
Oslo process.
As affirmed by the late former Secretary-General
Kofi Annan in one of the last pieces he penned on
behalf of The Elders, regarding the conflict:
“[A] people deprived of liberty and dignity
will never be pacified. Nor will they meekly accept
a settlement imposed by outsiders that redraws
borders and redefines sovereignty without popular
consent. Any fresh approach to peacemaking must
be welcome in principle ... Yet, if it does not address
the root causes of the conflict, including historic
dispossession, illegal settlement expansion, the
status of Jerusalem as a shared capital and the
rights of Palestinian refugees, the deal will be
doomed to failure.”

18-325549/32

S/PV.8375

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Those words ring alarmingly today. We have
continually called on the international community to
uphold its collective responsibility to bring an end to
the Israeli occupation and this 70-year injustice. We do
so again today, urging the Security Council to uphold
its duties under the Charter of the United Nations and
to act in conformity with its own resolutions, including
resolution 2334 (2016), to address the root causes
and tangibly contribute to a solution that will be just,
comprehensive and lasting. We have also continually
affirmed our commitment to the two-State solution as
the path to peace, insisting, however, that it be a just
peace — not one stripping our people of their land and
rights. We do so again today.
How can those seeking to make peace condone,
support or excuse the violations being perpetrated every
single day against the Palestinian people by Israel and
its destruction of the prospects for peace? They must
not condone or excuse the savage killing of innocent
civilians who have been cruelly denied protection
for decades by an international community that has
appeased and armed the occupation to the maximum
with little remorse. While they may be seen as statistics
by some, the Palestinian men, women and children
who have been killed — including over 200 peaceful
protesters, among them at least 45 children, since the
Great March of Return in Gaza began, and including
the mother of eight children, Aisha Mohammed Rabi,
who was killed last week in the West Bank by Israeli
settlers, as well as the tens of thousands who have been
injured by the Israeli occupying forces — are not just
numbers to us, but our sisters and brothers whose pain
and losses we grieve for and weigh heavily on us, not
least on our collective belief that justice and peace
are possible.
They must not condone or excuse attempts to clear
away people — human beings — like rubbish, with no
regard for rights and dignity, or the demolition of their
homes and lives. The forced transfer of people, as is
happening in the Bedouin village of Khan Al-Ahmar and
witnessed so many times before in occupied Palestine
over the years, constitutes ethnic cleansing. This is not
a mere decision by Israel’s so-called judiciary, which
has proven to serve and subsidize the occupation and
where the chances for minimal justice for Palestinians
are nil; this is a war crime.
They must not condone, excuse or in any way
support the colonization of a people’s ancestral
lands, as is being committed flagrantly in occupied
10/32

18/10/2018

Palestine, including East Jerusalem, where the Israeli
Government not only persists with illegal settlement
activities in all their manifestations — in flagrant
breach of resolution 2334 (2016) and countless other
resolutions — but openly declares its intent to annex
our land, with officials, including the so-called Justice
Minister, leading the charge in flat-out contempt of
international law and the international community.
They must not condone or excuse the imprisonment
of 2 million Palestinians in Gaza under the occupation’s
illegal blockade, by which Israel has caused
humanitarian and socioeconomic devastation and
exploited and deepened the Palestinian division, which
regrettably remains a dark stain on our national history
that has not been expunged despite many attempts at
reconciliation, including the important effort of our
brothers from Egypt, which we appreciate immensely.
Nor must they condone or excuse the imprisonment,
detention and abuse of thousands of Palestinians,
including hundreds of children, by the occupying
Power, or its deceitful distortions of social welfare to
the families of prisoners and martyrs as it persists in its
attempts to undermine and weaken all of our institutions.
They must not condone or excuse religious
extremism, incitement and hatred; pitting one religion
against another threatening the sanctity of holy sites,
including Al-Haram Al-Sharif; or the legislation of
racism, discrimination and segregation, with racist
laws that deem one people superior to another and grant
them exclusive rights to the land, including to selfdetermination and return, while simultaneously denying
those rights to the indigenous Palestinian people in a
situation that can only be classified as apartheid.
The fact that an occupying Power should feel
immune from accountability, even as it kills innocent
civilians and violates all norms and principles of
international law, only deepens cynicism about the
potential for a just peace, especially among our young
people, whose hopes are evaporating. The fact that the
illegal occupation should last for more than a halfcentury, with no concrete action to bring it to an end,
risks not only the future of our people and region, but
also destroying the credibility of the international
system and its laws, which the world has gone through
wars and colossal human and material sacrifices to
build, assert and defend.
What we demand — an end to the occupation and
historic injustice — is not only a call for respect and
18-32554

18/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the realization of the Palestinian people’ inalienable
human rights and national aspirations, but also a call
on the international community to respect and defend
the universal principles and moral standards that it has
itself developed and accepted as basic canons, all of
which are in grave jeopardy at this critical moment.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Danon (Israel): I have a few comments to
make on the circus that has been staged today in
this Chamber. B’Tselem is an Israeli organization
that is funded by the European Union and European
Governments. It was invited to the Security Council
today by Bolivia — a country with a terrible human
rights record — to defame our strong democracy, but it
has actually had the exact opposite effect. By inviting
B’Tselem, Bolivia has in fact demonstrated the strength
of Israel’s vibrant democracy. I challenge everyone
present to find a Palestinian or a Bolivian who could
dare defame his Government in the Security Council.
At best, he might be thrown in jail, but he would more
likely end up dead.
I would like to read out an English translation of
a short passage from an official Palestinian Authority
textbook. It states,
“There is an important place for heroes in every
nation. They have sacrificed everything. They
should be remembered forever, and we must be
proud of them. A nation becomes even more proud
as it gains more and more heroes. For if it were not
for our heroes, we would not have a nation.”
The next page of the textbook lists the number of those
so-called heroes, like Dalal Mughrabi, the terrorist
responsible for a massacre that killed 38 innocent
people. For her killing, she is described in the book as
“a crown of her nation”.
That is from a textbook that Mahmoud Abbas has
authorized for the current school year. This is Abbas’s
culture of hatred, right before the Council. It is the
reason why Palestinian school children learn that it
is better to kill a Jew than to keep a job. The Council
will not hear that from Mr. Mansour or Mr. El-Ad,
but Mahmoud Abbas is to blame. In his 13 years of
rule, Abbas has done nothing but inspire that rampant
culture of hatred. He is enabling an imminent war
between Hamas and Israel. He preaches tolerance
in English and terror in Arabic. If Council members

S/PV. 8375

are really interested in the truth, they should read
translations of Abbas’s Arabic speeches. He does not
recognize Israel. He calls us racist. He is trying to bring
us to court. He has led his people down a path of selfdestruction and misery, stealing their chance at a good
life. Far from being a peace partner, Mahmoud Abbas
is the obstacle to peace. If members hope to see a better
future for Palestinians and Israelis, they will join us in
indicting Abbas.
We are on the brink of a major escalation in Gaza.
Last night, two rockets were fired from Gaza into Israel.
One hit Beersheba, and the other one was aimed at Tel
Aviv. Hamas has set more than 8,000 acres of Israeli
agricultural land on fire. It has launched at least 300
rockets into Israel this year alone. It sends thousands
of rioters to commit violence on our southern border
almost every day. It steals foreign-aid funding to expand
its weapons arsenal and uses the cement intended for
schools and hospitals to construct terror tunnels. Israel
has just discovered and destroyed the fifteenth terror
tunnel found since October of last year.
Israel continues to send a strong message to
Hamas that nothing will justify terror and that it will
pay a heavy price for attacking Israel. But we have not
forgotten about Abbas. Abbas is taking active measures
to radicalize the people of Gaza and prolong their
suffering. For his own on cynical political purposes,
Abbas is pushing Israel and Hamas towards a war that
could begin any day. For months, Abbas has withheld
critical international funding for the people of Gaza.
We heard Mr. Mladenov. Today, more than 40,000
Palestinian workers in Gaza do not receive a paycheque
from Abbas and half of them live below the poverty
line. The unemployment rate is 53 per cent. Families
live with little electricity or fuel and even less clean
water. When an Arab country offered $60 million to
help to pay for electricity in Gaza, Abbas said no. He
even threatened to make it worse for the people of Gaza
if countries ignored those orders and delivered funds.
Abbas has now refused help from Israel, the United
States and even the United Nations. He exploits the dire
situation in Gaza in order to stay in power.
In Judea and Samaria, Abbas is guilty of a different
type of exploitation — the infamous “pay to slay” policy,
which remains the crown jewel of Abbas’s incitement
campaign. In the Palestinian Authority’s 2018 budget,
Abbas allocated $355 million towards the “pay to slay”
policy. That is 7 per cent of the total budget of the

18-3255411/32

S/PV.8375

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Palestinian Authority — 7 per cent. Let me put that into
perspective — 7 per cent of the budget of Bolivia last
year was more than $1 billion; 7 per cent of the budget
of Sweden was $19 billion; and 7 per cent of the budget
of the Netherlands was $24 billion. Imagine all that
money spent to encourage the killing of Jews.
That criminal policy is killing people. Ten days
ago, it did. It was just the beginning of another ordinary
workweek. Kim Levengrond Yehezkel and Ziv Hagbi
entered their offices as usual, like every Sunday in
Israel. They worked in the Barkan industrial zone, a
complex of factories in which thousands of Israelis and
Palestinians work side by side. Kim was 28 years old.
She was a mother with a one-year-old baby. Ziv was 35
and a father of three. The ordinary workweek quickly
turned into a massacre. A Palestinian co-worker of
Kim and Ziv — someone they knew — turned into
a terrorist that day. He used his work permit to enter
the factory as he would any other day. But this time he
had a rifle hidden in his bag. He made it through the
security checkpoint and entered the room where Kim
and Ziv sat in their office. Then he had them tied up and
he shot them in cold blood.
Just like that, four children lost a parent, two
spouses lost their partners and that very society suffered
yet another wound from terrorism. The killer is still at
large but he cannot hide forever. We will catch him,
and he will pay for his crime. But Abbas will pay too.
Abbas will pay him. He will pay a total of $3 million
to that animal during his lifetime in prison. That is the
legacy of Abbas — to slaughter innocent Israelis and be
rewarded for life. The same $355 million Abbas pays to
terrorists is also more than 45 per cent of the foreign aid
that the Palestinians will receive in 2018. That means
that nearly half of every dollar that everyone gives to
the Palestinian people to build roads and schools is put
into the pockets of those who murder Jews. Therefore,
if they do not pull their funding, they are complicit in
the “pay to slay” policy. Earlier this year, the United
States and Israel passed legislation to freeze payments
to the Palestinian Authority until it ends its “pay to slay”
programme. Australia has also cut aid funding to the
Palestinians, as it feared they were financing terror. In
response, Abbas ensured that he would continue those
payments even if “we had only a single penny left”.
Abbas’s priority is clear. His aim is to incite, so
ours must be to indict. If there were no culture of
hate, no incitement, no payments to terrorists and no
glorification of murder, just imagine where Israel and the
12/32

18/10/2018

Palestinians would be today. If there was a Palestinian
leader who actually cared about his people, perhaps we
would have a solution to the conflict. Let me remind
the members of the Council of some simple logic. They
cannot expect different results when they do not change
the equation. If they really want to change the reality
for Palestinians and Israelis, they must change the
equation. Remove the source of the culture of hate and
textbook terrorism. When that source is removed, when
Abbas is gone, only then will we see a brighter future.
The President (spoke in Spanish): In my capacity
as representative of the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
I am not at this time going to respond to the unfounded
accusations of the representative of Israel.
In my capacity as President of the Security Council,
I now give the floor to the members of the Council.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank
Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing. Special
Coordinator Mladenov’s briefing was informative and
it is appreciated. Mr. El-Ad’s briefing, by contrast,
was the sort of distorted and one-sided account that
is provided all too often at the United Nations when
it comes to Israel and the Palestinian issue. It is why
I have so often attempted to bring some diversity to
our discussions of the challenges facing the Middle
East. Rather than repeating the same tired points at this
monthly meeting, I will take the opportunity to focus
on a matter of great significance that is taking place
today in the Middle East — a matter that has received
far less attention than it deserves. I urge my colleagues
to listen, as their countries might unknowingly be
affected by it.
First, by way of a little background, in less than
two weeks, on 30 October, Iran will celebrate Student
Basij Day. What does Basij Day celebrate? It is the day
on which, during the Iran-Iraq war, a 13-year-old boy
strapped a live grenade to his body and leapt under
an oncoming Iraqi tank. His name was Mohammad
Hossein Fahmideh. Child soldiers like Hossein were
a horrifying feature of the Iran-Iraq war. Children
were sent into battle with a plastic key to paradise
hung around their necks. They were untrained and
considered expendable. In wars between trained adult
military forces, the numbers of the wounded typically
outnumber the dead. But the child soldiers of Iran were
used as cannon fodder and as a human minesweeper.
The dead far outnumbered the wounded. According to
the Iranians themselves, 36,000 school-age children
18-32554

18/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

were killed and just under 3,000 were wounded in the
Iran-Iraq war.
So why does that history matter today? Some in
the international community still labour under the
misimpression that the Iranian regime might be a
responsible international actor or might abide by the laws
of a civilized society. Some think that Tehran might care
more about a better life for the people of Iran than about
the forcible spread of the regime’s power and influence.
Many things about the Iranian regime contradict that
premise. One of the most glaring contradictions is the
continued use of children to fight and die in Iranian
aggression abroad. The Government in Tehran long ago
turned Mohammad Hossein Fahmideh’s death into a
propaganda tool to recruit and train children for war.
It continues to use that memory of its past barbarism to
promote more barbarism. The use of child soldiers is a
moral outrage that every civilized nation rejects, while
Iran celebrates it.
The Basij Resistance Force is a paramilitary
force operating under Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary
Guard Corps (IRGC). In addition to cracking down on
dissidents and enforcing internal security in Iran, the
Basij indoctrinate schoolchildren and provide combat
training to children as young as 12 years old. Those
children are then coerced into fighting abroad for the
IRGC. Since at least early 2015, the Iranian regime
has used the Basij to recruit and train Iranian children
to fight in Syria in support of the brutal Al-Assad
regime. The Basij also targets Afghan immigrants
in Iran — some as young as 14 years old — to fight
in Syria.
The United States has followed the money that
funds the recruitment, training and coerced deployment
of child soldiers in Iran. Earlier this week, we identified
the sources of the Basij funding and took action to cut
them off from the global economy and financial system.
Two days ago, the United States Treasury Department’s
Office of Foreign Assets Control imposed sanctions
on a network of 20 Iranian corporations and financial
institutions that provide funding for the Basij Resistance
Force. That network is deeply entrenched in the Iranian
economy. It is comprised of multibillion-dollar business
interests that operate in Iran’s automotive, mining,
metals and banking industries. The network uses shell
companies to hide the ownership of those interests.
Many of the companies do substantial international
business across the Middle East and Europe.

S/PV. 8375

The United States action targets banks, investment
firms and subsidiary mining and manufacturing
companies. It includes the largest tractor manufacturing
company in the Middle East and North Africa. It also
includes Iran’s largest steel producer, which funnels
millions of dollars each year to the Basij and its
financial network. Our Treasury Department has done
impressive forensic accounting to uncover the hidden
and overlapping networks of businesses and financial
institutions that fund the work of the Basij forces.
For anyone who cares to look, that is a perfect
example of what is fuelling the outrage of the Iranian
people today. Iran’s economy is increasingly devoted
to funding Iranian repression at home and aggression
abroad. In this case, Iranian big business and finance
are funding the war crime of using child soldiers.
That is crony terrorism. The Iranian people are rightly
disgusted with it and they are taking to the streets to
protest. To add insult to injury, the Basij use the very
money that they have stolen from the people to forcibly
shut down the protests and arrest the protesters.
The designations announced by the United States
Treasury Department extend beyond property or
interests in the United States or in the possession
of United States persons. Anyone who engages in
transactions with those designated entities could
themselves be designated and any foreign financial
institution that knowingly engages in transactions
with those entities could themselves be subject to
United States sanctions. The sanctions that the United
States is levelling against Iran are broad and deep,
and for good reason. Any company or individual that
does business with that Iranian network is complicit
in sending children to die on the battlefields of Syria
and elsewhere.
The United States will do all that it can to reverse
the flow of international funds into the coffers of the
Iranian regime. I thank everyone for listening today
and for their attention to this human rights crisis that
is occurring in the heart of the Middle East. I urge my
colleagues to join with the United States in helping to
the protect Iranian children from the Government that
is supposed to protect them.
Mr. Ashikbayev (Kazakhstan): We thank
Mr. Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, for his detailed and objective update on
the situation in the Middle East. Let me focus on some
developments in the Middle East that have caused the

18-3255413/32

S/PV.8375

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

overall turmoil, not only in the region but also beyond,
with heightened and grave consequences for global
insecurity. These violent conflicts are also having an
increasingly serious impact on countries in Africa,
South, Central and South-East Asia and other regions.
Kazakhstan’s position on the Middle East peace
process is very clear and remains unchanged. We
support the two-State solution and call for the early
resumption of negotiations, especially in the bilateral
format and without preconditions. That should be in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
the relevant Security Council resolutions and other
mechanisms and initiatives, such as the Quartet road
map, the Arab Peace Initiative, the Madrid principles
and the land-for-peace formula.
We support the rights of the Palestinian people to
self-determination and the creation of a free, sovereign
and independent State within the international borders
of 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital. It is necessary
to begin direct talks to reach agreement on pending
issues by giving them a so-called final status through
the signing of a basic treaty that provides security to
both Israel and Palestine.
Turning to Gaza, we are alarmed to see increased
Palestinian casualties. We reiterate that the Israeli
security forces must calibrate the use of force, which must
be employed only as a last resort. We also underscore
our call on Palestinians to avoid provocations. All the
incidents in Gaza since March must be thoroughly
investigated and the perpetrators brought to justice. We
reiterate our call for all sides to refrain from any act
that could lead to further casualties and, in particular,
any measures that could place civilians in harm’s way.
Kazakhstan believes that Gaza remains an integral part
of the two-State solution, in accordance with the relevant
United Nations resolutions. We hope that relieving the
humanitarian pressure in Gaza will reduce tensions and
the threat of escalation. Furthermore, we call on the
Palestinian Authority and Hamas to seriously engage
with Egypt on reconciliation and move forward with
implementing the Cairo agreement of 12 October 2017.
We are concerned about the temporary withdrawal
of international staff from Gaza, following a series of
worrying security incidents affecting its personnel,
who were harassed and prevented from carrying out
their duties. The challenging financial situation of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East is a cause for concern, in
14/32

18/10/2018

particular the emergency appeal for the occupied
Palestinian territory. We endorse the Agency’s calls
on the local authorities in Gaza to provide effective
protection to its personnel and facilities.
Regarding Syria, Kazakhstan believes that the
Astana process has great potential for directing
intra-Syrian talks towards long-term peace and
for supporting the Geneva process. We call on the
International Syria Support Group and other countries
to help to implement the measures stipulated by the
Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex), the Vienna
statements and other texts.
With regard to Lebanon, with the parliamentary
elections held successfully in May, we hope that
the new Government can be formed soon with the
consolidation of the Constitution through a democratic
process. We realize that both of those are contingent on
developments in neighbouring Syria. I am pleased to
inform the Council that Kazakhstan’s support to United
Nations peacekeeping operations is being expanded by
co-deploying, by the end of October, a well-trained
and highly qualified Kazakh contingent to the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon in partnership with
India. In addition, competent individual officers will
also be sent to Lebanon and the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization.
We congratulate Iraq on the election of its new
President, Mr. Barham Salih, and the appointment of
the new Prime Minister-designate, Mr. Adel Abdul
Mahdi. That will result in the next Government being
formed soon to help to bring about stability and peaceful
coexistence among the population and its minorities.
Turning to Yemen, we call for broad-based,
inclusive national dialogue in order to end hostilities,
which in turn will provide an opportunity to revive the
economy, resolve the humanitarian crisis and restore
public services. Only a political settlement will mitigate
the humanitarian and security challenges.
In conclusion, the region today and the entire
world are experiencing an uneasy confrontation among
countries, thus adding to mutual distrust and tension.
Peace and security, a world without terrorism and
nuclear weapons, sustainable development and human
rights for all are also noble goals for the Middle East,
which cannot be achieved without the joint efforts of
the international community.
18-32554

18/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Just over a week ago, Astana was host to the
sixth Congress of Leaders of World and Traditional
Religions. Once again leaders of different religious
denominations, including the Grand Imam of Al-Azhar
of Egypt, the Chief Sephardic and Ashkenazi Rabbis
of Israel, leaders of Shi’a Islam, Christianity and
Buddhism — all in all more than 80 delegations from 46
countries around the world — stressed the importance
of international cooperation to overcome intolerance,
discrimination, exclusion, tensions and conflicts based
on ethnic, religious, linguistic and cultural differences.
Kazakhstan is deeply committed to joining the
multilateral efforts to secure stability in this troubled
region which, at the same time, holds great promise
when peace will prevail.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I thank Mr. Mladenov, Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing and for
his efforts in actively pushing forward the de-escalation
of tension and the easing of the humanitarian crisis in
Gaza. I listened carefully to the statements made by
the representatives of Palestine and Israel, as well as by
Mr. Hagai El-Ad.
The current Palestinian-Israeli situation is very
fragile and tense, with frequent violent confrontations
and ongoing risks of escalation. The Palestinian Great
March of Return demonstration in the Gaza Strip has
been going on since March, with Palestinian civilian
casualties continuously on the rise. Settlement activities
continue on the West Bank of the Jordan River and in
Jerusalem and the demolition of Palestinian houses
is still taking place. That seriously challenges the
prospects for the two-State solution on the basis of
the 1967 border. The violent conflict and political
confrontations have further exacerbated the mistrust
between the two sides, with more restraining factors
for the relaunch of the Palestinian-Israeli peace talks.
The grim humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip is
not conducive to regional stability and the Middle East
peace process. The party in question should fully lift
its Gaza blockade at an early date. The use of force and
violence for violence are not conducive to the settlement
of the issue. The relevant parties should proceed from
the goal of the overall security and peaceful coexistence
of the peoples in the region, exercise restraint and
avoid escalation. The international community should
fully implement the General Assembly resolutions

S/PV. 8375

concerning the protection of Palestinian civilians in
order to ease the current situation in Gaza.
Faced with the current situation, the international
community should have an enhanced sense of urgency.
The Security Council should strengthen its unity in a
common effort to return the Palestine question to the
track of a negotiated solution. First, the Council should
push for but not weaken the two-State solution. The
two-State solution is the right way to settle the Palestine
issue. The international community should implement
the relevant United Nations resolutions, the land-forpeace principle, the Arab Peace Initiative and the road
map to Mideast peace and, on that basis, strengthen
political and diplomatic efforts. Efforts should be
made to abandon any and all measures that weaken
the prospect of the two-State solution, implement
resolution 2334 (2016), stop all settlement activities in
the occupied territories, and adopt measures to prevent
violence against civilians.
Secondly, the Council should be united and
cooperate to push for an early end to the stalemate of the
Palestinian-Israeli peace talks. Parties with significant
influence on the Middle East peace process should play
a constructive role, promote the mutual confidence of
the two sides, start a new round of efforts to promote
peace and try new mechanisms of good offices. All
parties should work to break away from the vicious
cycle of escalating confrontation between Palestine
and Israel and accelerate the internal Palestinian
reconciliation process.
Thirdly, the Council should properly address
the final status of Jerusalem. That is a complex and
sensitive issue and has a bearing on the future of the
two-State solution and regional peace and stability.
In dealing with related issues, all parties should be
prudent and avoid imposing unilateral solutions that
lead to renewed confrontation. All parties should
uphold the principles of respect for their diverse history,
adherence to fairness and justice, implementation of the
international consensus and the realization of peaceful
coexistence. On the basis of the relevant United Nations
resolutions and international consensus and through
final-status negotiations, they should reach a settlement
that takes the interests of all parties into account.
China resolutely supports the Palestinian people
in establishing a Palestinian State that enjoys full
sovereignty and independence on the basis of the 1967
border, with East Jerusalem as its capital. We support

18-3255415/32

S/PV.8375

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the greater integration of Palestine into the international
community, with a view to its active participation in the
affairs of the United Nations. China will continue to
play a constructive role in taking the Middle East peace
process forward.
For many years, the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) has played an important role in providing
health care, education and other basic services to the
5.3 million Palestinian refugees. The international
community should provide UNRWA with more
adequate, predictable and sustainable funding. We
appreciate those who made additional contributions
to UNRWA and appeal to all to continue to strengthen
their support to UNRWA and to countries receiving
Palestinian refugees. Over the past 30 years, China has
made annual contributions to UNRWA. This year, we
increased our contribution to UNRWA in view of its
urgent needs. China will continue to do what it can to
provide assistance to UNRWA so that it may implement
its mandate.
Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): I would like to express our
appreciation to Mr. Mladenov, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, for his most useful
and comprehensive briefing on the latest developments
concerning the Middle East and Palestine.
It is clear that provocative actions continue to fuel
tensions on the ground. That inevitably pushed the
parties to another cycle of confrontation and violence.
While we condemn all attacks and deeply regret the
loss of any innocent civilian lives, we would call upon
the parties to exercise maximum restraint. The region
is already on the edge. Every effort must be made to
avoid further escalation. We support any and all efforts
to diffuse tension. In that context, we appreciate what
the United Nations and Egypt are doing to help to
restore calm and facilitate a return to the 2014 ceasefire
arrangements.
The humanitarian situation in Gaza continues
to be of serious concern and the growing sense of
frustration and despair among the Palestinians is
completely understandable. Meeting the critical needs
of the Palestinians living in Gaza remains a daunting
challenge and addressing the huge funding gap must
continue to be a matter of the utmost priority. That
needs much greater attention and mobilization by the
international community, even though it was a matter
of discussion at a number of meetings held on the
16/32

18/10/2018

margins of the General Assembly last month. These
included the meetings of the Middle East Quartet and
the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee. We share the concerns
expressed by the Middle East Quartet and note its
support for the efforts of the United Nations to prevent
further escalation, empower the legitimate Palestinian
authorities in Gaza and address all humanitarian needs.
We also note the outcome of the meeting of the
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee and the priority areas it
identified to address the critical situation affecting the
Palestinian economy and the humanitarian situation
in Gaza. We would strongly agree with the support
expressed for the Palestinian Authority to reinstate its
governance in Gaza, in order to reunite Palestine under
one authority. We believe that progress in the Egyptianled reconciliation is indeed the key, and the Palestinian
parties should be urged to cooperate for the sake of their
own people, who have been suffering for far too long.
Ethiopia’s position on the Israeli-Palestinian
dispute has always been consistent and clear. As much
as we support the right of Israel to exist in peace and
security, we also support the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people to self-determination and the right
of Palestine to exist as a free and independent State.
Accordingly, we fully support the goal of two
States living side by side in peace and security. Indeed,
this is the only viable option to resolve the IsraeliPalestinian dispute. We believe that this is not only in
the best interest of both Israel and Palestine but that it
will also significantly advance peace and security in
the Middle East.
Peace in the Middle East and Palestine, however,
continues to elude us. It is very clear that we need to
reinvigorate efforts aimed at achieving a comprehensive,
lasting and just solution to the longstanding IsraeliPalestinian dispute on the basis of the two-State
formula. In other words, facilitating the resumption of
direct negotiations between the parties is vital. It is, we
believe, incumbent upon the Council to fully support
such efforts for the sake of peace between the Israelis
and the Palestinians and peace in the broader Middle
Eastern region.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
Madam President, we thank you for having convened
this meeting and Mr. Nickolay Mladenov and Mr. Hagai
El-Ad for their important briefings.
18-32554

18/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Peru notes with deep concern the continued
violence between Israelis and Palestinians. We cannot
but deplore the deaths and injuries and the worsening of
the humanitarian situation in Gaza, with no solution to
the prolonged conflict in sight. We continue to condemn
the disproportionate use of force by Israel and the
indiscriminate actions against civilians carried out by
Hamas. International law, international humanitarian
law and human rights are being flagrantly ignored.
We must continue to reject hate speech, incitement
to violence, recourse to terrorism, laws promoting
discrimination and anti-Semitism, all of this within a
particularly unstable regional context. The settlements,
demolitions and evictions in occupied Palestinian
territory openly defy international law and specific
resolutions of the Council, including resolution 2334
(2016), and they jeopardize the territorial integrity of the
Palestinian State and hence undermine the possibility
of achieving a political solution to the conflict.
We note with particular alarm the legal and
humanitarian consequences of the demolition of a group
of structures and the eviction of a Bedouin community in
Khan Al-Ahmar. We believe that the Israeli authorities
must ensure that this demolition is halted, in accordance
with international law. We are also alarmed about the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in Gaza.
Poverty, injustice and marginalization are a breeding
ground for radicalization and violent extremism.
We believe that the provision of goods and basic
services, as well as overcoming the isolation of
millions of Palestinians, must be priority issues for the
international community. In that regard, we commend
the implementation of development projects in Gaza
that are being promoted by the United Nations, with
international support. We stress how important it is that
the crossing points of Kerem Shalom and Rafah remain
open, with adequate security, and that the fishing zone
on the Gaza coast not be reduced, as this would have
humanitarian consequences.
We wish to underscore the generous contributions
announced by various States to provide predictable and
sustainable funding for the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
and also to alleviate the serious energy crisis affecting
the people of Gaza. We note, however, that this entity
continues to face a critical financial situation and that
it is therefore vital to continue mobilizing the support
of the international community. We also deplore the

S/PV. 8375

recent announcements about the possible closure of its
offices in East Jerusalem, despite the legal framework
regulating its functioning in accordance with resolutions
adopted by the United Nations and other instruments of
international law.
Peru continues to encourage the parties to resume
direct negotiations with a view to achieving the only
viable solution to the conflict: two States living
securely within mutually recognized borders and with
Jerusalem as a shared capital.
The United Nations and the Council in particular
are called upon to provide such a solution and to protect
civilians affected by the conflict. In this regard, we
wish to conclude by expressing our recognition of
and support for the important diplomatic work done
by Mr. Mladenov and to thank him for periodically
reminding us, in a clear and balanced way, of our
responsibilities as an international community.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We would
first like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
valuable briefing on the most recent developments in
the occupied Palestinian territory, which remind us
of the gravity of the situation there. We commend his
endeavours and reiterate our full support for his efforts
to ease tensions and avoid a confrontation. We would
like also to thank Mr. Hagai El-Ad, Executive Director
of B’Tselem. We commend him for his courage in
participating in this meeting to discuss the violations by
the Israeli occupation authorities of the human rights of
Palestinians, who are living in very difficult economic
and social conditions because of these practices.
We are meeting today a few weeks after the
conclusion of the general debate of the General
Assembly at its seventy-third session, whose echo
continues to resound. The strong support given to the
Palestinian people by Heads of State and Government
in their statements sent a clear message about the way
in which Member States have addressed the Palestinian
question for the past seven decades, namely, that Israel,
the occupying Power, must be compelled to stop its
violations of the most basic rules of international law
and that it must implement its legal obligations as
stipulated by international conventions and treaties,
notably the Charter of the United Nations, which
we have all adopted as our guiding light and which
embodies our belief in basic human rights, the dignity

18-3255417/32

S/PV.8375

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and worth of the individual and the equal rights of men
and women and of nations large and small.
Unfortunately, these rights remain but a dream for
our brothers and sisters in Palestine. The echo of this
message did not simply stop at the General Assembly
but spread to many other meetings held during the
high-level week, as well as the meeting of the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee on Palestine and the ministerial
meeting of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA).
Those two meetings reaffirmed the priority that a
large number of States give to these issues with a view
to alleviating the Palestinian people’s suffering as a
result of the crises they are facing, especially on the
humanitarian and economic fronts. Those States are also
trying to maintain the dignity of Palestine’s 5 million
refugees and not to disappoint the more than 500,000
male and female students among those refugees. Based
on its commitment to supporting UNRWA so that
it can continue to offer its vital services to refugees,
last month Kuwait decided to donate an additional
$42 million to the UNRWA budget.
Unfortunately, despite the resonance of these
messages, they have produced no results, because the
Israeli occupying forces have continued their grievous
systemic violations of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law in the occupied
Palestinian territory. The Israeli occupation forces have
continued to use excessive force against Palestinian
civilians taking part in the Great March of Return,
which was a peaceful demonstration. As we heard
earlier from Mr. Mladenov, those forces have continued
to use live ammunition against demonstrators, raising
the number of those killed to more than 205 and of the
injured to more than 20,000. In the past two weeks
alone, we have witnessed the deaths of 10 Palestinian
martyrs, including three children, and 882 Palestinians
have been injured. And Friday, 28 September, saw the
highest number of casualties in a single day since May,
when seven martyrs were killed.
This killing and terror spree did not simply stop
there. Attacks have continued to dominate the stage
in the occupied territories. Aisha Al-Rabi, a mother of
eight, died a martyr from a head injury received during
an attack by settlers who threw rocks at the car that
her husband was driving as they were returning home
from a family visit in Hebron. Before she was killed,
she had been preparing for the forthcoming wedding
18/32

18/10/2018

of her daughter Salam. The Council no doubt agrees
with me on the need to condemn this heinous crime.
These actions, which constitute war crimes and crimes
against humanity, are the responsibility of the Israeli
occupation authorities alone. In that regard, we join
our voice to that of Special Coordinator Mladenov
in demanding that those who killed this Palestinian
mother be quickly brought to trial.
We also want to note the impending danger of
the implementation of the unjust decision to raze the
town of Khan Al-Ahmar and forcibly move its Bedouin
residents away from the demolition site as bulldozers
and demolition machines, accompanied by large
numbers of Israeli troops, drew nearer. These events
resulted in injuries to many of the community residents
and those who stood in solidarity with them, including
an Israeli citizen, as they were severely beaten while
defending their homes and property. We reiterate our
rejection of Israel’s aggressive and systematic policies
targeting unarmed Palestinians, which are all part
of an illegal plan to annex these lands and impose a
policy of fait accompli that aims to partition the West
Bank, undermine its geographic continuity, negatively
affect the possibility of a two-State solution and
maintain the foundations for a racist regime against the
Palestinian people.
We also strongly condemn the Israeli Government’s
recent endorsement of a decision to build a new Jewish
settlement neighbourhood in the city of Hebron, where
more than 200,000 Palestinians live, south of occupied
Jerusalem, reportedly the first such endorsement in
Hebron since 2002. We can add that to the record of
unjust Israeli settlement decisions that clearly violate
Security Council resolutions, including resolution
2334 (2016), which among other things confirms that
Israeli settlement activity constitutes a clear violation
of international law and is an obstacle to peace. It also
states that Israel should immediately and completely
end all settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, and also affirms
that the international community will not recognize
any changes to the pre-1967 borders, including those
pertaining to Jerusalem, except those changes that are
agreed to by the two parties through negotiations.
Arrests, the demolition of homes, the destruction
of property, the unprecedented expansion in the
construction of illegal settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, the
forced displacement of Palestinian civilians, the
18-32554

18/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

targeting of civilians and the siege of the Gaza Strip,
which has gone on for nearly 12 years, have all become
part of the Palestinian people’s daily routine for years.
Nevertheless, the Security Council unfortunately
remains incapable of compelling the occupying Power
to implement its resolutions, thus giving Israel a
green light to continue its practices and entrench its
occupation and thereby undermining any chance for
a genuine peace that would guarantee the Palestinian
people their legitimate rights, including their right to
independence, sovereignty and a dignified and free life,
the most basic of human rights.
Many decades have gone by since the Palestinian
question was put on the United Nations agenda. It is
constantly being discussed, and many resolutions have
been adopted about it. However, the question remains
unanswered, and no solutions have been found. The
resolutions have not been implemented because of the
obstinacy of Israel, the occupying State, and because of
its explicit and blatant refusal to implement resolutions
of international legitimacy and its deliberately mocking
disregard of those resolutions. The time has come to
make sure that the members of the Security Council
give this issue, like others, its fair share of attention,
as Israel continues its attacks and acts of aggression,
which could be considered the inevitable result of the
absence of any serious call from the Security Council
to Israel to end that continued aggression and to fulfil
its obligations as the occupying Power, in accordance
with the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949.
In conclusion, we want to emphasize the strategic
option, which is to arrive at a just, lasting and
comprehensive solution to the Palestinian question
in accordance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions, the principle of land for peace, the Quartet
road map and the Arab Peace Initiative, adopted by all
Arab States at the 2002 Beirut summit. This solution
would be based on Israel’s withdrawal from all occupied
Palestinian territories to the borders of 4 June 1967, and
it includes dealing with all final status issues in a way
that can enable the Palestinian people to enjoy all of
their legitimate political rights, including the right to
self-determination and to establish an independent State
on their territory with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Mladenov and Mr. ElAd for their informative briefings.

S/PV. 8375

The situation in the Middle East continues to
be a complex one requiring a significant collective
effort, first and foremost by the United Nations and its
Security Council, which is the main guarantor of the
international legal architecture.
In our view, strict adherence to international law
and to the spirit and letter of the Charter of the United
Nations constitutes a firm foundation for developing
a formula for resolving the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict. In that regard, we are seriously concerned
about the aggressive re-examination of previously
reached agreements, including some that have been
enshrined in Security Council resolutions. We believe
that any ideas and proposals in this area should be
based on relevant internationally accepted principles
and previously approved resolutions of the Security
Council, along with the Arab Peace Initiative and the
Madrid principles. Any plans or agreements, whatever
they are called, should be subordinate to the main goal
of stabilizing the situation in the region by arriving at a
just, long-term settlement of the Palestinian question as
a key item on the Middle East agenda.
We see that the Palestinian-Israeli situation
is steadily deteriorating. The lack of progress in
the political process has created a vacuum that is
being filled with violence, unilateral measures and
provocative rhetoric. We are not even supposed to
mention the fact that all the long-standing problems,
including settlement activity, are still a long way
from being solved. The gulf of misunderstanding and
mistrust is widening, undermining the prospects for a
resumption of negotiations.
We cannot help feeling alarmed by the escalating
tension around Gaza, the missiles launched at Israeli
settlements and the answering air strikes. We condemn
any displays of terror and urge all the parties to refrain
from confrontational attitudes. We appreciate the
efforts undertaken in accordance with United Nations
policies by Special Coordinator Mladenov and various
regional players to correct the current trends and help
Gazan residents. Needless to say, that assistance should
be carried out in close coordination with the legitimate
Palestinian authorities under President Abbas,
and should be integrated into the task of restoring
Palestinian unity.
We note the need for sustainable funding for the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, whose activities for decades

18-3255419/32

S/PV.8375

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

have had an important stabilizing effect in relieving the
burden of Palestinian refugees in Gaza and countries of
the Middle East. We want to point out that the issue of
refugees should be the subject of a bilateral PalestinianIsraeli dialogue, not the object of arbitrary decisions.
In the current circumstances, we urgently need to
mobilize efforts to revive the political process between
the Palestinians and the Israelis on the international
legal basis that we are all familiar with, which assumes
the implementation of a two-State solution as a result
of direct negotiations. Unilateral steps are not capable
of achieving a just and lasting peace designed to realize
Palestinians’ national aspirations and strengthen
Israel’s security. That is why we have kept our proposal
for holding a summit in Russia between the leaders
of Palestine and Israel on the table, with a view to
enabling us to end an extraordinarily dangerous and
prolonged impasse in the efforts to reach a PalestinianIsraeli settlement. Russia will continue to maintain its
principled position, supporting and developing relations
with all the parties in the framework of a positive
agenda. We support the Middle East Quartet’s active
resumption of its work of international mediators,
which is still a unique mediation format approved by
Security Council resolutions.
Progress in the business of resolving the acute
crises in the Middle East and North Africa can be made
only in a framework of broad cooperation and respect
for our obligations under international law. The joint
efforts of the country-guarantors of the Astana process
have proved in practice that developing a common
vision for a settlement in Syria is possible despite our
differences. We are open to collaborating with anyone
who is willing to join this process in a constructive
spirit. We firmly believe that together we can do a great
deal to end the bloodshed in Yemen, stabilize Libya,
support normalization in Iraq and unblock other crises.
The countries of the region have a rich cultural, human
and natural potential from which they can develop and
even flourish, but it is a potential that will be fully
realized only when interference in the region’s internal
affairs comes to an end.
The Russian Federation supports the formulation
of a positive and unifying agenda on the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question, for the Security
Council and the entire international community.
We believe that the Council’s meeting during our
presidency on a comprehensive review of the situation
in the Middle East and North Africa (see S/PV.8293)
20/32

18/10/2018

made an important contribution to the joint analysis of
the genesis of the conflicts in the region and the quest
for collective tools to resolve them.
The key to our collective work in the region should
be creating conditions conducive to strengthening
a general atmosphere of trust. This is crucial to the
relations between the Arab States, Israel and Iran.
We would like to remind the Council that in its
resolution 598 (1987), the Security Council instructed
the Secretary-General to work with the parties in the
region on measures for enhancing its security and
stability. This is a complicated issue, but we have to
begin working on it, and we are ready to provide every
possible assistance for it through our contacts with our
regional partners.
The ultimate goal should be establishing a regional
security architecture that is genuinely inclusive and is
intended to involve every State in that part of the world.
Our concept of strengthening security in the Persian
Gulf under international guarantees, which we could
begin to implement through a conference in which the
States of the subregion participate, is still relevant, and
in future could be expanded to other Middle Eastern
countries. In all these and other aspects, Russia is
ready to work with interested partners on an open,
impartial basis.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): I would like to start
by thanking Special Coordinator Mladenov for his
briefing and for his tireless efforts. The United Nations
and its agencies deserve to be commended for the work
that they are doing on the ground every day in a very
challenging environment. We stand fully behind their
efforts and their continued close consultations with the
parties. I thank Mr. Hagai El-Ad for being here today
and for sharing his honest assessment and valuable
perspectives, and more importantly for the integrity
and bravery of B’Tselem and many other civil-society
organizations in both Israel and Palestine. We commend
him for his conscience and encourage him to speak up
as an Israeli citizen. Personal insults have no place in
this Chamber.
We align ourselves with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union
later today.
Sweden has a long-standing engagement on the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict and a steadfast friendship
with the peoples of both Israel and Palestine. As a
member of the Security Council, we have consistently
18-32554

18/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

based our position on international law, including
international human rights and international
humanitarian law. While the proliferation of new and
re-emerging crises in the Middle East requires our
attention, we must maintain our active commitment to
resolving the Israel-Palestine conflict. The situation
is increasingly urgent as new generations grow up
in a reality marred by conflict. The shared vision of
the international community remains unchanged. It
consists of two States, Israel and Palestine, living side
by side in peace and security, with Jerusalem as the
future capital of those two States and the home of three
world religions. We must now return to a meaningful
and inclusive peace process, ending the occupation and
resolving all final status issues. If we are to achieve a
just and sustainable peace, it is critical to ensure that
any future peace plan is based on international law,
the relevant United Nations resolutions and previous
agreements. Final status issues can be taken off the
table only when they have been resolved through
negotiations between the parties.
The continued rapid deterioration of the situation
on the ground is destroying hopes for peace. A twoState solution is regrettably becoming more distant
by the day. Israelis and Palestinians alike have an
urgent responsibility to reverse those trends. We are
deeply concerned about the continuing rapid settlement
expansion in the occupied West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, and that includes the decision by the Israeli
authorities to advance plans for new settlement units
in the city of Hebron. We are also deeply concerned
about the demolition of homes, including the imminent
threat of demolition of Khan Al-Ahmar and the forcible
displacement of its inhabitants, a majority of whom are
children. The village is located in Area E-1, a location
of strategic interest for preserving the contiguity
of a Palestinian State. Settlements are illegal under
international law, and the evictions and demolitions
of homes that enable the policy to continue seriously
threaten the prospects for peace. We strongly condemn
all acts of violence against civilians, including acts of
terrorism. The use of disproportionate, lethal violence
in recent days and weeks is a tragedy. The crimes
must be investigated and those responsible must be
held accountable.
The peace process cannot merely be about ending
the occupation and the conflict. It must also be about
building peaceful and inclusive societies. A vibrant
civil society, particularly with the meaningful inclusion

S/PV. 8375

of women and young people, is critical to sustainable
peace. The shrinking space for civil society and the
possibilities for promoting human rights are a source
of great concern on both sides. On the Palestinian
side, laws are used to curtail freedom of expression,
and on the Israeli side, representatives of civil-society
organizations are delegitimized, creating obstacles for
them in carrying out their important work. We call on
both the Palestinian and Israeli leaderships to support,
respect and allow members of civil society to operate
and express their views freely.
In the so-called post-Oslo generation, few on
either side have any hope that peace is still possible.
We must show these young people that there is an
alternative to conflict, violence and a constantly
deteriorating situation. And the voices of young Israelis
and Palestinians must be heard, in line with resolution
2419 (2018). Both Israel and Palestine have been vocal
advocates for the full implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda and the meaningful inclusion
and engagement of women in the peace process. We
remain committed to supporting such efforts in every
way we can.
Mr. Mladenov has rightly put the Council on
high alert today. Gaza is on the verge of collapse. The
situation remains untenable and increasingly desperate.
Millions of people are caught between Hamas and other
militant groups on the one hand, and the Israeli policy
of closure on the other. The people of Gaza must not pay
the price for that long-standing crisis. We continue to
witness tragic events leading to regrettable loss of life.
All the parties must exercise maximum restraint, avoid
confrontation and take immediate steps to de-escalate.
We must also step up efforts to avoid a humanitarian
disaster. There is an urgent need for humanitarian
interventions with a quick, direct and immediate impact
on the daily lives of the people in need. All actors have
a responsibility in that regard.
There is an urgent need to lift the restrictions, secure
full and sustained access and movement to and from
Gaza and ensure unimpeded access for all humanitarian
actors, while maintaining respect for the legitimate
security concerns of Israel, Palestine and Egypt. The
efforts to achieve the full return of the Palestinian
Authority to Gaza must be redoubled. We support the
Egyptian-led efforts to achieve reconciliation and call
on all Palestinian factions to revitalize genuine attempts
to that end. Only reconciliation will lead to a unified

18-3255421/32

S/PV.8375

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

18/10/2018

Palestinian leadership and a reunification of Gaza and
the West Bank, including East Jerusalem.

be heard in the context of addressing the crises on
our agenda.

The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) was
established by the General Assembly and mandated
to provide assistance and protection to Palestinian
refugees across the region until a negotiated, lasting
and just solution to that issue was reached. UNRWA
not only delivers critical services and education but
plays a crucial role in ensuring stability in a region
seriously affected by conflict, terrorism and turmoil.
During the high-level week of the General Assembly,
Sweden, together with Jordan, Turkey, Japan, Germany
and the European Union, hosted a ministerial meeting
to mobilize political and financial support to UNRWA.
Together we managed to mobilize $122 million,
significantly reducing UNRWA’s deficit and enabling
the Agency’s schools to remain open throughout 2018.
Having now overcome the most immediate crisis, we
must shift our focus to the coming year. Much work
remains to be done to secure funding for 2019. We must
maintain the recent positive momentum and end the
Agency’s perpetual crisis mode by finding solutions for
more predictable and sustainable funding. UNRWA is
not part of the problem, it is part of the solution.

Turning to the situation on the ground, every
passing day confirms the tragic threefold observation
that we regularly make before the Council. First, the
false status quo before us masks a daily deterioration of
the situation that is linked in particular to the settlement
policy. Secondly, that situation has the potential to
degenerate into open crisis at any moment, as we have
been seeing in Gaza for months, and it also produces
its daily share of violence, including an incident that
recently claimed the lives of two Israelis and that we
condemned. Thirdly, when the prospects for peace
on the ground diminish, they do the same in people’s
minds and conversations, feeding into a particularly
dangerous vicious cycle. Last month was the twentyfifth anniversary of the Oslo Accords, and according to
opinion surveys, almost three quarters of Palestinians
now believe that their situation has worsened since the
Accords were signed. Today, only a small percentage of
Palestinians and Israelis still believe in the possibility
of a two-State solution. Generation by generation,
Palestinians and Israelis are losing hope for a peaceful
resolution of the conflict, which opens the door to
the worst possibility, the despair that is our common
enemy. That is why it is so important for the Israeli
and Palestinian authorities to preserve a pluralistic
and open space within their respective societies. The
democratic future of those societies depends on that
and on the possibility of dialogue between them.

In conclusion, we cannot allow the viability of
a two-State solution to move beyond our reach. We
must act, or we risk moving rapidly not only towards
perpetual occupation but towards a one-State reality.
That should not be in anyone’s interest. The Council,
and every one of its members, has a responsibility. Our
faith in a negotiated, just and fair two-State solution led
us to recognize the State of Palestine in 2014. It is not
too late to resolve this conflict. We must do everything
in our power to make sure that the hope of two States is
kept alive and that the vision of a just and lasting peace
in the Middle East is realized. We owe it to every young
Israeli and Palestinian. They deserve no less from us.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Nikolay Mladenov for
his briefing and his commitment day in and day out, and
to renew France’s support for him. I would also like to
commend Bolivia’s initiative in inviting Mr. Hagai ElAd, Executive Director of the Israeli non-governmental
organization B’Tselem, who has been doing remarkable
work under difficult conditions. It is an ongoing policy
of France to support opening the work of the Security
Council to the voices of civil society, which must
22/32

Any negotiations must take place within the
framework that I have just outlined, which is based
on international law and the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 478 (1980),
on Jerusalem.
Today, I would like to underscore two points, both
dictated by the urgency of what we are seeing on the
ground — the situation in Gaza, where we are once
again on the edge of a cliff, and the Israeli settlement
policy, which, through the case of Khan Al-Ahmar,
threatens to irreversibly undermine the possibility of a
two-State solution.
First, with regard to the situation in Gaza, for the
second time since the beginning of the summer the
Gaza Strip is on the verge of a new conflict, something
it has experienced three times in the past decade. In
that context, France calls on all actors to exercise
restraint. The rockets that were launched during the
18-32554

18/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

night of Tuesday and Wednesday from Gaza to Israel,
one of which hit a house in Beersheba, fortunately
without causing any casualties, are an extremely
worrying development. I want to say it again with the
greatest clarity: France condemns the indiscriminate
firing on Israeli territory, regardless of the perpetrators,
just as it condemns the use of incendiary devices and
the construction by Hamas of offensive tunnels, of
which a new one was dismantled again over the past
few days by Israeli forces.
Already in mid-August, the worst had been avoided
thanks to the efforts of Egypt and the steps taken by
the Special Coordinator. However, we know that if the
current situation continues, a large-scale escalation
cannot be definitively avoided, and if there is one, the
people of Gaza will once again pay the price. We must
therefore do everything we can to prevent it. It is up
to the Council to speak with a strong voice to prevent
an escalation by breaking a silence that is becoming
increasingly deafening and incomprehensible to the
world every day.
Those peaks in tension are arising in the context
of humanitarian collapse and political impasse in the
Gaza Strip. For more than six months, there has been a
series of acts of violence in Gaza against the backdrop
of a humanitarian crisis of unprecedented severity. The
toll of recurring demonstrations along the separation
barrier is appalling: more than 150 Palestinians have
been killed since 30 March in rallies fuelled by the
despair of the population. France has condemned the
disproportionate and indiscriminate use of force and
calls on Israel to respect the right of Palestinians to
demonstrate peacefully, on the one hand, and to live
up to its obligations to protect civilians in the context
of international humanitarian law, on the other hand.
We have also denounced the exploitation of the
demonstrations by Hamas and other armed groups and
their use in attempts to cross the separation barrier, as
seems to have been the case during last Friday’s rallies.
To restore hope among the people of Gaza in the short
term, we must respond to the humanitarian emergency.
The efforts of the Special Coordinator and all United
Nations agencies to rapidly improve the humanitarian
situation contribute significantly to this response. All
actors must coordinate their efforts in this regard.
Ultimately, only a lifting of the blockade, together with
the necessary security guarantees for Israel, can meet
the needs of the people. At the same time, the role of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine

S/PV. 8375

Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) remains essential,
particularly in Gaza, where two thirds of the population
are refugees. International drives have raised an
additional $120 million for UNRWA at the margins
of the General Assembly and must continue to do so.
France has played its part and intends to continue to do
so by doubling its contribution to the Agency for 2019.
The stakes are high both for the populations concerned
and for regional stability. Tensions since the start of the
school year, in particular in Gaza and Lebanon, attest
to that.
Finally, there can be no sustainable humanitarian
response to the crisis in Gaza without a political
solution, including the full return of the Palestinian
Authority to the territory. Gaza is not a landless
territory, and it cannot be dissociated from the question
of the Palestinian State in the context of the two-State
solution. We call on all parties to pursue dialogue in the
context of Egypt’s ongoing efforts, which we commend,
to relaunch the inter-Palestinian reconciliation process
within the framework of the agreement reached in
Cairo a year ago.
The gravity of the situation in Gaza should not
make us forget the severity of the situation in the West
Bank and Jerusalem, where the critical advances in
settlements are creating an irreversible situation before
our very eyes. We are close to the point of no return,
and if we are not careful, the two-State solution may
disappear before us, like a mirage in the desert. France’s
position is clear and unchanging: the settlements are
illegal under international law and counterproductive
because they destroy trust between the parties and
stoke tensions on the ground. They are accompanied
by worrisome developments in violence, including by
certain radical settlers. We have called for all light to
be shed on the death of a Palestinian woman last week
close to Nablus, which we condemned.
Today, I will focus on the case of Khan Al-Ahmar,
which has long been identified by the entire international
community as a red line. On 12 September, the Israeli
Government decided that it would demolish the
village. This decision could be implemented at any
time. Together with its main partners, France has
expressed its profound concern about this matter and
solemnly calls on the Israeli authorities not to proceed
with the demolition. The demolition of this Bedouin
village, which would result in the forced displacement
of its inhabitants, would contravene international
humanitarian law, in particular the Fourth Geneva

18-3255423/32

S/PV.8375

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Convention, as well as Council resolutions. I note that
several of the structures that are directly targeted,
including one school, have received European funding.
In addition to its humanitarian consequences, that
demolition would have potentially irreversible political
effects. It would pave the way for the settlement of
the so-called E-l area, which, as everyone knows, is
of strategic importance for the two-State solution.
It would separate the north and south of the West
Bank and isolate East Jerusalem from the rest of the
Palestinian territories. By destroying the continuity
of the Palestinian territories, it would make the twoState solution impossible and would instead favour a
strategy of de facto annexation of the West Bank by
Israel, which would be taking on a heavy responsibility
in terms of the history of both peoples.
France is a friend to both the Israelis and the
Palestinians. It has no other interest than peace in the
region and ensuring the possibility for the populations
concerned to live in safety and dignity. As we all know,
the destinies of the Israelis and the Palestinians are
intertwined; neither of the two peoples will achieve
their national aspirations in a sustainable way at the
expense of the other.
As I have said, there is no solution other than
a two-State solution, but there can be no two-State
solution without an agreement between the parties on
Jerusalem, and there can by no possible agreement on
Jerusalem outside internationally agreed parameters.
These parameters are not options or a menu that we can
pick and choose from; rather they are the cornerstone of
any peace process and any future negotiation. Moving
away from this framework would fuel tensions and
violence because of the symbolic, historic and religious
dimensions of Jerusalem, both for the Palestinians and
for the Israelis. It would also provide a space for all
radicals in the region, who want to see this political
conflict become a religious conflict, to rush into.
Given that risk, we have a collective responsibility in
the Council to act within the parameters that we have
defined together and which are recalled in resolution
2334 (2016), which was adopted almost two years ago.
France will spare no effort in that regard.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I want to join others
in thanking Special Coordinator Mr. Mladenov for his
briefing and for the work that he and his team do on the
ground. I want also to thank Mr. El-Ad. Like the French
and Swedish representatives, we think it is important
24/32

18/10/2018

that the voices of civil society can be heard in this
Chamber, and he was invited by the Security Council.
I wish to digress, if I may, to make a point about
non-Council-member speakers, building on the one I
made yesterday. This is an open debate. It vitiates the
point of an open debate if we cannot understand what
is said in the Chamber, no matter who it is said by. I
would therefore like to know at some point what the
Israeli Permanent Representative said to Mr. El-Ad
in Hebrew. I would also like to make a general point
that if speakers use a language for which there is no
interpretation, that the presidency of the day stop them
and ask them to speak in one of the Council’s — or the
Organization’s — six authorized languages.
Turning to the substance, I think Mr. Mladenov is
right to remind us that every month we come here and
talk about the same things while everything that we
have heard today about the region shows how desperate
and unsustainable the situation is. There are terrible,
cruel and sad stories of deaths and injuries on both
sides. These stories underscore the need for urgent
progress to end what is a useless cycle of violence and
a heartbreaking waste of life and ruined families. On
terrorism, to quote a famous playwright: “The gunmen
are not dying for the people; the people are dying for
the gunmen.” We ought to bear that in mind as well.
We fully respect Israel’s right to security. At the
same time, as many speakers have said today, the
situation in Gaza is unsustainable. There needs to be an
immediate improvement in the humanitarian situation.
We need political resolve to make these improvements.
The reconciliation agreement of 2017 was a good start,
but now all the Palestinian factions must implement that
agreement. We strongly support the efforts of Egypt
and the wider international community to secure this
goal with some urgency. And we strongly support the
return of the Palestinian Authority to administer Gaza.
We continue to encourage all parties to work together
to ensure that this objective is met.
Like other speakers, we remain deeply concerned
about the planned demolition of the village of Khan
Al-Ahmar. I take this opportunity to again call on
the Israeli Government not to go ahead with its plan
to demolish the village. The decision of the Israeli
Supreme Court did not mandate demolition, which
remains at the discretion of the Israeli Government.
We appeal to the Government not to proceed with the
demolition of this village, which is located in an area
18-32554

18/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of strategic importance for the contiguity of a future
Palestinian State. Its demolition threatens the prospects
for a two-State solution with Jerusalem as a shared
capital because, as others have said, it would pave the
way for building settlements in the E-1 area.
We have heard a lot of common themes from the
speakers today so I will not repeat them. I will just say
that the Special Coordinator asked us to echo his three
calls — for both sides to step back from the brink, for
them to uphold the 2014 ceasefire and for Hamas to
stop its provocations; for Israel to restore the delivery
of critical supplies and use proportionate responses in
their use of live fire; and for the Palestinian Authority
to not disengage from Gaza. I am happy to throw the
United Kingdom’s voice behind his calls today and to
make it crystal clear how strong our support is for the
Special Coordinator.
The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) was
mentioned. In this regard, I would just say that we
welcome the increase in donor contributions that was
announced on 27 September. They will help meet the
immediate needs of the Palestinian people, but in the
longer term UNRWA itself needs to continue to give
priority to the implementation of cost-saving reform
measures. We will continue to work closely with
UNRWA and other donors on the continuity of its
central services.
In conclusion, like France, we consider ourselves
to be a friend to both the Israelis and the Palestinians.
Like France, we believe that the destinies of these two
people are inextricably intertwined. Substantive peace
talks between the parties leading to a two-State solution
based on 1967 borders, which includes the West Bank
and Gaza, is the best way to end this conflict and ensure
a sustainable peace. It is the best way to ensure Israeli
security, which is absolutely vital, and to achieve a just,
fair, agreed and realistic solution to the Palestinian
refugee question, in line with Council resolution 1515
(2003). The United Kingdom will continue engaging
meaningfully to help bring this about.
Finally, I want to say that I have concentrated today
on subject matter that the Special Coordinator raised.
I think I am right to do so. Other speakers touched on
wider matters. I do not have time now to go into the
issue of child soldiers, but I would just like to put on
record that the United Kingdom shares the concerns
about these child soldiers.

S/PV. 8375

Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): I want to thank you, Madam President, for
giving me the floor. I also want to convey our appreciation
to the delegation of Bolivia for having included this
extremely important item in the programme of work of
its presidency in this month of October. I also wish to
thank Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process Mladenov for his excellent briefing today.
Despite the difficulties he faces, the collective work
that he represents has always been commendable.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is very
concerned about the brutal and ongoing events that,
for many years, have claimed numerous human lives
and e threatened the security in various places in the
Middle East, which is a situation that has led to massive
internal and external displacement of millions of
people in certain countries of the region, such as Syria,
Yemen, Lebanon and Libya, to name just a few. The
United Nations and the international community must
now find a sustainable solution to these conflicts, in
which warring parties have extinguished the hope of
the people, despite the fact that the passage of years has
shown that the conflicts can have no military solution.
On the Palestinian question, I would like to first
express our most heartfelt condolences to the conflicting
parties. We join them in solidarity over the thousands
of citizens who have lost their lives during the seven
decades of this long, tragic history, to which we have
always given due attention since our State’s inception.
Like other countries, Equatorial Guinea is dismayed
at the persistence of the conflict and the stalemate in
Israeli-Palestinian negotiations on conditions for the
creation of a Palestinian State.
In recent years, we have seen a massive increase
in violence in the region by parties to the conflict. The
improvised rockets from Gaza and the disproportionate
responses of the Israeli army frighten both sides. The
impact of those unnecessary exchanges has mired
the Palestinian population in Gaza in undesirable
living conditions, with destroyed infrastructure and
insufficient basic daily means of subsistence, including
an elevated rate of unemployment, mainly among
young people. These and other aspects of the situation
described in the media are the result of the insurgency
in an area dominated by fear and destruction, leading
to a precarious and unprosperous future for both sides.
But there is another reality that both Israelis and
Palestinian must recognize, whether they like it or

18-3255425/32

S/PV.8375

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

not — both peoples will always be there, side by side.
Accordingly, the parties would be well served to foster
a peaceful and harmonious coexistence. In this regard,
the Israeli and Palestinian leaders must engage in
political and moral analysis on the future they want for
their people, considering that the best future Israelis
can wish for their children necessarily involves the
creation of an independent Palestinian State, and a
future Palestinian State will not exist unless Israel’s
security is guaranteed.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is convinced of
the crucial role of the United Nations on the Palestinian
question. Since it was put on the agenda in 1947 up to
today, both the General Assembly and the Security
Council have taken very significant steps that could
have resolved the conflict, which is reflected in the
various important resolutions that have been adopted
on the topic. The implementation of these resolutions
and the effectiveness of the work of the United Nations
call for unreserved unity among the members of
the Council. History has demonstrated that Israelis
and Palestinians cannot easily resume negotiations,
let alone reach an agreement, if the Council and the
international community do not engage in a more
united and positive manner.
Ever since we began our membership of the
Council, we have called for the return of the Palestinian
Authority to Gaza. We believe that insecurity in that
densely populated enclave and tension with Israel
concerning that area are caused by the considerable
power vacuum. That vacuum, which contributes only to
the deterioration of local living conditions, could pave
the way for extremist organizations in the surrounding
areas to gain greater access to young people. That,
in turn, would increase the level of insecurity in the
region. In that regard, we again call on the international
community to provide greater support for the initiative
of Egypt and other international actors working on
intra-Palestinian reconciliation, while bearing in mind
that the peace agreement signed in October last year
between Hamas and Fatah has not been implemented.
We welcome the efforts of certain countries that
recently announced an increase in their contributions
to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which, because of
its ongoing financial crisis, is in danger of reducing the
number of important services it provides to millions of
Palestinian citizens.
26/32

18/10/2018

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the position
of Equatorial Guinea, which, in line with Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions, the Arab
Peace Initiative, the Madrid guiding principles, the
Quartet road map and other instruments, considers the
claims of the Palestinians, which are based on history,
to be just. We therefore reiterate our support for the
two-State solution, based on the 1967 borders, with
Jerusalem as its capital, which should be the subject of
negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians so as to
ensure a safe and peaceful coexistence between the two
States and harmony with other States of the region.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me
thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for a very
comprehensive and insightful briefing. I also thank
Mr. Hagai El-Ad, Executive Director of B’Tselem, for
his contribution.
I would also like to align myself with the
statement to be delivered later today on behalf of the
European Union.
Despite our constant calls for de-escalation in the
Middle East, there has, unfortunately, been no progress
at all. On the contrary, we have failed to prevent further
loss of life. Recent developments in the Gaza Strip, where
thousands of Palestinians have demonstrated, some of
them violently, are very worrying. Unfortunately, at least
six Palestinians were killed and hundreds injured. Once
again, we call on all sides to act with utmost restraint
in order to avoid further casualties. On the one hand,
Israel should respect the principle of proportionality
in its use of force. On the other, protests at the Gaza
border fence, fuelled by Hamas and the Islamic Jihad,
have led to violence, which affects both parties to the
conflict. Recurring rocket attacks from Gaza aimed
at Israel, as well as the launching of incendiary kites
and balloons from the Strip, which have been aimed at
nearby Israeli communities, are unacceptable and must
stop. Very worrying signals are also coming from the
West Bank, where a Palestinian woman was killed by
stone-throwing. On the Israeli side, three civilians have
also been killed in recent days and weeks, including two
Israelis killed by a Palestinian co-worker at the Barkan
Industrial Park. We firmly condemn such incidents and
call for a swift investigation to bring those responsible
to justice.
The humanitarian situation of 2 million people in
the Gaza Strip is still alarming. Limited access to basic
services, including health care, chronic energy crises
18-32554

18/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and the lack of fuel, can easily lead to the escalation of
social tensions that may destabilize the situation in the
region even further. In that regard, we commend the
efforts of Special Coordinator Mladenov to alleviate
the humanitarian crisis in the Strip, including the
fuel-delivery deal reached last week, thanks to his
engagement. The danger of Gaza’s collapse is real.
That is why we strongly urge all parties to de-escalate,
exercise maximum restraint and prevent incidents that
jeopardize the lives of both Palestinians and Israelis.
Our main goal and commitment should be the
resumption of a meaningful peace process. We still
believe that only by returning to meaningful bilateral
negotiations, based on the relevant United Nations
resolutions and international law, will it be possible to
bring positive input to the process. That is the only path
towards a two-State solution and the resolution of all
final-status issues. The creation of a political horizon,
as well as an appropriate framework for political
progress, will be possible only by working together
with our regional and international partners, starting
with the Middle East Quartet. We wish to especially
underline the engagement of the United States and its
peace proposal, which, when revealed, could help with
the reactivation of the Middle East peace process.
We support the two-State solution, under which
the national aspirations of both parties to the conflict
would be met, including the Palestinian right to selfdetermination and independence, as well as the Israeli
right to ensure its security. Unfortunately, the two-State
solution seems to be at risk of fading away. The likely
demolition of Khan Al-Ahmar in the very near future
and subsequent Israeli settlement plans, potentially
splitting the West Bank into two parts, would make the
two-State solution almost impossible.
We are closely following Egyptian-led discussions
on intra-Palestinian reconciliation and hope that
that process will be successful. We, therefore, urge
all Palestinian factions to work together to achieve
the sustainable development of that process, thereby
allowing the Palestinian Authority to resume its full
responsibilities in Gaza. One single and legitimate
Palestinian Authority could be an important step
towards ensuring the unity of a future Palestinian State
and providing a basis for a sustainable peace agreement.
In conclusion, let me underline the severe funding
difficulties of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East

S/PV. 8375

(UNRWA). Collective efforts by the international
community have enabled UNRWA to continue
providing essential services until the end of this year.
The termination of UNRWA’s important activities
could well cause instability and create a vacuum that
would serve only the extremists. We should do our
utmost to preserve the crucial role played by UNRWA
in the region.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Côte
d’Ivoire welcomes today’s open debate on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
We thank Special Coordinator Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, whose briefing has provided us with
the context surrounding the multiple and complex
challenges to peace and stability in a region notably
affected by the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We also
thank Mr. Hagai El-Ad for his briefing.
My delegation is concerned about the breakdown
in the relative lull in the conflict owing to renewed
violence between Israelis and Palestinians, particularly
in the Gaza Strip. Faced with this new outbreak of
violence, Côte d’Ivoire remains convinced that there
is no alternative to a negotiated solution to the IsraeliPalestinian crisis and urges the parties to exercise
restraint and refrain from unilateral actions that can
only damage and distance prospects for a peaceful
settlement of the crisis.
My country values both the security of the State of
Israel and the inalienable right of the Palestinian people
to self-determination. We reaffirm our firm support for
the two-State solution, namely, peaceful coexistence
within the 1967 borders. Consequently, Côte d’Ivoire
reiterates its call on the Israeli and Palestinian parties
to show restraint in order to preserve the achievements
won so far and create conditions favourable to a just
and lasting peace.
We need hardly recall that the consequences of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict have been disastrous for the
people living in the Gaza Strip. That unprecedented
humanitarian crisis is accompanied by a high youth
unemployment rate of up to 47 per cent, as well as by
incessant shortages of water and electricity. That is
why my delegation calls for the opening of negotiations
between Israelis and Palestinians with a view to lifting
the current blockade. We also encourage the Palestinian
parties, on the basis of enhanced cooperation, to pursue
dialogue for an effective return of the Palestinian

18-3255427/32

S/PV.8375

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Authority to Gaza, which would enable humanitarian
issues to be better addressed.
Moreover, Côte d’Ivoire remains concerned about
the budget deficit facing the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA). That situation jeopardizes the effectiveness
of the assistance and protection provided by that United
Nations agency to more than three million Palestinian
refugees. Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the pledges made by
donor countries on the sidelines of the general debate
of the General Assembly at its current session of
$122 million to UNRWA, which will enable it to fulfil
its mission.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire would like to assure
all stakeholders of its support for initiatives aimed
at promoting dialogue promoting the achievement
of lasting peace and stability between Israelis and
Palestinians, as well as throughout the region.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Allow me
to begin by thanking Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for
his comprehensive briefing. The Kingdom of the
Netherlands fully supports the Special Coordinator
in his efforts to prevent a catastrophe in Gaza, and
we thank him for his tireless efforts for peace aimed
at bringing the parties closer together, despite all
obvious obstacles.
Allow me to also thank Mr. El-Ad for his views on
the situation as a guest of the Council, and I would like
to underline the point made by our British colleague in
that regard. The Kingdom of the Netherlands is a longstanding donor to B’Tselem and we are proud of our
cooperation with that non-governmental organization.
The presence of a strong and vibrant civil society,
including human rights organizations like B’Tselem
that speak truth to power, is crucial for a democratic
and pluralistic society.
I align myself with the statement to be made later
by the observer of the European Union (EU). In my
statement today, I will focus on three key issues: the
West Bank, Gaza and the importance of a renewal of
the peace process.
My first point concerns the West Bank. Listening
to Mr. Mladenov and Mr. El-Ad, it struck me that
their briefings were packed with the latest troubling
developments on the West Bank. Those developments
raise concerns that the region is on a slippery slope,
sliding towards a one-State reality. The Kingdom of
28/32

18/10/2018

the Netherlands reiterates its opposition to Israel’s
settlement policy and to actions taken in that vein,
including demolitions and confiscations of EUfunded projects, evictions and the forced transfer of
local communities.
We are greatly concerned about the decision taken
on Sunday by the Israeli authorities to advance plans
to expand settlements in Hebron. Such settlements are
illegal under international law, constitute an obstacle
to peace, and threaten a two-State solution. The Israeli
settlement policy and the denial of opportunities for
Palestinian development in Area C make peace more
difficult. Khan Al-Ahmar, as others have said, is a case
in point. We are concerned that the planned demolition
and forced transfer of its inhabitants will undermine
confidence in a negotiated two-State solution. It will
also clear the way for further settlement expansion.
That is illustrated by the announcement of new houses
for settlements near Khan Al-Ahmar earlier this year
in May.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands condemns the
recent violent attacks in the West Bank, which led to
the loss of Israeli and Palestinian lives. Such attacks
illustrate the need for a sustainable solution that
provides peace and security for Israel and prevents the
resurgence of terrorism. Such a solution must provide
security for Palestinians, respect their rights and
demonstrate that the occupation is over. In short, we
need a two-State solution.
That brings me to my second point, concerning
Gaza, where the situation is a constant source of concern.
People in and around Gaza live a daily reality that no
one should have to endure. People there deserve a life
in which peace and security can be taken for granted.
Unfortunately, that is far from the current reality: early
on Wednesday morning, an Israeli family in Beersheba
narrowly escaped when they reached a bomb shelter
seconds before a rocket from Gaza hit their home. We
condemn the firing of rockets from Gaza. In response,
the Israel Defence Forces struck multiple targets in
Gaza, reportedly killing a 25-year-old Palestinian man.
We call on all actors involved to exercise restraint in
order to prevent a further escalation. Closing border
crossings and reducing the fishing zone is not the
answer and will only cause the humanitarian situation
in Gaza to deteriorate further.
We are concerned by the growing violence
during protests at the border and the continued use
18-32554

18/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of incendiary balloons and kites, as well as tunnel
activity. The Kingdom of the Netherlands calls upon
all relevant Palestinian parties to ensure that protests
remain peaceful, especially so that children are not
put in harm’s way. We also repeat our call on Israel
to ensure that its responses are proportionate and
necessary at all times, in line with Israel’s obligations
under international law. An independent and transparent
investigation into the events that led to so many victims
over the past months is needed. We call upon Israel to
finalize its own investigation as soon as possible and
provide full transparency on its findings.
We fully support the efforts of Mr. Mladenov to
improve the humanitarian and economic situation in
Gaza. We call upon all parties to create an environment
in which such plans can be implemented. We join the
calls of others upon the parties concerned to continue
their cooperation with the Special Coordinator and
to make sure that no effort is spared to improve the
humanitarian situation in Gaza. The implementation of
his plans will bring sorely needed relief to Gaza.
Ultimately, a sustainable solution is needed
to alleviate living conditions in Gaza. That means
intra-Palestinian reconciliation leading to the return of
the Palestinian Authority to Gaza. We welcome ongoing
Egyptian efforts to make that a reality.
We continue to support the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA). The services offered by UNRWA
provide opportunity, hope and dignity for Palestine
refugees. This year, with the help of many old and
new donors from the region and globally, UNRWA
managed to broaden its support base. Together with
other donors, we will continue to work with UNRWA
to close the remaining gap for this year. We encourage
all partners of UNRWA to translate this year’s generous
contributions into predictable, multi-annual support.
My third point concerns the renewal of the peace
process. Over the past years, we have noted many
threats to the peace process. I regret that today we
have been forced to discuss many negative steps that
have been taken by all parties to the conflict. Again,
we are only discussing measures needed to manage the
conflict. However, conflict management is not what we
are here for. We, the Council, the United Nations and
both sides of the conflict have the same goal — to end
the conflict. We remain firmly committed to that goal
and call on all parties to combine efforts, return to the

S/PV. 8375

negotiation table and restart a genuine peace process
leading to a two-State solution.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia.
First of all, I thank Mr. Mladenov for his briefing
today. I also thank Mr. El-Ad, and, on behalf of the
Security Council, apologize to him for the ill-treatment
received by him today. I initially wanted to return to
what happened to make a clarification concerning
the human rights record of the Plurinational State of
Bolivia, of which we are very proud, but that would
show a lack of respect to the State and the people of
Palestine. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the
human rights of the Palestinians, which continue to
be violated by the Israeli occupation, and not those of
the Bolivians.
Accordingly, I will begin my statement by
expressing Bolivia’s firm rejection of the extreme
violence with which the Israeli Defence Forces have
been repressing the Palestinian civilian population.
Such actions, which are unjustified no matter where
they occur, only undermine the achievement of a longsought, just and lasting peace for the Palestinian people,
who have been living under the Israeli siege for more
than 70 years. The illegal actions of the Government
of Israel, including its settlement policies in the
occupied Palestinian territories, constitute an obstacle
and a threat to stability in the region, and, as members
of the Security Council, we bear the unavoidable
responsibility to act in order to prevent Israel from
continuing to enjoy impunity as a State.
In that order of priorities, we categorically reject
the clear intention of the Israeli Government to alter
the demographic composition and territorial character
of the State of Palestine, including East Jerusalem,
which has been under occupation since 1967. All such
actions are illegal and constitute a violation of the
basic principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
including the inadmissibility of the acquisition of
territory by force, as reaffirmed in resolution 2334
(2016), on the legal invalidity of Israeli settlements
in occupied Palestinian territories, which constitute a
flagrant violation of international law.
Bolivia expresses its unequivocal rejection of
Israel’s expansionist and annexationist policy. One such
example of that policy is illustrated by Israel’s plan
to demolish the Bedouin-Palestinian village of Khan

18-3255429/32

S/PV.8375

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

18/10/2018

Al-Ahmar, located in Area C to the north-east of East
Jerusalem in the West Bank, where the Israeli Defence
Forces forcibly entered with heavy equipment to
demolish the homes of almost 200 Palestinian civilians,
who will be relocated by force and compelled to
abandon their homes, their daily lives and their history.
We therefore call on the international community,
including the Security Council, not to recognize any
change whatsoever to the 1967 borders. The Gaza Strip
and the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, constitute
a single territory.

I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.

We also demand that the Government of Israel
end the blockade of the Gaza Strip, which has been
living under a regime of collective punishment for 11
years, which deprives Palestinians of access to water
and sanitation, infringes on their human right to health
care and restricts their access to decent employment
and the freedom of movement, together with a long list
of violations that everyone in this Chamber has been
witness to month after month and year after year.

Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): Let
me begin by commending the Permanent Mission of
Bolivia on its competent management of the work of
the Security Council for the month of October. I wish
it every success. I also congratulate the delegation of
the United States on its outstanding efforts during its
presidency of the Council last month.

As it has on previous occasions, Bolivia expresses
its firm commitment to all international efforts leading
to a peaceful solution to the occupation of Palestine. In
that regard, we join in supporting initiatives, such as
the Quartet road map, the Madrid principles, the Arab
Peace Initiative and others, that would ensure a just and
lasting peace in which both peoples could live within
recognized and secure borders.
I also sincerely commend the humanitarian work
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East, benefiting more
than 5 million Palestinian refugees in the West Bank,
East Jerusalem, Gaza, Jordan, Lebanon and Syria.
We call on the States Members of the Organization
to continue making their valuable contributions to
the Agency so that it can finally overcome its current
crisis, which is only resulting in the deterioration of the
quality of life of all Palestinian refugees.
Bolivia believes that the only option for a long-term
solution to the occupation is the two-State solution,
whereby a free, sovereign and independent Palestinian
State within the pre-1967 internationally recognized
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, can finally
be established, pursuant to the relevant Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
30/32

I also wish to inform all concerned that, with the
consent of the members of the Security Council, I will
suspend this meeting between 1.20 p.m. and 3 p.m.
I now give the floor to the representative of Lebanon.

A few weeks ago, the leaders of our States met
at the high-level segment of the seventy-third session
of the General Assembly. The statements of many of
them reflected the real concerns of the international
community about the future of multilateralism and
the urgent need to maintain, defend and promote. The
clearest manifestation of that need is embodied today in
the Palestinian question.
The intensity, immensity and complexity
of conflicts and tensions in the Middle East are
growing at an unprecedented rate. The Palestinian
question is currently at a critical juncture. In fact,
the agreed principles for a political solution, based on
international law and many international resolutions,
are being systematically undermined. We must raise
our voices from this very Chamber to underscore
that multilateralism is the only way to resolve the
problems facing the world, on top of which is the
Palestinian question.
Lebanon has always considered the two-State
solution to be the only sustainable political solution to
this conflict, based on all resolutions of international
legitimacy. That entails ending the occupation and
establishing an independent State of Palestine within the
1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, while
fully ensuring the right of return of Palestinian refugees
in accordance with General Assembly resolution 194
(III). The foundations of just and comprehensive peace
are completely embodied in the Arab Peace Initiative.
18-32554

18/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Peace is long overdue, and the Security Council must
use its influence, authority and tools to achieve peace.
Despite delays, Lebanon is working hard to form
a Government of national unity following the most
recent parliamentary elections. We hope that the
new Government will represent another important
step towards strengthening the State institutional
structure. Lebanon is currently undertaking a series
of important commitments, in particular by following
up on the recommendations emanating from the
support conferences held earlier this year in Rome,
Paris and Brussels. Lebanon seriously looks forward
to implementing those recommendations meaningfully
and optimally in order to support its security
and economy.
Everyone knows that Lebanon continues to
face major challenges as a result of regional crises,
in particular the Syrian crisis. We continue to host
more than 1.5 million displaced Syrians, which is
significantly straining our economy, society, security
and infrastructure.
The funding crisis of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
puts more pressure on Lebanon, as it continues to host
hundreds of thousands of Palestinian refugees, while
the chances of a political solution for the Palestinian
question are dwindling, as we have heard today. In
addition, Israel continues to violate the sovereignty of
Lebanon and threatens its security through its ongoing
occupation of Lebanese territory and daily air, land and
sea violations.
On 31 August, the Council sent a strong message
of support on the stability and sovereignty of Lebanon
by adopting resolution 2433 (2018). That resolution
once again reflected the united position of the Council
and the international community on the priority need
to preserve the stability of Lebanon by maintaining
the mandate of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL). The Government of Lebanon
stresses its full commitment to resolution 1701 (2006).
In that context, the Lebanese Armed Forces are making
great efforts to build and develop their capacities in
order to ensure that they fulfil their role completely.
They are cooperating on an ongoing basis with UNIFIL
to implement Lebanon’s relevant commitments,
hoping to reach a permanent ceasefire, as stipulated in
the resolution.

S/PV. 8375

Lebanon is working with the Tripartite Mechanism
to decrease tensions and preserve the security and
stability of its southern borders. Despite that, in the
General Assembly last month (see A/73/PV.10), the
Prime Minister of Israel implicitly threatened to target
Lebanese civilian and Government facilities, such as
the international airport and national stadium. His
Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs responded
to those threats by organizing a field visit for the
diplomatic corps in Lebanon.
Nevertheless, Lebanon stresses from this Chamber
the need for the Council and the Organization to
prevent Israel from using any pretext to launching new
aggression against Lebanon, which threatens the lives,
safety and future of the Lebanese people.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Tayel (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his
briefing today and for his ongoing efforts to achieve
a settlement to the Palestine question. I also thank
Mr. Hagai El-Ad for his participation in today’s meeting
and his comprehensive and detailed briefing.
I do not believe that anyone present in the Council
was surprised by the mention of violations against the
Palestinian people under occupation or the injustice
to which they are subjected. Council members and
the international community are well aware of those
violations. While some may feel bored by hearing of
the same old problems, practices and various kinds
of suffering periodically over and over again in the
Council for long years, it is important for us to bear
in mind that what we hear is not mere rhetoric or
meaningless numbers and statistics. It is a reality being
lived by Palestinian families on the ground, whose
homes have been demolished or whose land has been
taken in favour of the settlements. It is a reality being
lived by entire generations of Palestinian refugees
scattered throughout the world —generations born and
live without a homeland, or under siege, or behind bars.
The Palestinian question has existed as long as
the Council itself. Contrary to what some may believe,
that is not due to division or inaction on the part of
the Council. The resolutions adopted by the Council
since 1967 have established a framework agreed by the
international community and in line with international
law and human conscience, beginning with resolution
242 (1967) up to resolution 2334 (2016), which contains

18-3255431/32

S/PV.8375

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

decisive elements for achieving a settlement, including
the 4 June 1967 borders and the status of Al-Quds
Al-Sharif within the two-State solution, in addition to
clear law provisions with regard to settlements, homes
demolition and the need to restart direct negotiations
between the Palestinian and Israeli sides.
In that regard, it is important to reiterate that
those decisive factors have not disappeared or expired
with the passing of time. They constitute inalienable
rights. I note that the issue at hand has nothing to do
with seeking a solution. A solution already exists that
is known and conforms to the legal and humanitarian
principles that we all acknowledge. What is lacking
is the will to implement the solution and sometimes
the political will. I recall the fact that a commitment
to rights has never been the cause of the failure of a
political settlement. On the contrary, forgetting and
attempting to circumvent rights is the cause for the
failure of the international community to achieve peace
in years past.
The humanitarian tragedy endured for years
in the Gaza Strip is a grave situation that is the
consequence of the ongoing occupation and the failure
to uphold international law. Gaza is an integral part
of the Palestinian territories, and the issue of Gaza
cannot be addressed separately from the political
issue as a whole. The crisis in Gaza was not born in
a vacuum. At this point, I wish to warn of significant
pressures being applied on the residents of Gaza and
of a potential explosion of the situation there as a
consequence of the energy crisis, the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) crisis, confrontations with the
Israeli security forces that claim the lives of dozens of
Palestinians, or the obstacles to movement in and out
of Gaza Strip.
In that regard, Egypt is addressing the crisis based
on its principled humanitarian commitment to and in
solidarity with our Palestinian brothers. Despite the
security conditions and the lack of legal responsibility,

32/32

18/10/2018

we have opened the Rafah crossing for individuals
in order to ease the crisis. That is an exceptional
measure, but it is not enough if Israel fails to uphold
its responsibilities under international law and if the
Palestinian Authority fails to establish its authority
throughout the Gaza Strip. Egypt has also made
diligent efforts to prevent further clashes in Gaza. In
that regard, we thank Special Coordinator Mladenov
for supporting such efforts.
We continue to call for an end to the Israeli
occupation of Palestinian territories, and on Palestinian
parties to accelerate their response to Egypt’s efforts to
promote reconciliation. I also call on the international
community and members of the Council, particularly
those with the greatest influence, to support those
efforts and to gradually build on them, particularly
the steps already taken by the Palestinian National
Authority to control the crossings in the Gaza Strip. It
is important to consider how to build on that and to
benefit from previous experiences regarding movement
to and from the Gaza Strip.
In conclusion, we embrace any meaningful
initiative for a comprehensive political settlement in
the coming period. We stand ready to support any such
initiatives, both politically and practically. We call
on the Israelis and the Palestinians to reciprocate by
making efforts based on upholding the legitimate rights
of the Palestinian people, in line with the resolutions
previously mentioned. We reiterate that the Palestinian
question remains the pivotal issue in the region. If any
ideas or efforts are to achieve success, it is important
not to overlook that reality or link the issue to other
arrangements in the region.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are still
a number of speakers remaining on my list for this
meeting. Given the lateness of the hour, I intend, with
the concurrence of the members of the Council, to
suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.20 p.m.

18-32554
