UNITED NATIONS / NATIONS UNIES

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS

916

FIFTEENTH YEAR
th MEETING: 91 10 DECEMBER 1960
erne SEANCE: 9/10 DECEMBRE 1960
QUINZIEME ANNEE

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
DOCUMENTS OFFICIBLS
NEW

YORK

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/916)..... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1
1

Letter dated 13 July 1960 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/438t):
Urgent measures in connexion with the latest events in the Congo:
Note by the Secretary-General (S/4571 and Add.l);
Statement dated 6 December 1960 by the Government of the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics concerning the situation in the Congo
(S/4573)
,..............................

1

TABLE DES MATIERES
Ordre du jour provisoire (S/Agenda/916)

.

Adoption de l'ordre du jour

.

','

1
1

Lettre, en date du 13 juillet 1960, adressee par le Secretaire general au
President du Conseil de securite (S/4381):
Mesures urgentes a prendre eu egard aux derniers evenements survenus
au Congo:
Note du Secretaire general (S/4571 et Add. 1) ;
Declaration du Gouvernement de l'Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques, en date du 6 decembre 1960, concernant la situation
au Congo (S/4573)
.

(3A P:' )

1

SjPV.916

NOTE
Relevant documents not reproduced in full in the records of the meetings of
the Security Council are published in quarterly supplements to the Ojficial Records.
Symbols of United Natio?Js docll·ments m·e c01nposed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol bldicates a ?"eference to a United
N atimls doctf.ments.

*

*

*

Les documents pertinellts qui ne sont pas reproduits in extenso dans les
comptes rendus des seances du Conseil de securite sont publies dans des supplements trimestriels aux Docum.ents ojfieiels.
Les cotes des documents de l'Organisation des Na.tions U?Jies se co'mposent
de lettres tliajllscllles et de chiffres. La simple mention d'llne cote da.ns un te.'/;te
signili.e qu'il s'agit d'un document de l'Organisation.

NINE HUNDRED AND SIXTEENTH MEETING
Held in New York, on Friday, 9 December 1960, at 7.30 p.m.

NEUF CENT SEIZIEME SEANCE
Tenue a New York, le vendredi 9 decembre 1960, a 19 h 30.

President: Mr. V. ZORIN (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) .

President: M. V. ZORINE (Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Ceylon, China, Ecuador, France, Italy,
Poland, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
Un;ted Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America.

Presents: Les representants des Etats suivants:
Argentine, Ceylan, Chine, Equateur, Etats-Unis d'Amerique, France, Italie, Pologne, Royaume-Uni de Grande-Bretagne et d'Irlande du Nord, 'l\misie, Union des
Republiques socialistes sovietiques.

Provisional agenda (SI Agenda/916)

Ordre dn jour provisoire (SI Agenda/916)

1. Adoption of the Agenda.
2. Letter dated. 13 July 1960 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed. to the President of the Security
Council (S/4381):
Urgent measures in connexion with the latest
events in the Congo:
Note by the Secretary-General (S/4571 and
Add.1);
.
Statement dated. 6 December 1960 by the
Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics concerning the situation in the Congo
(S/4573).

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.
2. Lettre, en date du 13 juillet 1960, adressee par le
Secretaire general au President du Conseil de securite (S/4381):
Mesures urgentes a prendre eu egard aux derniers evenement5 survenus au Congo:
Note du Secretaire general (S/4571 et Add.1);

Adoption of the agenda

Adoption de l'ordre du jour

Declaration du Gouvernement de l'Union des
Republiques socialistes sovietiques, en date du
6 decembre 1960, concernant la situation au
Congo (S/4573).

L'ordre d1t jour est: adopte.

The agenda was, adopted.
Letter dated 13 July 1960 from the Secretary.
General addressed to the Presiflent of the Secnrity
CouncU (S/4381)

Lettre, en date du 13 juillet 1960, adressoo par le
Secretaire general an President du CooseU de
secnrite (8/4381)

Urgent measures in connexion with the latest
events in the Congo:

Mesures urgentes it prendre eu egard aox derniers
evenements survenus au Congo:

Note by the Secretary-Genera1 (8/4571 and
Add.l) ;

Note du Secretaire general (8/4571 et Add.I);

Statement dated 6 December 1960 by the Gov.
ernment of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics concerning the situation in the
Congo (S/4573)

Declaration du Gouvernement de l'Union des
Republiques socialistes sovietiques, en date
du 6 decembre 1960, coneernant la situation
au Congo (S/4573)

1. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): In
accordance with the decisions taken earlier by the
Security Council, I invite the representatives of Mali,
Guinea, the Republic of the Congo (Leopoldville),
Indonesia, Cameroun, Yugoslavia, India and the United
Arab Republic to take seats at the Council table.

1. Le PRESIDENT (tradttit du russe): Conformement aux decisions precedentes du Conseil de securite,
j'invite les representants du Mali, de la Guinee, de la
Republique du Congo (Uopoldville), de l'Indonesie,
du Cameroun, de la Yougoslavie, de l'Inde et de la
Republique arabe unie a. prendre place a la table du
Conseil.
Sur !'invitation du President, M. Mamadou Aw
(Mali), M. Toure Ismael (Guinee), M. Mario Cardoso
(Congo [LeopoldvilleJ), M. Sukardjo Wirjopranoto
(Indonesie), M. Joseph Owono (Cameroun), M. Miso
Pavicevic (Yougoslavie) , M. Krishna Menon (Inde)
et M. Mahmoud Fawzi (Republique ambe unie)
prennent place a la table du Conseil.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mamadou Aw
(Mali), Mr. Toure Ismael (Gttinea) , Mr. Mario
Cardoso (Congo, Leopoldville), Mr. Su.kardjo Wirjopranoto (Indonesia), Mr. Joseph Owono (Came1'mm),
Mr. ¥iso Pavicevic (Yugoslavia), Mr: Krish,na Menon
(Indta.) .and Mr. Mahmoud Fa-zuzi (Umted Amb
Republic), took places at the Security Council table.
1

2. The PRESIDENT (tratlslated from Russia.n):
I have also received a letter from the Chairman of the
Moroccan delegation [S/4591] asking to be allowed to
participate in the COl!ncil's discussion of the question
on its agenda.
3. If there is no objection, I shall invite the Moroccan
representative to take a seat at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. M'hamt11l.ed
Bo-ucetta (Morocco) took a· pla.ce at the Security
C(mncU table.
4. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian):
The Council will now continue its discussion of the item
on its agenda. Before I call on the first speaker 011 my
list-the United States representative-I shall, with his
permission, give the floor to the Secretary-Genenal,
who wishes to present some information to us.

2. Le PRESIDENT (trad-uit du rIMse): En outre,
rai rec;u une lettre du chef de la delegation du Maroc
[Sj4591] dans laquelle il demande l'autorisation du
Conseil de securite de participer a la discussion de la
question a I'ordre du jour.
3. S'it n'y a pas d'objection, j'inviterai le representant
du Maroc a prendre place a la table du Conseil.
Sur l'invitat·im~ d1t President, M. M'ham'med BOHcetta (.I.\'1o,roc) frretld place a la. table du. Cotlsrfil.
4. Le PRESIDENT (traduit d'lt russe): Le Conseil
continue maintenant l'examen de la question qui figure
a l'ordre du jour. Avant de donner la parole au premier
Ol'ateur qui figure Slir la liste, c'est-a.-dire au representant des Etats-Unis, et avec son assentiment, je
donnerai la parole au Secretaire general qui desire faire
une communication au Conseil.
.5. Le SECRETAIRE GENERAL (tnuil!.it de l'Q.1~­
glais): Le representant de I'Union sovietique au Conseil de securite m'a demande cet apres-midi de fournir
d'urgence, a la reunion de ce soir, des renseignements
complets an sujet d'une question tra!tee dans le rapport
touchant la situation actuelle a. Stanleyville [S/4590]
que m'a adresse mon representant special au Congo.

5. The SECRETARY-GENERAL: The representative of the Soviet Union to the Security Council
addressed a request to me this aftemoon to submit
urgently to this evenings meeting of the Security Council complete information in regard to a subject which
is described in the report, on the current situation in
Stanleyville, [S/4590], from my Special Representative
in the Congo.
6. No report has been made by me in regard to this
matter, as it is still under consideration in Leopoldville.
In this respect, I follow a rule consistently maintained
in this as in o~er United Nations bodies. Practically
daily difficulties and conflicts arise. We do not trouble
the General Assembly and Security Council with them,
unless we have first tried to find a satisfactory solution
without recourse to the authority of those organs.
Another approach would submit them to a meaningless
burden without adding to the efficiency of the Organization. However, the facts of this matter are as follows.

6. Si je n'ai pas soumis de rapport sur cette question,
c'est qu'elle est encore en cours d'e..xamen a Leopoldville. J'ai suivi a cet egard une regIe bien etablie du
Conseil et d'autres organes des Nations Unies. Presque
chaque jour des difficultes et des conflits surgissent.
Nous ne dera.!lgerons pas l'Assemblee generale ou le
Conseil de securite a leur sujet avant d'avoir essaye
de trouver une solution satisfaisante sans recourir a
leur autorite. Agir autrement serait accroitre inutilement le volume de travail de ces organismes, sans rien
ajouter a l'efficacite de I'Organisatiol1. Quoi qu'il en
soit, voici ce dont il s'agit.
7. Le representant special du Secretaire general a
re~u confirmation du fait que, conformement a certaines
rumeurs, l'administrateur en chef de la stirete avait
envoye le 5 decembre a I'OTRACO, organisation de
transports para-etatique, un ordre limitant le transport
du mate.iet et des vehicules militaires de la Force des
Nations Unies au Congo. Des que le representant special a eu connaissat'lce de l'affaire, il a engage des discussions avec les autorites locales interessees et, n'ayant
pas rec;u satisfaction, a dresse aujourd'hui la lettre
suivante au President de la Republique:
"J'ai l'honneur d'attirer votre attention sur la copie
ci-jointe d'un ordre emis a l'OTRACO par l'administrateur en chef de la stirete, limitant le transport
des produits strategiques ell du materiel militaire et
des vehicules de la Force des Nations Unies au
Congo.
"Cet ordre constitue une intervention dans l'exercice des devoirs essentiels de la Force au Congo et
son effet immediat a ete d'empecher l'envoi de matenel essentiel pour lequel des dispositions doivent
etre prises avec rOTRACO, aujourd'hui meme,
vendredi 9 decembre 1960.
"Je n'ai pas besoin de souligner que cet ordre
represente une violation flagrante de l'Accord du
27 juillet 1960, signe par M. Bunche et M. Bomboko,
garantissant la liberte de mouvements a rinterieur du
pays pour la Force, et qu'il est egalement en contradiction avec les Articles 25 et 49 de la Charte des
Nations Unies.

7. The Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral received confirmation that, as rumoured, on
5 December an order had been issued to OTRACO,
a parastatal transport organization, by the Administrateur en chef de la stirete restricting the transport
of military material and vehicles of the United Nations
Force in the Congo. As soon as the Special Representative learned about this matter, he began discussions
with the local authorities concerned and finally, not
having received satisfaction, he today addressed the
following letter to the President of the Republic:
"I have the honor to invite your attention to the
enclosed copy of an order issued to OTRACO by
the Administrateur en chef de la stirete restricting
the transport of the strategic or military material and
vehicles of the United Nations Force in the Congo.
"This order represents an interference in the fulfilment by the Force of its essential functions in the
Congo, and the immediate effect has been to prevent
the shipment of essential material as to which
arrangements must be made with OTRACO by
today, Friday, 9 December 1960.
"I need not point out that the order also represents a flagrant violation of the agreement of 27 July
1960, signed by Mr. Bunche and Mr. Bomboko,
guaranteeting la lwerte de mouvement a l'interieur
du pays pour la force, and that it is likewise in
contradiction of Articles 25 and 49 of the United
Nations Charter.

2

"Etant donne que les representations faites a
M. Bomboko et a M. Nendaka n'ont amene aucune
annulation de l'ordre, il me faut porter de fac;on
urgente a votre attentioncette question pour action
immediate. Vous comprendrez I'urgence de l'annulation de cet ordre si nous vouloI1s eviter la necessite
d'en referer au Secretaire general pour qu'il attire
l'attention du Conseil de securite actuellement en
session."
b. Par la suite, j'ai ete informe que des discussions a
ce sujet etaient encore en cours et qu~il Hait possible
que l'ordre £Ut annule dans un avenir' assez rapproche.
Sans tenir compte de cet ordre, le Commandement des
Nations Unies continue cl. faire transporter ses approvisionnements dans les docks et prepare leur envoi
vel'S I'interieur, qui s'effectuera, on l'espere, dans les
conditions prevues. Il va sans dire qtie, si les mouvements des approvi,;ionnements de l'Organisation des
Nations Unies devaient etre entraves par tme -intervention directe, je ne manquerais pas d'en informer le
Conseil de securite.
9. M. WADSvVORTH (Etats-Unis d'Amerique)
[traduit de l'angl.ais]: J'avais espere que la presente
discussion au Conseil de securite de la situation au
Congo pourt"ait avoir un role utile en apportant la paix
et la securite au Congo et en permettant I'Hablis,sement,
dans ce pays, de conditions favorables au bien-etre du
peuple congolais. Ce sont la les buts de 1'0rganisation
des Nations Unies et egalement ceux du Gouvernement
des Etats-Unis.
10. Toutefois, comme c'cst le Gouvernement de
l'Union sovietique qui a demandela convocation de
ces reunions du Conseil de securite, je regrette sincerement que le representant de ce pays ait montre clairement que les fins qu'il poursuit n'etaient en aucune
fac;on constructives. Sous le pretexte de preoccupations
htunanitaires, et fidele a sa methode, l'Union sovietique
soumet de nouveau, pour le Congo, des propositions
qui ne peuvent qu'entrainer le chaos et conduire a la
domination sovietique dans ce pays. A plusieurs
reprises, au cours des mois ecoules, le Conseil a rejefe
a une majorite ecrasante des propositions de meme
nature et l'Assemblee generale a fait de meme.
11. VUnion sovietique a poursuivi avec persistance
ses efforts pour s'assurer la haute main au Congo.
Elle a, sans se lasser, continue a soumettre a l'ONU
des propositions destinees a affaiblir les forces qui
cherchent a retablir la stabilite au Congo: EUe a pris
encore, soit ouvertement, soit clandestinement, d'autres
mesures- qui toutes visaient a ce meme- but.
12. Se fondani probablement sur le :ptincipe selon
lequel la meilleure methode de defense 'est I'attaque,
M. Zorine a crie "au complot". Il a pretendu que les
Etats-Unis provoquaient savarilment les evenements
dansquelque vaste ma~hination -aU Congo. Il accus~
notamment l'ambassade des Etats-Unis a Leopoldville
d'etre l'instigatrice de menees c~iminelles an Congo.
C'est la, a mon avis, une allegation etninge,mais peut-etre comprehensible, de la part d'un homme qui remplissait les fonctions d'ambassadeur de l'URSS a
Prague, en 1948, lors du coup monte, sous la direction
de l'Union sovietique, contre le got].vernement democratique de Tchecoslovaquie.
13. Mais, s'il faut en croire le representant sovietique;
queUes auraient ete les intrigues ourdies au Congo par
cette conspiration des Etats-Unis? _EUe aur.ait comporte
une succession de manceuvres aussi inconcevables que
fantastiques. Les Etats-Unis auraietit persu~de tout
d'abord les BeIges d'accorder l'independance au Congo.

"As representations made to Mr. Bomboko and
:Mr. Nendaka have not brought Gbout a recission of
the order, I must urgently bring the matter to your
notice for immediate action. You will appreciate the
urgency of the cancellation of the order so as to
obviate the necessity of my referring it to the Secretary-General for the attention of the Security Council now in session."
8. I have subsequently been informed that discussions
concerning this matter are still going on and that the
possibility of rescinding the order does not seem too
distant. Irrespective of the order, the United Nations
Command is as usual bringing its supplies to the docks
and is preparing for shipment which it is presumed
will be undertaken as scheduled. Of course, I shall
infornl· the Security Council if direct interference with
the movement of United Nations supplies should occur.

9. Mr. WADSWORTH (United States of America):
It has been my hope that the present Security Council
discussion of the Congo situation could be made to
serve the useful purpose of promoting peace and
security in the Congo, and the establishment of conditions there which would advance the welfare of the
Congolese people. These are the objectives of the
United Nations and they are the objectives of the
United States Government as well.
10. However, it is the Soviet Union that has requested
these meetings of the Security Council and I sincerely
regret that the Soviet representative has made it clear
that he does not have constructive purposes in view.
Under a- mask of humanitarian concern, he is again
proposing the Soviet pattern for chaos in the Congo
leading to Soviet domination. This Council has, during
these past few months, overwhelmingly rejected such
proposals on previous occasions and so has the General
Assembly.

11. The Soviet Union has persistently pursued its
efforts to gain control in the Congo. Over and over
again they have made proposals in the United Nations
designed to weaken the forces for stability in the Congo.
They have taken other steps, some open, some clandestine, to the same end.
12. On the basis, presumably, that the best defence
is -to attack, Mr. Zorin has cried "plot". He claims
that the United States is skilfully manipulating events
in some vast plot in the Congo. He accuses the United
States Embassy in Leopoldville, in particular, of
master-minding gangster activities in the Congo. I 'find
this a strange but perhaps understandable allegation
from the gentleman who was Soviet Ambassador in
Prague in 1948, when the Soviet-directed coup was
perpetrated against the democratic Government of
Czechoslovakia.
13. But, if we are to believe the Soviet representative,
steps involved in this American conspIracy, this great plot in the Congo? A· series of incredible and fantastic events must have taken place. First,
the United States must have persuaded the Belgians
to grant -independence to the Congo. Then, the Soviet
\~hat were the

3

thesis would have it, the United States must have
persuaded the Congolese to rebel against the Belgians.
Presumably, in this Soviet fantasy, the United States
then immediately reversed its course and inspired the
Belgians to send in military forces to put down the
Congolese rebellion. While it was doing this, we must
have persuaded the Congolese to request direct military
assistance from the United States, which the United
States then immediately rejected in favour of channelling all aid through the United Nations. As part
of this deep, dark conspiracy, the United States would
have had to agree to its own exclusion from the United
Nations Force-which it in fact did, but not as part
of a plot-and then the United States would have
publicly supported total withdrawal of the Belgians,
rather than using the veto in the Security Council to
prevent it. Instead of introducing its own forces in
the Congo, the United States brought in, by a mammoth
air and sea operation, more than 15,000 members of
the United Nations Force presently in the Congo. And
all of this, accordin.g to the Soviet Union and its friends,
was part of a vast conspiracy designed to reimpose
colonialism on the Republic of the Congo.

Puis, selon la these sovietique, ils auraient amene les
Congolais a se revolter contre les BeIges. Renversant
alors brusquement leur politique, ils auraient incite les
BeIges a envoyer des forces militaires pour reprimer
la rebellion congolaise. En meme temps, notre pays
aurait pousse les Congolais a lui demander une assistance militaire directe qu'il aurait sur-le-champ refusee
afin que toute aide fiit canalisee par l'intenl1ediaire de
l'ONU. Toujours dans le cadre de cette sombre conspiration, les Etats-Unis auraient accepte en apparence
d'etre exclus des forces envoyees d'urgence. par
I'ONU - ce qu'ils ont fait en realite, mais sans -aucune
manreuvre de leur part - et ils auraient ensuite publiquement appuye le retrait complet des BeIges, au lieu
de faire usage de leur droit de veto au Conseil de
securite pour I'empecher. Plutot que d'introduire au
Congo leurs propres forces armees, les Etats-Unis
auraient pre£ere transporter, grace a une gigantesque
operation aerienne et navale, plus de 15.000 membres
de la Force des Nations Unies qui se trouvent en ce
moment au Congo. D'apres l'Union sovietique et ses
amis, toutes ces manretlvres auraient fait partie d'une
vaste conspiration destinee a reinstaller le colonialisme
dans la Republique du Congo.
14. Peut-etre rUnion des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques imagine-t-elle que ces allegations constituent la preuve tie l'imperialisme des Etats-Unis au
Congo, mais aucun pays capable de juger des evenements en parfaite independance d'esprit ne pourra les
considerer autrement que comme des absurdites. Si
I'Union sovietique s'attend reellement que les autres
Membres de rONU et du Conseil ajoutent foi a des
accusations aussi fantastiques, c'est qu'elle eprouve le
mepris le plus flagrant pour leur intelligence.
15. Quant a nous, nous comprenons fort bien le sens
veritable des attaques sovietiques contre les Etats-Unis.
Elles sont a peu pres aussi dignes de foi que I'accusation formulee le jour ou le Conseil de securite a
aborde l'etude de ce probleme et selon laquelle il e.tait
affirme comme parole d'evangile que les 15eme et
24eme divisions d'infanterie des Etats-Unis etaient sur
le point de partir pour le Congo ou encore que les
accusations denon<;ant I'inuninence d'une invasion milltaire des petits pays.
16. Certes, nous savons fort bien que les tentatives
faites actuellement pour saper l'autorite du chef de
l'Etat, le president Kasa-Vubu, et pour imposer au
peuple congolais d'autres dirigeants plus accommodants
pour I'Union sovietique, ont en realite un autre but.
Nous comprenons fort bien dans quelle intention a ete
faite la proposition de desarmement des forces nationales du Congo, et pourquoi, dans le cadre de cette
meme politique, I'Union sovietique continue ses attaques
virulentes contre la personne du Secretaire general, la
fonction qu'il remplit, le Commandement des Nations
Unies et les operations des Nations Unies au Congo.
J'estime devoir souligner que les Etats-Unis n'ont pala moindre intention de ceder a ce genre de pression.
De· leur cote, le Conseil de securite et l'Assemhtee
generale ont defini leurs positions respectives de fa<;on
aussi claire.
17. Dans la situation actuelle, les faits essentiels sont
tres nets - je ne veux pas parler ici des divergences
d'opinion toujours possibles et des differences d'interpretation qui sont parfois entierement sinceres. Le
president Kasa-Vubu est, sans conteste, le chef d'Etat
de la Republique du Congo. L'Assemblee generale
a accepte recemment ses pouvoirs et ceux de la delegation qu'il avait designee. Quant au statut de

14. Perhaps the USSR believes that this constitutes
evidence of United States imperialism in the Congo,
but any country able to exercise independent judgement
will reject it as absurd. If the Soviet Union really
expects the other members of the Council and of the
United Nations to believe these fantastic charges about
United States plotting, it shows a most flagrant contempt for the intelligence of Members of the United
Nations.
15. We well understand the Soviet attacks on the
United States. They are about as trustworthy as the
Soviet claim, which was made on the day the Security
Council first took up this question, when it was stated
as gospel truth that the Fifteenth United States
Infantry and the Twenty-fourth Infantry Division were
about to go to the Congo, or the other charges that are
made about the imminence of a military invasion of
small countries.
16. Of course, we understand the purposes behind
the present efforts to undermine the authority of the
chief of state, President Kasa-Vubu, and to force upon
the Congolese people other leaders more amenable to
Soviet purposes. We understand the purpose behind
the proposal to disarm the Congolese National Army.
We understand, in the same context, why it is that the
Soviet Union continues its vitriolic personal attacks
upon the Secretary-General, upon the office of the
Secretary-General, upon the United Nations Command
and upon United Nations operations there. I think it
should be emphasized that the United States has not
the slightest intention of giving way to this kind of
pressure. We think that the Security Council and the
General Assembly have made their positions equally
clear.
17. The essential facts in the present situation are
straightiorward-and this is without any reference
whatever to differences of opinion, which are of course
possible, and differences of interpretation, which are
sometimes completely sincere. President Kasa-Vubu is
without doubt the chief of state of the Republic of
the Congo. The United Nations General Assembly has
recently accepted his credentials and those of the

4

M. Lumumba dans le regimepolitique de la Republique
du Congo, c'est exclusivement au gouvernement et au
peuple congolais qu'i! appartient de s'en occuper. It
s'agit en l'espece d'un probleme qui· releve de la juridiction nationale congolaise et non du Conseil de
securite ou de l'Assemblee generale. Ni le Conseil, ni
I'Assemblee n'ont le droit de prendre parti dans un
conflit interieur ou de s'immiscer dans les affaires interieures d'un Etat souverain, Membre de I'ONU.

delegation named by him. As for the status of
Mr. Lumumba in the political system of the Republic
of the Congo, that is a matter which can only be dealt
with the Congolese Government and people themselves.
It is a problem of internal Congolese jurisdiction and
not one for the Security Council or the General Assembly to judge; it is not for the Security Council or the
General Assembly to choose between sides in an
internal conflict and interfere in the internal affairs
of a sovereign Member State of the United Nations.
18. However, since this question has been raised again
in the Security Council, I will once again make our
view quite clear. \Ne accept fully the position of
President Kasa-Vubu that Mr. Lumumba was legally
removed from his former office in accordance with the
procedures stipulated in the basic constitutional instrument of the RepUblic of the Congo. There is no question as to the right of the Congolese authorities to place
Mr. Lumumba under arrest. It is the evident judgement of these authorities that the activities of Mr. Lumumba have constituted a threat to the security of
the State. A warrant for his arrest, signed by the
President of the Republic, has been outstanding for
some time. He was apprehended in the process of
fleeing to Stanleyville. It was widely understood
throughout the world that, had he reached Stanleyville,
he would have attempted either to establish a separatist
regime, or to seek to usurp power in the Congo in
opposition to the chief of state. The Soviet Union's
anger in calling this meeting is very simply explained
because this plan, which they supported, did not succeed.

18. Toutefois, puisque cette question a ete a nouveau
soulevee devant le ConseiI de securite, je definirai une
fois de plus et de fac;on tres cIaire notre position. Nous
acceptons entieremer..t le point de vue du president
Kasa-Vubu, selon lequel M. Lumumba a ete h~galement
revoque de ses fonctions dans les formes prevues par
l'acte constitutionnel fondamental de la Repuhlique du
Congo. Le droit des autorites congolaises de mettre
M. Lumumba en etat d'arrestation ne saurait etre
conteste. II est evident que ces autorites ont estime
que les activites de M. Lumumba constituaient une
menace pour la securite de l'Etat. Depuis quelque temps
deja, un mandat d'arret, signe par le President de la
Republique, avait ete decerne contre lui. M. Lumumba
a ete apprehende au moment ou il s'enfuyait pour
gagner Stanleyville. II Hait clair pour tout le monde
que, si M. Lumumba etait parvenu a Stanleyville, il
aurait essaye soit d'etablir un regime separatiste, soit
d'usurper le pouvoir au Congo, en opposition avec le
chef de I'Etat. Le. mouvement de colere qui a pousse
l'Union sovietique a demander la convocation de la
presente reunion du ConseiI de securite s'explique tres
simplement par l'echec du plan de M. Lumumba qu'eIle
avait appuye.
19. It n'est pas douteux cependant -- et les EtatsUnis n'admettent aucune contestation a cet egard - que
M. Lumumba a droit a un traitement humain et equitable. C'est pourquoi nous avons accueilli avec une vive
satisfaction, a la derniere seance, l'intervention du
representant de la Republique du Congo, au cours de
laquelle it nous a donne lecture d'un extrait d'une lettre
du president Kasa-Vubu adressee le 7 decemhre 1960
au Secretaire general [5/4571 et Add.1, annexe 111].
Dans cette Iettre, le president Kasa-Vubu decIarait en
termes cIairs qu'iI acceptait les obligations imposees
par la Charte et qu'it se consacrerait au retablissement
de la justice et du respect des droits de l'homme dans
la Republique du Congo.
20. On n'ignore pas, je crois, hien que la nouvelle
n'en ait peut-etre pas ete donnee offidellement, que, le
4 decembre dernier, le Gouvernement des Etats-Unis
a charge son ambassadeur a LeopoldviIle de porter a la
connaissance du president Kasa-Vubu et du colonel
Mobutu qu'i! esperait que l'ancien premier ministre
Lumumba beneficierait d'un traitement humain, recevrait regulierement les visites d'un medecin de la CroixRouge internationale et serait juge d'une maniere equitable. Dans le meme esprit, le Gouvernement des EtatsUnis estime egalement que des representants de la
Croix-Rouge devraient se rendre dans d'autres localites
du Congo.
21. Nous sommes maintenant saisis d'un rapport
inquietant du representant special du Secretaire general
au Congo concernant les evenements qui se deroulent
actuellement a Stanleyville rs/4590]. Nous pensons
qu'une action efficace et vigoureusede la part de la
Force des Nations Unies est indispensable pour empecher de nombreus~s pertes de vies humaines et des
sevices clans la 1 Jvince-Orientale.

19. There can be no question, however-and the
United States feels strongly about this-that Mr. Lumumba is entitled to humane and equitable treatment.
In this connexion, we welcomed the statement at the
previous meeting by the representative of the Republic
of the Congo, in which he read to us a portion of
President Kasa-Vubu's letter dated 7 December 1960
to the Secretary-General [5/4571 and Add.1, annex Ill]. In this letter the President made absolutely
clear his acceptance of the obligations imposed by the
Charter and his dedication to the task of restoring a
reign of justice and respect for human rights in the
Republic of the Congo.
20. I believe it to l, rather widely known, though
perhaps not officially, that on 4 December the United
States Government instructed the American Ambassador at Leopoldville to inform President Kasa-Vubu
and Colonel Mobutu that it hoped former Prime
Minister Lumuba would be accorded humane treatment, including regular visits by a physician from the
International Red Cross, and that he would be given
a fair trial. On the same basis, the United States
Government also considers that Red Cross representatives should visit other places in the Congo.

21. We now have a disturbing report from the Secretary-General's Special Representative in the Congo
regarding the current situation in Stanleyville [S/
4590]. We believe that effective, vigorous action is
requir~d by the United Nations F:orce to prevent
brut~hty and widespread loss of life in Oriental
prOVlllce.

5

22. This situation appears to be an extension or a
worsering of the problem referred to by the SecretaryGeneral in his letter of 5 December to President KasaVubu in the following terms:
"In making various efforts to use its good offices
for the freeing from illegal tension of Mr. Songolo
and other parliamentarians, to our great regret still
held in Stanleyville, the United Nations has suggested that the International Red Cross be asked
to examine the detained persons and their places
and conditions of detention and otherwise to obtain
the necessary assurances for their safety". [S/4571
and Add.l, amlC.t· Il.]

22. Cette situation semble. etre le prolongement et
l'aggravation de celle dont a parte le Secretaire general
dans sa leh:re du 5 decembre au president Kasa-Vubu.
II s'exprimait en ces termes:
"Au cours des divers efforts qu'elle a faits pour
user de ses bons offices en vue de faire cesser la
detention i11c~gale de M. Songolo et d'autres parlementaires qui, a notre grand regret, sont toujours
detenus a Stanleyville, rOrganisation des Nations
Unies a suggere que I'on demande a la Croix-Rouge
internationale d'examiner les personnes detenues
ainsi que les lieux et les conditions de leur detention
et, d'une maniere generale, d'obtenir les assurances
necessaires au sujet de leur surete." [S/4571 et
Add.l, mmcxe Il.]
Je peux ajouter que, d'apres nos renseignements, le
ministre Songolo et les autres parlementaires ont ete
iIlegalement detenus a Stanleyville par les partisans de
Lumumba pendant plus d'un mois et que M. Songola
a ete si cruellement roue de coups qu'il a pel'du un
ccil et risque de perdre l'autre, un traitement medical
approprie lui ayant ete continuellement refuse. Tous les
representants de la Croix-Rouge envoyes an Congo
devraient, de toute evidence, rendre visite aces senateurs et deputes ilIegalement detenus a Stanleyville.
23. Bien que nous ne pensions pas qu'il nous appartienne d'essayer d'interpreter la loi congolaise, nous
comptons fermement que la procedure judiciaire reguliere sera suivie dans I'examen du cas de M. Lumumba.
1I est malheureusement evident qu'a Stanleyville des
elements dissidents ont empeche I'application de la
procedure juridique normale et que les arrestations et
detentions arbitraires ainsi que les brutalites revoltantes
sont pratique courante.
24. Si le Conseil de securite parvient a traiter le
. maintien de la legalite et de l'ordre au Congo comme
une question d'interet general et de vaste portee, ces
discussions auront une utilite certaine. L'objectif des
Nations Unies que nous devons faire notre et nous
efforcer de servir de notre mieux est l'etablissement au
Congo de conditions favorables a la legalite, a I'ordre
public et au respect general des droits fondamentaux de
l'individu. De l'avis du Gouvernement des Etats-Unis,
la realisation de cet objectif pourrait etre sensiblement
acceleree si tous les Membres de l'Organisation des
Nations Unies appuyaient et reconnaissaient pleinement
ce que ron considere comme l'une des deux seules
institutions subsistant encore au Congo: la Presidence
de la Republique, et s'ils consentaient a soutenir les
efforts de M. Kasa-Vubu pour retablir le droit et
l'ordre sur tout le territoire du Congo. lIs renforceraient ainsi l'action de l'ONU ethateraient le moment
ou elle pourrait se consacrer avant tout a une tache
positive, c'est-a-dire a la restauration de l'economie
congolaise et a l'amelioration des conditions de vie de
la population.
25. Tel est le but a atteindre de toute urgence - et
non pas le sabotage de l'action de rONU par des
atta.ques contre le Secretaire general ou contre le Commandement des Nations Unies ni par tous moyens
propres a saper la force meme de ce commandement.
Ce n'est pas dans l'intention d'assurer le succes de
l'Organisation des Nations Unies au Congo que I'Unian
sovietique a demande la convocation de la presente
reunion. Elle a voulu essayer une fois de plus d'aneantir
l'effort de l'ONU et de discrediter en meme temps les
fonctions du Secretaire general. Dans le jargon de
l'URSS, le President de la Republique du Congo est
un "traitre", le Secretaire general, un "laquais", et

I might add that our information is that minister
Songolo and other members of Parliament have been
illegally detained by Lumumba supporters in Stanleyville for over a month and that Mr. Songolo was so
badly beaten that he has lost the sight of one eye and
may lose the sight of the other, as a result of the
continued denial of proper medical treatment. Any
Red Cross representatives sent to the Congo clearly
should visit these Senators and Deputies illegally held
in Stanleyville.
23. Wbile we do not believe that it is appropriate for
us to seek to interpret Congolese law, we have every
e:..:pectation that due process of law will be observed
in the handling of Mr. Lumumba's case. In Stanleyville
it is unfortun~tely evident that dissident elements have
prevented the" application of proper legal procedures,
and that arbitrary arrest, imprisonment and gross mistreatment are the common, everyday practice.
24. If the Security Council can deal with the problenl
of law and order in the Congo as a matter of general
concern and "broad" importance, a useful purpose can be
served by these discussions. The objective of the United
Nations, which we should endorse and seek to advance,
is the establishment of conditions in the Congo which
will promote law and order and the general observance
of fundamental human rights. In the view of the United
States, this purpose could be very significantly advanced.
if all Members of the United Nations would give full
support and recognition to what has been characterized
as one of the only two standing institutions in the
Congo: the office of the President, Mr. Kasa-Vubu;
and if they would give full support to President KasaVubu's efforts to restore law and order throughout the
Congo. That would reinforce the United Nations effort
in the Congo and hasten the day when the United
Nations can give its primary attention to the positive
task of revitalizing the Congolese economy and improving the conditions of life of the Congolese people.
25. That is what urgently needs to be done-not to
destroy the United Nations action through assaulting
the Secretary-General or the United Nations Command, nor to seek to erode the strength of the Command itself. The Soviet Union has not sought this
meeting out of any desire for the United Nations to
succeed in the Congo. It has sought the meeting to try
once again to destroy the United Nations effort and
the office of the Secretary-General with it. In the jargon
of the USSR, the President of the Republic of the
Congo is a "traitor", the Secretary-General is a
"lackey", and so on. The motives behind such charges
are reprehensible. These accusations are self-serving

6

ainsi de suite. Dc telles accusations dissinutlent des
mobiles reprehensibles et ne sont inspirees que par des
calculs interesses; elles ne meritent pas un examen
serieux.
26. Les Etats-Unis pal'tagent le point de vue exprime
mercredi par le Secretaire general lorsqu'il a declare:
"Je suis convaincu, et beaucoup le sont avec moi,
que l'Organisation, si frele qu'eUe soit, represente la
seule voie qui puisse nous offrir une chance de roouire
le risque que les frictions constantes - vastes ou
limitees - qui carach~risent la vie du monde d'aujourd'hui n'aboutissent, en s'accumulant, a une tension qui pourrait aisement declencher une convulsion
dans laquelle nous serions tous engloutis. J e suis de
meme convaincu qu'il est essentiel a la croissance
d'une societe humaine dans laquelle la dignite de la
personne humaine sera respectee que tout soit mis
en reuvre pour assurer la reussite de ce pas en avant
dans la v.oie d'une communaute mondiale organisee."
[913cme seance, par. 21.J
27. En depit des recriminations, accusations et contreaccusations et de la tension due au fait que l'Union
sovietique a souleve cette question actuellement devant
le Conseil de securite, nOllS esperons encore qu'il
resultera quelque bien de l'epreuve que traverse
actuellement le jeune Etat du Congo. Pour notre part,
nous continuerons d'accorder notre appui total a tous
les efforts deployes par l'intermediaire de l'Organisation
des Nations Unies - je souligne bien: par l'intermediaire de l'Organisation des Nations Unies et non en
dehors d'elle - en vue d'assurer la stabilite et de
favoriser les prog'res de ce malheureux pays.
28. J'invite le representant de l'Union sovietique a
reflechir dans le calme a la lourde responsabilite qu'assumerait quiconque chercherait a contrecarrer ces
efforts et a poursuivre une politique unilaterale compromettant les interets de la population congolaise
aussi bien que la paix du monde.
29. Nous avons entendu, et nous entendlrons encore
avant la fin de ce debat, de nombreux appels de caractere sentimental, juridique et autre destines a ebranler
les opinions des membres du Conseil de securite et des
Membres de l'Organisation des Nations Unies dans
son ensemble. Personnellement, j'estime avec la plus
profonde sincerite qu'it faut se preoccuper uniquement
de la population congolaise et non pas de questions de
prestige national ou des querelles ideologiques qui
opposent l'Est a l'Ouest, ni meme, necessairement, du
groupe ou du parti interesse qui devrait l'emporter au
Congo. Or, plus nous suscitons de difficultes a cette
population, plus nous facilitons les massacres de Congolais entre eux. De toute evidence, ce n'est pas pour
ce genre de resultats que l'ONU a ete instituee. It ne
faut pas oublier les obligations que nous impose la
Charte. C'est uniquement et en toute circonstance
l'interet du peuple congolais qui doit inspirer 110S
actions.
30. M. ORTONA (Italie) [tradu.it de l'anglaisJ:
. Puisque nous sommes maintenant au creur de la discussion sur le Congo, je voudrais, une fois de plus,
preciser que, lorsque a la 912eme seance ma delegation
a propose de modifier l'ordre du jour provisoire, c'etait
avec la conviction profonde que la situation au Congo
et, en particulier, les tout derniers evenements survenus
dans ce pays exigeaient de la part des hommes d'Etat
de tous pays un effort trop soutenu et un esprit d'objectivite trop eIeve pour que les debats puissent etre
guides par une declaration aussi calomnieuse que celle

only, and, so far as we are concerned, they are unworthy of serious consideration.
26. The United States shares the views expressed
on Wednesday by the Secretary-General when he said:
"I believe, and many believe with me, that this
Organization in all its frailty represents the sole
approach which may give us a cb~nce to reduce
the risk that the constant frictions-large and smallwhich characterize the life of our present-day world,
build up to a tension easily triggered into a clash in
which we would all be engulfed. I also believe that
it is essential, for the growth of a human society in
which the dignity of the human being will be
respected, that every effort is made to make this step
in the direction of an organized world community
a success". [913th 1neeting, para. 21.J
27. In spite of the recriminations, charges and countercharges, and the tension that has been created by the
Soviet Union in bringing this subject before the
Security Council at the present time, we still hope that
something good may come of the travail through which
the infant State of the Congo is now passing. For our
part we shall continue to give full support to efforts
through the United Nations~and I emphasize that:
through the United Nations, not outside it-to promote
stability and progress in that .unhappy land.
28. I ask the representative of the Soviet Union to
reflect soberly on the heavy responsibility which must
be borne by any who seek to thwart these efforts and
to pursue unilateral policies jeopardizing the interests
of the Congolese people and the peace of the world.
29. We have heard and we shall hear again before
this debate is over, emotional, iuridical and other
appeals calculated to sway the opinions of the members
of this body and of the United Nations as a whole.
I personally believe, with the utmost sincerity, that we
must think not of our own prestige, not of any quarrel
between ideologies-East or West--not necessarily
enn of which interested group or party within the
Congo should or should not have the ascendency; but
of the Congolese people. We should remember that the
more difficult we make it for the Congolese people, the
easier we make it for Congolese to kill other Congolese.
That is obviously something which the United Nations
was not established to do. V\Te should remember our
obligations under the Charter. We should work first,
last and always for the Congolese people.

30. Mr. ORTONA (Italy): Now that we are in the
midst of our substantive discussion I would like to
restate that when my delegation proposed a change in
the provisional agenda, at the 912th meeting, it did so
because it felt deeply convinced that the situation in
the Republic of the Congo, and in particalar the most
recent events in that country, required too much of an
effort in international statesmanship, too much dispassionate evaluation, to allow our debate to be guided
by such a libel as the statement circulated by the Soviet
Government. A document that uses such a provocatory

7

tone, that dispenses such t.hreats and e.xpressions of
anger, must certainly be considered as a sad innovation
in the annals of diplomacy.

du Gouvernement sovietique. Un document redige sur
un pareil ton de provocation et qui dispense ainsi les
menaces et les explosions de colt~re ne peut certes etre
considere que comme une triste innovation clans les
annales de la diplomatie.
31. Nous avons estime egalement qu'i1 etait de notre
devoir de repousser les allegations contenues dans ce
document, en qualite de representants d'un pays membre non seulement de l'OTAN, mais aussi de l'Organisation des Nations Unies, organisation dont ledit document essaie de saper l'autorite par des attaques haineuses contre les plus devoues de ses fonctionnaires de
rang eleve.
32. Nous avons egalement propose que la lettre du
Secretaire general en date du 13 jui11et 1960 [Sj4381]
reste a la base de nos discussions comme elle l'a ete
dans tous les debats intervenus au sujet du Congo, car
nous estimons que les recents evenements dont ce pays
a ete le theatre ne doivent pas etre consideres isolement,
mais etre envisages dans le cadre plus vaste de
l'ensemble des faits historiques, inevitablement lies les
uns aux autres, qui sont survenus au Congo.
33. Le document sovietique et la declaration faite
hier [914emc seance] par le representant de l'Union
sovietique s'efforcent ~m contraire d'isoler les evenements de ces derniers jours, dans l'intention de de£ormer le cadre historique de la situation a des fins de
polemique et pour servir les visees destructives manifestes de l'Union sovietique a l'egard de l'operation des
Nations Unies au Congo.
34. En fait, lorsqu'on nous parle de machinations, de
complots et de conspirations de la part des pays de
I'OTAN, nous ne pouvons nous emp&her de nous
reporter au stade initial de cette operation, quand, sur
une demande d'aide directe, adressee par M. Lumumba
aux Etats-Unis, ce pays a repondu qu'il etait dispose
a donner suite a cette requete a condition que l'aide
et l'assistance soient fournies autant que possible par
l'intermediaire de l'ONU. Ce que l'Union sovietique
a fait par la suite est en contraste frappant avec cette
attitude des Etats-Unis qui tendait a favoriser et a
appuyer l'effort des Nations Unies. Nous savons tous
que, peu de temps apres, de nombreux faits ont prouve
que l'Union sovietique fournissait au gouvernement de
M. Lumumba, a titre unilateral, une assistance qui
etait nettement de caractere militaire. C'etait le premier
coup porte a I'operation des Nations Unies; c'etait aussi
le prelude a d'autres tentatives faites dans le meme
sens qui, en fin de compte, emanaient de M. Lumumba
lui-meme; celui-ci a en effet manifeste sa desapprobation de l'activite de la Force des Nations Unies apres
avoir lui-meme sollicite de l'Organisation un appui
dont I'ampleur aurait largement depasse les limites
fixees par la resolution du Conseil de securite, en date
du 14 juillet [Sj4387].
35. Je ne veux pas m'appesantir sur le Muil des
evenements qui ont amene la chute du gouvernement
Lumumba, si ce n'est pour souligner que M. Lumumba,
10rsqu'iI a finalement rompu avec rONU, n'a pas tarde
a s'apercevoir qu'en periode de detresse I'Organisatioll
constituait sa seule protection.
36. Le principal evenement survenu depuis a ete
l'acceptation par l'Assemblee generale, le 22 novembre,
de la delegation presidee par M. Kasa-Vubu [resolu.t£on
1498 (XV)]. Certains representants ont voulu voir
dans cette decision une tentative de l'Assemblee generale pour prendre position dans l'evolution interienre
du Congo. Toutefois, si nous nous reportons a ce debat,
notamment a ses' conclusions, nous constatons qu'en

31. Vle also felt an obligation to reject the allegations
contained in that document, not only as representatives
of a NATO country, but also as members of the
United Nations, an organization which that statement
is seeking to undenuine through vicious attacks against
the highest and most dedicated officials of the organization.
32. V-le also proposed that the letter of the SecretaryGeneral dated 13 July 1960, rSj4381], should forn1 the
basis of our discussion as it did all through the debates
we held on the Congo, because we feel that the recent
events, which have again beset that country, should
not be viewed in an isolated conte.xt but rather projected against the wider background of all the historic
developments there, which ~Lre unavoidably interrelated.
33. The Soviet document and the statement of the
Soviet representative of yesterday [914th 1I1cef·ing] try,
on the contrary, to isolate the occurrences of the last
few days with the evident attempt to distort the historical picture to suit the purposes of polemics and
those destructive aims which the Soviet Union is
obviously pursuing with r<;"oard to the United Nations
operation in the Congo.
34. Actually, when we hear of machinations, plots
and conspiracies by the NATO countries we cannot
avoid going back to the initial stages of the operation
,,,hen, to a request made by Mr. Lumumba for direct
help from the United States, that country responded,
indicating its willingness to meet the request, provided
aid and assistance would be channelled, as much as
possible, through the United Nations. ';Yhat the Soviet
Union subsequently did is in striking contrast to this
attitude of the United States, which was meant to
further and sustain the effort of the United Nations.
'Ve all know there was soon increased evidence that
the Soviet Union was supplying the Government of
Mr. Lumumba, unilaterally with assistance clearly of
a military nature. This was the first blow to the United
Nations operation, and constituted also the prelude
to attempts in the same direction that finally came
from Mr. Lumumba; when he voiced his disapproval
of the activit-j of the United Nations Force, after having
himself requested the United Nations to support him
far beyond the limits set by the Security Council
resolution of 14 July [Sj4387].

35. I do not want to dwell in detail on the events
which brought about the end of the Lumumba Government except to point out that Mr. Lumumba, when he
finally broke with the United Nations, soon found
that in times of distress the United Nations was his
only protection.
36. The main event which occurred subsequently was
the seating, on 22 November, of Mr. Kasa-Vubu's
delegation in the General Assembly [resolution 1498
(XV)). Some representatives tried, during our debates,
to see in this an effort to take sides in the internal
development of the Congo. But if we go back to that
debate, and especially to its conclusive phases, we shall
see that, in seating Mr. Kasa-Vubu the majority of

8

admettant M. Kasa-Vubu, la majorite de I'Assemblee
a agi conformel11ent au principe de la legalite et de la
legitimite. Lorsque l'Assemblee a reconnu la delegation
de M. Kasa-Vubu, i1 n'y a eu ni gagnants ni perdants;
ceux qui accusent les puissances occidentales d'avoir
conspire en vue de l'admission de M. Kasa-Vubu, poursuivallt ainsi la realisation de fins obscures, ceux qui
ont taxe le resultat d'ttne decision aussi democratique
de notre assemblee de "farce honteuse", selon les
termes memes employes hier par le representant de
I'Union sovietique, sont incapables de penser autrement
qu'en fonction de victoire ou de defaite par~e que leur
philosophie politique est fondee sur l'expansionnisme
et qu'ils ne peuvent comprendre que 1'0n puisse agir
dans une autre intention.
37. L'acceptation de la delegation de M. Kasa-Vubu
ne signifierait ni victoire ni de£aite pour l'un ou l'autre
parti, si 1'0n permettait simplement qu'autour de cette
autorite constitutionnelle reconnue du Congo toutes les
forces politiques essaient de se rallier afin d'harmoniser
les elements divers et parfois opposes du nouvel Etat,
ce qui est la condition sine qua non du retablissement
d'une situation normale et de la prosperite du pays.
En fait, un projet de reunion de tous ces elements a
une conference de la "table ronde" a ete elabore et
nous esperons qu'il n'a pas ete abandonne. Les deux
obstacles qui pourraient en empecher la realisation sont
la fuite de M. Lumumba et les regrettables evenements
de la Province-Orientale au sujet desquels nous avons
entendu, au cours de ces dernieres heures, des nouvelles
fort inquietantes.
38. On peut certes se demander si la decision de
M. Lumumba n'avait pas pour but de saboter cette
conference de la "table ronde", qu'il ne souhaitait pas
ou a laquelle il craignait de participer. Quoi qu'il en
soit, ce que 1'0n peut dire, je crois, c'est que ce n'est
pas M. Kasa-Vubu, dument et amplement reconnu par
l'Assemblee generale des Nations Unies, qui a mis fin
a. la detente politique, mais M. Lumumba lui-meme,
qui, bien que jouissant cl. Leopoldville de toute la protection necessaire, a decide de s'enfuir a. destination de
ce que la radio de Moscou a appele un "territoire
amical". Or, il n'a fait ainsi que multiplier les difficultes
deja innombrables dans lesquelles se debattait le pays.
Telle est la regrettable succession historique des evenements qui ant peut-etre prive le peuple congolais de
vastes possibilites et d'occasions de cooperation fructueuse.
39. On ne peut s'empecher de penser que des facteurs
de desordre venant de l'exterieur accroissent les difficultes poignantes de la situation interieure du Congo,
en ce qui concerne notamment les relations humaines
et les besoins de la popuiation, surtout si 1'0n medite
les paroles qu'un des representants des Etats africains,
nouvellement admis, le .Ministre des affaires etrangeres
du Cameroun, a prononcees au cours d'un recent debat
de I'Assemblee generale [920eme seance pteniere] lorsqu'il a declare:
"Je voudrais dire au representant de I'Union
sovietique que son pays n'a pu subjuguer le petit
peuple du Cameroun ... malgre l'appareil de subversion que son pays et ses satellites ont essaye d'y
installer."
L'Union sovietique ne saurait soutenir que ces tentatives soient conformes a. run des principes du Pantcha
<;ila, incorpore dans la declaration de Bandoung et
ainsi con~u: "Non-intervention et non-ingerence dans
les affaires interiellres des autres pays."

the Assembly acted in support of the principles of
legality and legitimacy. There were no winners and
no losers when the Assembly endorsed the delegation
of Mr. Kasa-Vubu; those who accuse the Vlestern
Powers of conspiring to recognize Mr. Kasa-Vubu for
obscure aims, and who labelled the result of such a
democratic process in the Assembly a "shameful
comedy", according to the words used yesterday by
the Soviet representative, do so because they are
incapable of thinking, except in terms of winning or
losing, and because their political philosophy is based
on expansionism and they cannot envisage anyone purSUIng an action without having such an aim in mind.
37. The seating of Mr. Kasa-Vubu would not have
meant either a victory or a defeat, for one party or
another, if one could only allow that, round this recognized constitutional authority of the Congo, all the
political forces would try to rally, in order to harmonize
the various and sometimes differing components of
the new State; the sine qua non for the return to
nomality and well-being of that country. In fact, a
project for a gathering of such elements at a roundtable conference was and, we hope, is still under way.
The two factors which might impede such a project
are the flight of Mr. Lumumba and the unfortunate
events in Oriental province, about which we have
heard such perturbing news in the last few hours.
38. vVe certainly cannot help wondering whether the
decision of Mr. Lumumba was not meant to sabotage
a round-table conference which he did not want or
of which he feared to be a part. At any rate, I think
that what we can say is that it was not Mr. Kasa-Vubu,
duly and amply recognized by the General Assembly
of the United Nations, who broke the process of
political detente, but precisely Mr. Lumumba who,
notwithstanding the fact that he was living under due
protection at Leopoldville, chose instead to flee to what
the Moscow radio has called "friendly territory", and,
by so doing, gave new impetus to the difficulties already
rampant in the country. This is the unfortunate historical sequence of events, in which great 'Jpportunities
for the Congolese people may have be~n missed, in
which openings for fruitful co-operation may have
been lost.
39. We cannot help feeling that disruptive factors
from outside the Congo add to the poignant fundamental difficulties of the internal Congolese situationto its problems of human relations, to the needs of its
people-if we only meditate on the words that one of
the representatives of the newly· arrived African States,
the Foreign Minister of Cameroun, said during a recent
debate in the General Assembly r920th plenary
meeting] :
"I should like to tell the representative of the
Soviet Union that his country has not been able
to subjugate the small country of Cameroun ...
despite the subversive machinery which his country
and its satellites tried to set up there."
The Soviet Union certainly cannot maintain that these
attempts are in keeping with one of the principles of
Pancha Shila, as incorporated in the Declaration of
Bandung, as follows: "Abstention from intervention or
interference in the internal affairs of another country."

9

40. Notwithstanding the many achievements of the

40. En depit des nombreux succes de l'ONU au

Congo, la situation dans ce pays apparait a. nouveau
comme tres dangereuse parce qu'elle n'est plus limitee
a. une lutte politique, si dure soit-eUe, mais qu'eUe a
atteint le point ou les droits fondamentaux de l'homl11e
ont ete et sont encore fouICs aux pieds.
41. Il n'y a aucun interet a monter en epingle tel ou
tel incident et a en grossir l'importance. Dans le climat
ardent qui regne actuellement au Congo, la violence
semble eclater de toute part. Alors. qu'une certaine
detente semblait se manifester dans les provinces de la
Republique ou les conflits etaient les plus aigus, une
nouvelle situation explosive couvait it. Stanleyville. Des
cas de mauvais traitements et de graves violations des
droits de l'homme etaient signales dans la ProvinceOrientale. C'est dans cette perspective que nOllS devons
considerer l'arrestation de M. Lumumba et les mauvais
traitements qui lui auraient ete in!liges.
42. Nous som111es opposes a toute espece de violence
comme .l toute violation des droits de I'homme. Le
respect de ces droits et des libertes essentiel1es est une
des pierres angulaires de la Charte et doit, en toute
circonstance, inspirer nos actes. Lorsque des abus sont
commis, peu importe que les victimes soient ou 110n
des Congolais, des ennemis ou des Ik1.rtisans de Lumumba, des membres du personnel de l'ONU ou des
BeIges: la condition premiere d'une civili&'ltion et d'une
democratie ordonnee est, selon nous, la cessation de
toute violence. Or, c'est precisement pour prott~ger les
vies humaines contre de tels perils que 1'0peratio11 des
Nations Unies au Congo a ete con.::ue.
43. De I'avis de ma delegation, nous devons en premier lieu mobiliser tous les moyens en notre pouvoir
pour mettre un terme it. ces violences. Une organisation
impartiale aussi respectee que la Croix-Rouge internationale exercerait it. cet egard une influence des plus
utiles; d'autre part, en al1ant voir et en protegeant les
prisonniers politiques, on pourrait connaitre leur version des faits. Le respect de la dignite humaine et le
souci de sauvegarder les droits de l'homme ont incite
ma delegation it. s'associer aux auteurs du projet de
resolution [5/4578] presente de fa~on si convaincante
par le representant de l'Argentine.
44. Tel etant le motif qui a amene les quatre pays a
presenter ce projet de resolution et compte tenu des
arguments invoques jusqu'ici, on comprendra aisement
notre attitude a l'egard du projet de resolution propose
par le representant de I'Union sovietique [5/4579].
S'il nous est impossible de l'approuver, c'est tout
d'abord parce que, en ne mentionnant que le cas de
M. Lumumba, elle essaie de faire converger sur celui-ei
tous les elements du drame congolais et, en particulier,
la situation politique qui regne it. Leopoldville. ElIe
dCforme ainsi l'image des evenements qui se deroulent
dans ce pays Oil, maUieureusement, les desordres sevissent en plus d'un endroit. La situation qui s'est creee
a Stanleyville notamment, telle qu'elle ressort du rapport que nous venons de recevoir [5/4590], nous cause
de graves souds.
45. En second lieu, nous ne pouvons nOllS associer
aux demandes contenues dans ce projet de resolution,
qui constitueraient une atteinte aux droits que possedent les autorites reconnues de la Republique du
Congo de regler elles-memes leurs affaires interieures.
46. Le role de 1'0rganisation des Nations Unies est
de veiller it empecher l'emploi de la violence, les mauvais traitell1ents et toutes autres violations des droits
de I'homme. Nous serions malavises d'aller au-deIa. et
de nous immiscer dans les affaires interieures du Congo.

United Nations in the Congo, the situation there again
appears to be fraught with danger because it is no
longer confined to a political struggle, however harsh,
but has reached the point where fundamental human
rights have been and are being violated.
41. There is no point in singling out one incident or
another and magnifying it. In the burning moral climate
prevailing in the Congo. violence seems to flare up
everywhere. \i\Thile a feeling of relaxation of tension
was beginning to appear in the most conflict-torn
provinces in the Republic, a new explosive situation
was brewing' in Stanlevville. Cases of maltreatment and
of grave violations o(l1Uman rights were taking place
in Oriental province. It is in this perspective that we
should view the seizure and the alleged mishandling
of Mr. LUl11umba.

42. \Ve are against any sort of violence or any violation of human rights. The respect of such rights and
freedoms is indeed one of the cornerstones of the
Charter, and should inspire our actions in all circmustances. \i\Thether the people abused are Congolese,
whether they are enemies of Lumumba or his supporters, United Nations personnel or Belgians, we think
that the prerequisite of civilization and orderly democracy is the end of violence. And it was just to protect
human lives from such upheavals that the operation
of the United Nations in the Congo was conceived.
43. In the first instance, in my delegation's Opll1lOn,
we must make an effort to use all ways and means
to stop violence. An unbiased and highly respected
organization, such as the International Red Cross,
would help very much in that direction; moreover, through visiting and proteding the political
prisoners, their side of the story would come to
light. The respect of human dignity and the preservation of human rights are the motives which have
prompted my delegation to join in the sponsorship
of the draft resolution [5/4578], which has been so
ably presented by the representative of Argentina.
44. This being the reason which prompted the four
Powers to present the draft resolution, in the light of
the arguments set forth so far, it will be easy to understand our opinion on the draft resolution [5/4579]
introduced by the representative of the Soviet Union.
\i\Te cannot approve of it because, in the first place,
in singling out the situation of Mr. Lumumba, it
attempts to focus the whole drama of the Congo on
him, particularly the political situation in Leopoldville.
This is a notion which distorts the picture prevailing
ill that country where, anfortunately, disorders take
place in more than one place. The situation which
developed particularly in Stanleyville, as described in
the report which we have just received [5/4590],
causes us great concern.

45.

In the second place, we can hardly concur with
the requests contained in that draft resolution which
would impair the rights of the recognized authorities
of the Republic of the Congo to take care of their own
affairs.
46. The United Nations must see that violence, maltreatment or other infringements of human rights do
not take place. We would be ill-advised to take steps
beyond such limits and to enter into the internal
situation of the Congo. Nor can we impose upon the
10

Nous ne pouvons pas non plus imposer au Gouvernement du Congo le respect d'une resolution du Conseil
de securite qui, en interdisant l'emploi de personnel
civil beIge, s'tkartenlit des resolutions anterieures deja
adoptees.
47. Nous estimons egalement qu'en cette periode de
transition et d'evolution, et en raison precisel11ent des
penuries de personnel technique qui sevissent encore,
on ne peut pas et on ne doit pas refuser aux autorites
et au peuple congolais la possibilite d'avoir recours a
des etrangers, queUe que soit leur nationalite.
48. N ous nous rendons com~-:'e des inconvenients qui
peuvent resulter de l'activite du personnel civil de
l'ONU, lorsqu'elle doit s'exercer parallelement a celle
du personnel civil employe directement et en vertu d'un
accord bilateral par le Gouvernement congolais. Mais
il va sans dire que les difficultes de cette nature ne
peuvent trouver leur solution que dans une coordination
appropriee: l'Organisation des Nations Unies, avec
tout son prestige, viendrait ainsi en aide aux autorites
du Congo, et celles-ci, de leur cote, reconnaitraient toute
la valeur de cette assistance dans un esprit de neutralite
et de cooperation fruetueuse.
49. J e me trouve ainsi al11ene a la derniere partie de
ma declaration, que je voudrais consacrer au rapport
du Secretaire general [913e1'1te seance] et aux taches
futures que notre organisation pourrait etre appelee a
accol11plir.
50. Perl11ettez-moi tout d'abord, en guise d'introduction a l11es observations sur ce point, d'.attirer l'attention du Conseil sur le principe fondal11ental qui a inspire nos actes depuis le debut de la crise, c'est-a-dire le
respect des prerogatives souveraines ainsi que de l'independance et de l'unite de la jeune Republique du
Congo. En vertu de ce principe que, parmi ·les Membres
de l'Organisation des Nations Unies, nul, j'en suis convaincu, n'accepterait de voir meconnaitre - puisqu'il
est l'une des pierres angulaires de notre institutionles organes et organismes des Nations Unies ont ete
dans l'obligation d'adopter une attitude stricte de nonintervention d:ms les problemes interieurs du Congo.
51. Dans le cadre des principes de la Charte, notre
action s"est, ,\ juste titre, limitee a l'octroi d'une aide
aussi efficace que possible aux autorites congolaises
I{~galement constituees. Les trois resolutions sur la situation au Congo adoptees par le Conseil de securite
les 14 et 22 juillet et le 9 aout 1960 [S/4387, S /4405'
et S/4426], ainsi que la resolution adoptee a l'unammite, le 20 septembre par l'Assemblee generale [1474
(ES-IV)], dcfinissent clairement ces limites et constituent la base fondamentale de l'action de rONU et de
ses fonctionnaires.
52. C'est seulement si nous arrivions a la conclusion
que les resolutions deja adoptees sont insuffisantes ou
ne repondent plus completement aux necessites d'une
situation nouvelle que nous pourrions envisager la possibilite de prendre d'autres mesures; mais, meme alors,
des limites bien deflnies resultant des dispositions de la
Charte elle-meme conditiOlmeraient nos possibilites.
Quoi qu'il en soit, nous ne pourrions prendre aucune
decision constituant une violation des droits souverains
du pays. Nous avons toute latitude pour aider, conseiller et adresser des appels, mais il nous est interdit
cl'imposer une ligne de conduite dans des questions
qui relevent essentiellement cle la juridiction interieure.
53. Qu'il me soit pennis cle declarer que, selon l'intime
conviction de la delegation italienne, les decisions deja
adoptees par le Conseil de securite et par l'AssembIee

Goverument of the Congo to abide by a resolution of
the Security Council which, in forbidding the employment of Belgian civil personnel, would constitute a
departure from the previous resolutions which we have
approved.
47. We also feel that, in this moment of transition
and growth, and because difficulties and shortages of
technical skill are rife, we cannot and should not deny
to the Cmlgolese authorities and people the possibility
of choosing to co-operate with foreign individuals
regardless of nationality.
48. \Ve do realize the difficulties which might arise
with regard to the activities of United Nations civilian
personnel, when they have to run parallel with civilian
personnel employed directly and bilaterally by the
Congolese Government. No doubt the solution of these
difficulties can only be found in proper co-ordination in
which the United Nations, with the prestige that it
carries, should give a helping hand to the authorities
of the Congo, and these authorities should in turn
realize the importance of this assistance in a spirit of
neutrality and fruitful collaboration.
49. This particular point brings me to the concluding
part of my statement, in which I wish to direct myself
to the report of the Secretary-General [913tll. meeting]
and to the future tasks which may lie ahead for our
Organization.
50. May I, as an introduction to my remarks on this
point, draw the attention of the Council to the fundamental purpose which has guided our action since the
begil.;ling of the crisis, namely, to respect the sovereign
prerogatives and the independence and unity of the
young Republic of the Congo. In the light of this principle which we are sure none of the Members of the
United Nations would like to see disregarded-since
it is one of the cornerstones of our Organization-it
has been imperative for United Nations bodies to take
a position of strict non-interference in the domestic
problems of the Congo.
51. \Vithin the framework of the Charter's princir~es,
our action has been rightly circumscribed to assist, in
the best possible way. the legally constituted authorities
in the Congo. The three resolutions approved by the
Security Council in regard to the situation in the
Congo, or 14 and 22 July and 9 August 1960 [S/4387~
S /4405 and S /4426], and the resolution unanimously
approved by the General Assembly on 20 September
[1474 (ES-IV)], clearly set forth these limits and
constitute the basic guide to the action of the United
Nations and of its officials.
52. Only in the event that we reached the conclusion
that the resolutions already adopted are not fully
adequate for new developments, could we consider
taking another course of action; but even in that case
some clear limitations, deriving from the provisions of
the Charter itself, would condition our possibilities. In
any case, no action could be undertaken on our part
",:,hich might represent an infringement of the sovereign
nghts of the country. Vle can properly assist.. advise
and make appeals, but we cannot dictate a course of
~ction in matters essentially within the framework of
Internal jurisdiction.

53. May I say that the Italian delegation fundamentally considers that the decisions already adopted
by the Security Council and the General Assembly,
11

with reference to' the Congo, do represent an adequate
response to the past and present requirements of the
situation. Furthermore, my delegation is convinced
that the Secretary-General's conduct of the United
Nations operation was and is fully in line with those
decisions. The basic problem now refers to the more
proper way of executing those resolutions in order to
further, among other things, a more satisfying and
fruitful co-operation between United Nations organs
and local authorities in the Congo.
54. Mistakes may have been made in this respect on
both sides, bu.t the best proof that the United Nations
has not acted. in a biased way is to be found in the
criticism uttered against it by the opposite poles. "\iVhen
Mr. Lumumba was protected, the United Nations was
attacked for giving privileged protection to him; when
he left his residence voluntarily and clandestinely, and
was arrested by Congolese military authorities, the
United Nations came under fire for not having intervened in his defence, after· he had rebutted the protection lent to him by the United Nations. The truth isas the Secretary-General has explained in his latest
report to the Council-the United Nations can and
must help, but not just take over the RepUblic of the
Congo.
SS. It is in this light that, while commending once
more the noble effort and the skillful performance of
the Secretary-General, I also want to reply to the
question he has raised and say that we should all go
on supporting the United Nations effort in the Congo.
And this not because the United Nations is a panacea,
but because it offers the only sound way in which the
international community can help the Congolese people
in a difficult moment.

generale au sujet du Congo repondent veritablement
aux exigences passees et presentes de la situation et
que la falSon dont le Secretaire general a dirige l'operation des Nations Unies a ete et est encore pleinement conforme a ces decisions. Le problbne fOlldamental consiste maintenant cl. trouver un moyen encore
plus approprie de dOImer effet a ces resolutions et
d'assurer, entre autres resultats, une collaboration plus
satisfaisante et plus feconde entre les organes des Nations Unies et les autorites locales du Congo.
54. I1 est possible que des erreurs aient ete cOl11mises
des deux cotes dans ce domaine, mais la meilleure
preuve de rimpartialite de raction de rONU reside
dans les critiques dont elle a ete robjet de la part des
partis opposes. Lorsque M. Lumumba etait protege,
on a reproche a rONU de lui assurer un traitel11ent
privilegie; lorsqu'il a quiUe volontairement et clandestinement son domicile et que les autorites militaires
congolaises ront arrete, on a blame rOrganisation de
n'etre pas intervenue pour le de£endre, alors qu'il
avait lui-meme fait fi de la protection que lui assurait
rOrganisation. La verite - ainsi que ra justement
souligne le Secretaire general dans son rapport au
Conseil- c'est que l'ONU peut et doit aider, mais
non prendre a sa charge la Republique du Congo.
55. C'est dans cet esprit que, tout en felicitant a nouveau le Secretaire general pour ses nobles efforts et la
falSon remarquable dont il s'est acquitte de sa tache, je
desire egalement repondre a la question qu'il a soulevee
en declarant que nous devons tous continuer a appuyer
les efforts de rONU au Congo, et cela non parce que
rOrganisation des Nations Unies est une panacee, mais
parce qu'elle offre a la communaute internationale la
seule voie rationnelle par laquelle elle puisse venir en
aide au peuple congolais en un moment difficile.
56. En fait, toutes les critiques formulees contre l'operation des Nations Unies partent de l'idee que notre
organisation peut agir comme un super-Etat Membre,
alors que ceux-Ia memes qui emettent ces critiques
se refuseraient certainement a abandonner maintenant
la moindre parcelle de leur souverainete pour faire de
l'Organisation un gouvernement mondial au lieu de ce
qu'elle est et doit etre, c'est-a-dire une organisation
mondiale.
57. En nous declarant partisans de la continuation
de l'operation des Nations Unies, nous voulons egalement souligner que la Force des Nations Unies au
Congo ne devrait pas etre reduite, mais au contraire
accrue et renforcee en cette periode critique. Pour des
raisons evidentes, on ne peut s'empecher de craindre
les consequences que pourrait entrainer son affaiblissement. Nous estimons que rOrganisation des Nations
Unies, avec le prestige que lui confererait l'appui de
toute la communaute internationale, demeure le seul
espoir que l'on ait d'ecarter la guerre froide des rives
congolaises et que, pour cette raison, on ne saurait permettre a roperation des Nations Unies d'echouer.

56. As a matter of fact, all the criticism levelled at
the United Nations operation starts from the assumption that the Organization can act as a super-Member
State, but at the same time those who utter this criticism would certainly not be willing to give up any
particle of their sovereignty to make the United Nations a world Government instead of being what it is
-and what it should be-a world Organization.
57: In stating that we feel the United Nations
operation should continue, we also want to emphasize
that our delegation would certainly wish no withdrawals from the United Nations Force to take place.
We feel that, in this time of need, the United Nations
Force in the Congo should be enhanced and strengthened and we cannot fail to be concerned, for obvious
reasons, with the consequences that a weakening of that
Force might entail. We feel the United Nations, with
the prestige which it commands through the support
of the international community, still constitutes the
only hope of keeping the cold war away from Congolese shores, and that for this reason the United Nations operation cannot be allowed to crumble.
58. To that end and in order to overcome the difficulties already encountered, we feel it would be necessary first of all to maintain the maximum measure of
co-operation between the United Nations Command
and the Congolese authorities. The Secretary-General
has admitted that difficulties and misunderstandings
have arisen from time to time, but we feel confident
that it should be possible, given the necessary cooperation on all sides and at all levels, and making
allowances for the faults of human nature-whether
the individuals are with an international Organization

58. A cet effet et afin de surmonter les difficultes
deja rencontrees, il serait necessaire, tout d'abord, de
maintenir la plus etroite collaboration possible entre le
Commandement des Nations Unies et les autorites congolaises. Le Secretaire general a reconnu que des difficultes et des malentendus s'etaient produits de temps
a autre, mais, si resprit de cooperation necessaire se
manifeste de toutes parts et cl. tous les niveaux et si 1'0n
fait preuve de tolerance a l'egard des defauts de la
nature humaine - qu'it s'agisse de membres d'une organisation internationale ou d'autorites locales - it doit

12

etre possible d'arriver a une coordination satisfaisante
des efforts. J e pense en particulier a une cooperation
morale. Toutefois, nous estimons egaIement que les representants locaux de l'ONU, les autorites du Congo,
les experts et assistants techniques engages par accord
bilateral doivent de leur cote chercher a. mettre au point
des dispositions qui iavorisent la coorrnmation et ecartent les malentendus et les sentiments de competition
parmi les interesses.
59. Une fois encore, l'heure des grandes decisions
approche en ce qui concerne l'operation des Nations
Unies au Congo. Ma delegation estime que nos deliberations doivent s'inspirer des realites fondamentales et
des principes indiques ci-apres:
a.) Reconnaissance d'une autorite constitutionnelle,
dans l'espoir que cette autorite sera en fin de compte
le point de ralliement de la collaboration tant avec
l'Organisation des Nations Unies qu'avec les differentes
forces politiques dn pays;
b) N ecessite pour rONU, sans franchir indument
les limites n.'Cees par les resolutions et par la Charte,
de poursuivre sa tache de retablissement de l'ordre public et de la legalite dans le territoire;
c) Necessite d'insister sur le respect des droits de
l'homme comme condition prealable a. l'etablissement
de conditions de vie decentes, de l'ordre, de la legalite
et de la democratie du Congo.
60. Pour atteindre ces objectifs et venir en aide au
peuple congolais dans ses epreuves, il est essentie1 av~t
tout que nos deliberations se revelent utiles a l'Organisation et a la Force des Nations Unies au Congo.
C'est par cet appe1 et cette priere que je desire. conclure les observations que j'ai presentees au nom de
mon gouvernement.
61. M. BENITES VINUEZA (Equateur) [tradu.it
de l'espagnol]: Dans l'examen de la question dont le
Conseil est saisi, ma delegation entend rester dans les
limites d'une complete objectivite. Elle estime injurieux pour le peuple congolais que les epreuves douloureuses qu'il subit servent de pretexte a des manceuvres de guerre froide. Les problemes qui se posent aux
Congolais doivent etre resolus par eux. Le sort definitif
de ce pays, la forme de son gouvernement, le droit
qu'il possede d'exercer le pouvoir, ce sont la des questions dont la solution leur appartient. Nons denions
aux anciens maitres du Congo le droit d'essayer de
retablir - ouvertement ou d'une fac;on voilee - un
regime colonial qui doit etre definitivement aholi; nous
ne croyons pas a. cette theorie de l'etat mineur des peupIes recemment liberes, au nom de laquelle on voudrait
restaurer une nouvelle forme de tutelle. Si, dans le cadre d'une morale individuelle a son stade le plus eleve,
l'homme est une fin en soi et non un moyen, l'ethique
politique exige, elle aussi, que les peuples ne soient pas
consideres comme des instruments, mais comme ayant
eux aussi une valeur, une fin en soi.
6:"'. Ma delegation eprouve la plus vive sympathie a
l'ebard du peuple congolais qui a accede a l'independance dans un c1imat affligeant de luttes intestines et de
dechirements cruels. C'est pourquoi e1Ie pretend etudier
les problemes du Congo avec la plus grande comprehension. Elle est convaincue que l'integrite, la dignite
et l'independance du peuple congolais l'emportent sur
les . interets des factions et des groupes qui divisent
aujourd'hui le pays. Il se peut que le peuple congoIais
lui-meme soit, dans sa majeure partie, etranger aux
luttes actuelles, et il ne serait pas, moralement, juste
que son avenir soit compromis par le desir de trouver

or are local authorities-to arrive at a satisfactory coordination of efforts. I am referring in particular to
moral co-operation. But we also feel that a further
effort should be made by local United Nations representatives, the Congo authorities and experts and technical assistants engaged on a bilateral basis, to work
out arrangements to allow a proper co-ordination of
efforts, and elimination of misunderstandings and
feelings of competition among all concerned.
59. "We are again approaching, momentous decisions,
with regard to the United Nations operation in the
Congo. My delegation feels that our deliberations
should be guided by the following fundamental realities
and principles:
(a) The recognition of a constitutional authority, in
the hope that this authority be ultimately the rallying
point of co-operation both with the United Nations
and with the various political forces in the country;
(b) The necessity that the United Nations, without
going unduly beyond the limits set by the resolutions
and by the Charter, continues in its task of restoring
law and order in the territory;
(c) The need for stressing the observance of human
rights as a pre-requisite for the establishment c: :l
decent way of life and of order, law and democracy
in the Congo.
60. In order to pursue such goals and to help the
Congolese people in their toil, it is essential above all
that the United Nations and the United Nations Force
in the Congo be helped by our deliberations. That is
the appeal and the prayer with which I wish to conclude my remarks on behalf of my Government.

61. Mr. BENITES VINUEZA (Ecuador) [translated from Spanish] : In discussing the question before
the Security Council, my delegation intends to adopt
a strictly impartial approach. It considers that attempts
to convert these distressing problems into cold war
issues are insulting to the Congolese people. The problems of the Congo must be settled by the Congo itself.
Its final destiny, form of government and autonomy are
Congolese problems which call for Congolese solutions.
We reject the idea that the former rulers of the Congo
have any right to try to re-establish a colonial regime
overtly or covertly; that regime must be abolished once
and for all. Nor do we believe in the theory that newly
liberated peoples have not yet achieved maturity and
that new fonns of trusteeship should therefore be set
up for their benefit. Just as the highest standards of
.individual morality require us to treat man as an end
and not a means, so the standards of political morality
demand that peoples should be regarded as being of
intrinsic importance and not as instrument for the
attainment of certain ends.
62. My delegation has the deepest sympathy for the
Congolese people, whose emergence as an independent
nation has been accompanied by internal tension and
agonizing strife. For that reason, we hope to study the
problems of the Congo with the greatest understanding.
We are convinced that the integrity, dignity and independence of the Congolese people transcend the
interests of the factions and groups which today divide
the nation. It may well be that the majority of the
Congolese people are not directly involved in today's
struggles, and it would be neither right nor just to
prejudice their future in order to achieve the easiest

13

solution of the present problems. The basic· solution to
these problems must be considered from a long-term
standpoint, in relation to the future, and not in relation
to the often impassioned factional disputes by which
the country is now rent.
63. My delegation further believes that the Council
is not debating the general problem of the Congo, that
is to say, not considering all aspects of the problem
and its solution; this will be done in the broader study
to be undertaken by the General Assembly. What we
have to consider here, and consider urgently, is the
present tense situation and the immediate steps which
must be taken to deal wit~ it.
64. Clearly, this issue is closely related to the disputes over leadership and the struggles for power
which have divided the Congo into opposing factions.
But these disputes and struggles do not constitute the
issue which the Council was convened to discuss, for if
we were to deal with such matters we would rtm the
risk of turning the Council into an international tribunal for the settlement of the political problems of
Member States. In my delegation's view, the Council
has been convened because of the existence of serious
violations of human rights, the impending threat of
grave disorders which may endanger hundreds of
human lives, and the need to consider what preventive
action can be taken by the United Nations.
65. No one questions the fact that the United Nations
is not a super State with unlimited powers, as the
representative of Italy has just pointed out. It would
therefore be absurd for us to treat the Security Council
in the light of a world executive body with discretionary powers. We are not called upon to achieve
what is desirable, but what is possible, and what is
possible is what is laid down in the Charter. No
mandate can properly go beyond the bounds or exceed
the authority provided for in the Charter. Therefore,
our first duty is to determine the limits within which
our action must be confined.

la solution la plus facile a ses problemes actuels. Leur
solution quant au fond doit etre placee dans ses perspectives historiques, en fmIction de l'avenir, et non recherchee dans la fievre des combats passionnes entre
factions qui dechirent en ce moment le pays.
63. Ma delegation estime, par ailleurs, que 1'0n n'a
pas a discuter ici du probleme congolais dans son ensemble, c'est-a-dire a procerler a 1'examen general des
solutions possibles; ce sera 1'objet d'une etude plus
vaste de la part de 1'Assemblee generale. Ce qu'il nous
appartient d'examiner immediatement, c'est l'etat de
tension actuel et les mesures urgentes qu'il convient de
prendre pour y faire face.
64. I1 est evident que cette question est etroitement
liee aux luttes pour 1'hegemonie politique et aux conflits de pouvoir qui divisent le Congo en factions
opposees; mais ces querelles et ces conflits ne sont pas
le motif de la convocation du Conseil; on courrait, sans
cela, le risque de transformer ce dernier en une sorte
de tribunal international, charge de regler les problemes
politiques des Etats Membres. Ce qui, de 1'avis de ma
delegation, est 1'objet de la convocation du Conseil,
c'est 1'existence de graves violations des droits de
l'homme, 1'imminence de serieux desordres pouvant
mettre en peril des centaines de vies humaines, la recherche, enfin, des moyens que peut employer 1'ONU
pour eviter ces dangers.
65. I1 n'est pas douteux que 1'ONU ne constitue pas
un super-Etat dote de pouvoirs illimites et le representant de 1'Italie vient de le faire remarquer. Il serait,
par consequent, absurde de vouloir considerer le Conseil de securite comme une sorte d'executif a l'echelle
mondiale, disposant de pouvoirs discretionnaires. I1 ne
s'agit pas de realiser ce qui est souhaitable, mais ce qui
est possible; or, ce qui est possible est determine par
la Charte. Nul mandat ne peut outrepasser ses propres
limites, ni transgresser ses pouvoirs sans donner lieu
it des abus. Voila pourquoi il nous faut, en premier lieu,
determiner les limites dans lesquelles doit s'exercer
l'action que 1'on reclame de nous.
66. I1 faudrait faire preuve d'une extraordinaire subtilite pour faire entrer le cas qui nous occupe dans ceux
que prevoit l'Article 39 de la Charte. I1 s'agit, en ciIet,
d'une lutte d'influence, d'une lutte pour l'hegemonie
politique, d'une querelle portant sur la legitimite des
gouvernements, en un mot d'un probleme constitutionnel
purement interne. Le Congo etant un Etat souverain,
libre et independant, les questions ci-dessus relevent
indiscutablement de la competence nationale de ce pays,
comme ·le prevoit le paragraphe 7 de l'Article 2.
67. L'action de 1'ONU au Congo, qui fait 1'objet de
tant de critiques, n'a pas ete entreprise spontanement.
C'est le Gouvernement congolais lui-meme qui l'a sollicitee, par des telegrammes en date des 12 et 13 juillet
1960 [S/4382] et signes de M. Joseph Kasa-Vubu,
chef de I'Etat, et de M. Patrice Lumumba, premier ministre. Ces telegrammes, adresses au Secretaire general,
sollicitaient une aide militaire; le deuxieme telegramme
specifiait bien que l'aide demandee n'avait pas pour but
de retablir la situation interieure du Congo, mais d'assurer la protection de son territoire. Je me permets de
souligner que M. Lumumba - en sa qualite de premier
ministre - a, des le debut, etabli une ligne de demarcation entre les problemes interieurs du Congo, a propos desquels il ne voulait pas d'aide, et la de£ense de
l'integrite territoriale, pour laquelle il demandait it
I'ONU son assistance.
68. Quant au mandat etabli par le Conseil de securite,
it fit la meme distinction. En effet, la resolution adop-

66. It would stretch legal ingenuity to regard Article 39 of the Charter as applicable to the case before
us, which is a power conflict, a struggle for political
leadership, a dispute over the legitimacy of governments, in short, a problem of an internal constitutional
nature. And since the Congo is a free and independent
sovereign State, this is unquestionably a matter within
its domestic jurisdiction, which is safeguarded by
Article 2 (7) of the Charter.
67. The action the United Nations has taken in the
Congo, which is now being criticized on such varied
grounds, was not taken on its own initiative. It was
called for by the Congolese Government itself in cables
dated 12 and 13 July 1960 [S/4382], cables signed by
Mr. Joseph Kasa-Vubu as the head of state and
by Mr. Patrice Lumumba as the Prime Minister. The
cables, which were addressed to the Secretary-General,
requested military aid, the second specifying that the
purpose of the aid requested was not to restore the
internal situation in the Congo but to protect its territory. I should like to emphasize the fact that Mr. Lumumba, as Prime Minister, drew a distinction from the
very outset between the domestic problems of the
Congo, for which he did not ask assistance, and the
defence of the country's territorial integrity, for which
he did seek assistance.
68. The mandate given by the Security Council followed very much the same lines. The resolution sub14

tee le 14 juillet par le Conseil de securite, sur l'initiative du representant de la Tunisie, decidait "d'autoriser
le Secretaire general a prendre, en consultation avec le
Gouvernement de la Republique du Congo, les mesures
necessaires en vue de fournir a ce gouvernement l'assistance militaire dont il a besoin, et ce jusqu'au moment ou les forces nationales de securite, grace aux
efforts du Gouvernement congolais et avec l'assistance
technique de l'Organisation des Nations Unies, seront
a meme, de l'opinion de ce gouvernement, de remplir
entierement leurs taches".
69. Je me permets d'insister sur le fait que ce mandat
subordonne l'action de l'ONU au Congo a la consultation du Gouvernement congolais, ce qui est une bonne
methode pour maintenir strictement cette action en dehors du cadre de la competence nationale du Congo. Ce
mandat ne prevoit pas, et 1 e pouvait pas prevoir, de
moyens quelconques destines a apprecier la legitimite
ou l'illt~gitimite du Gouvernement congolais. II n'accorde a personne le pouvoir d'interpreter les textes
constitutionnels et les lois congolaises aux fins de savoir a qui revient Iegalement 1'exercice du gouvernement, ce qui, dans des conditions normales, n'aurait
souleve auctlll probleme, mais represente actuellement
la source de toutes nos difficultes.
70. C'est un fait - et les faits sont inexorablement ce
qu'ils sont et nOll pas ce que nous voudrions qu'ils
soient - c'est un fait, donc, que la jeune Republique
du Congo connait des difficultes de plus en plus inextricables. La lutte pour le pouvoir a pris des formes
d'une violence inhabituelle. Les conflits purement politiques, provoques par des ideologies opposant les factions, ont ete suivis de luttes entre les tribus, ou les
vieilles animosites sont venues s'ajouter aux haines
plus recentes. En outre, les elements appeU~s a maintenir 1'union, a garantir 1'ordre et a assurer la paixc'est-a-dire les forces armees congolaises - n'ont malheureusement pas pu se soustraire a cette atmosphere
de discorde et ont pris parti, de fa<;on confuse.
71. II est facile de comprendre que, dans une telle
ambiance, chacune des factions en presence, chacun des
dirigeants croyant detenir le legitime exercice du pouvoir, ait ete tente de croire que les forces des Nations
Unies devaient proteger ses interets politiques. Nous
ne comprenons pas, en revanche, que 1'on pretende que
les representants des Nations Unies auraient dil proceder a un arbitrage entre ces factions. II est bien evident qu'ils ne pouvaient le faire dans le cadre de leurs
attributions. Nous pouvons croire, ou ne pas croire,
selon notre sympathie personnelle ou notre position
ideologique, a 1'illegitimite de la destitution de M. Lumumba; it n'en reste pas moins que c'est la une question qui doit etre apprcciee en tenant compte des lois
congolaises, que nous ne sommes pas habilites a interpreter sans empieter sur la competence nationale du
Congo. On peut manifester des doutes plus serieux
face a 1'attitude du chef d'etat-major de 1'armee congolaise, le colonel Mobutu, lorsqu'il a declare, vers la
mi-septembre, que "1'armee prendrait le pouvoir jusqu'au 31 decembre, en raison des luttes se deroulant
entre les partis gouvernementaux opposes". Je dois
avouer que nous eprouvons une certaine repulsion pour
toute intervention militaire dans le domaine politique,
que ce soit en Afrique ou en Amerique, et que nous
eprouvons quelque inquietude devant une ingerence
systematique dans les problemes interieurs de ce pays.
72. Les faits qui ont motive la convocation du Conseil de securite sont le resultat de ces luttes internes.
lIs sont exposes dans le rapport adresse au Secretaire

mittedby the Tunisian representative, as finally approved on 14 July, stated that the Security Council
decided: "to authorize the Secretary-General to take
the necessary steps, in consultation with the Government of the Republic of the Congo, to provide the
Government with such military assistance as may be
necessary until, through the efforts of the Congolese
Government with the technical assistance of the United
Nations, the national security forces may be able, in the
opinion of the Government, to meet fully their tasks;"
69. I should like to stress that this mandate makes
United Nations action in the Congo contingent upon
consultation with the Congolese Government, which is
a sound method of ensuring that such action remains
outside the limits of the domestic jurisdiction of the
State. It does not establish, nor could it establish, any
criterion for assessing the legitimacy or otherwise of
the Congolese Government. It does not grant authorization of any kind to interpret the constitutional texts
or the laws of the Congo to determine in whom the
right to exercise power is legally vested. And this circumstance, which in normal conditions would have
raised no problems whatsoever, is the source of the
present difficulties.
70. It is a fact-and facts are implacable as they are
and not as we would like them to be-that the political
difficulties of the young Republic of the Congo have
grown increasingly complex. The struggle for power
has taken on unusually violent forms. The primarily
political struggles resulting from ideological conflict
between factions have been followed by tribal strife,
in which old animosities have been reinforced by new.
And the Congolese armed forces, whose function it was
to maintain unity, to guarantee order and to ensure
peace, have unfortunately been unable to remain detached from the discord and are participating indiscriminately in the conflict.
71. In these circumstances, it is understandable that
each of the rival factions and each of the leaders laying
claim to the legitimate exercise of power, should have
expected the United Nations forces to protect their
particular political interests. But I cannot understand
the argument that the representatives of he United Nations should have arbitrated between the factions. Quite
clearly, they could not do so within the limits of their
mandate. We mayor may not believe, according to our
personal sympathies or ideological position, that
Mr. Lumumba's removal from office was an unlawful
act, but this is a matter which must be decided by reference to Congolese laws, and we cannot interpret these
laws without trespassing upon the country's domestic
jurisdiction. We may have grave doubts concerning the
activities of Colonel Mobutu, the Chief of Staff of the
Congolese Army, who stated in mid-September that
"the Army would take over power until 31 December
because of the struggle between opposing governments". I must own that we view with a certain
repugnance all military action in the political sphere,
be it in Africa or in America, and that we are concerned about systematic interference in the internal
problems of that State.

72. The events which led to the convening of the
Security Council are the result of these internal conflicts. They have been described in the report sub-

15

general par son representant au Congo. Rien ne nous
autorise a mettre en doute la droiture et I'honorabilite
de M. Dayal, que nous avons personnellement connu
quand il assumait avec distinction les fonctions de representant de l'Inde aupres de I'ONU et que nous
avons appris a considerer comme un homme integre.
C'est pourquoi ma delegation accepte comme veridiques les informations officielles qu'il nous a transmises; il en ressort que rien ne nous autorise a penser
que la force des Nations Unies au Congo ait .agi avec
partialite en vue de favoriser la capture de M. Lumumba.
73. Mais le rapport Dayal relate par ailleurs des faits
qui constituent une violation flagrante des droits de
I'homme. Les actes de violence sur. la personne, les
coups, les traitements vexatoires qu'ont subis M. Patrice Lumumba et plusieurs membres de son parti, les
conditions dans lesquelles ils ont ete maintenus en prison sont autant de faits que ma delegation condamne
comme une violation des principes de la Charte que le
Gouvernement congolais s'etait engage a respecter au
moment de son admission dans I'Organisation.
74. Nous pensons que, lorsqu'il s'agit de la violation
des droits de l'homme, on ne peut toujours alleguer
l'exception de competence nationale. La Charte est, en
fait, un traite multilateral qui forme un tout indivisible.
Chaque Etat signataire est tenu d'en observer les termes, car, en y souscrivant, il a transfere une partie de
ses competences a I'Organisation des Nations Unies.
C'est pourquoi, a notre avis, nous devons exiger du
Congo qu'il s'acquitte de ses obligations essentielles
concernant les droits de I'homme.

mitted' to the Secretary-General by his Special Representative in the Congo. We have no reason to question
the honesty and integrity of Mr. Dayal. We made his
acquaintance when he represented India with great distinction in the United Nations and learned to admire
him as a man of the finest qualities. My delegation
therefore accepts the truth of the official information
he has submitted. Nothing in it gives us reason to
believe that the United Nations Force in the Congo
has been guilty of any particularly in facilitating
Mr. Lumumba's capture.
73. The report does mention, however, facts which
constitute a flagrant violation of human rights. In my
delegation's opinion, the acts of physical violence,
beatings and indignities to which Mr. Patrice Lumumba
and various members of his party have been subjected,
and the conditions of their detention constitute a violation of the principles laid down in the Charter, which
the Congolese Government pledged itself to uphold
upon joining this Organization.
74. We believe that, in the case of violations of
human rights, it is not always possible to invoke the
argument that matters within the domestic jurisdiction
of a State are involved. The Charter is a multilateral
treaty and forms an indivisible whole. Its observance
is binding upon Member States, which, in signing it,
have recognized that their domestic jurisdiction is in
some measure subordinate to the international jurisdiction of the United Nations. In this respect we believe that the Congo must be called upon to fulfill its
essential obligation to safeguard human rights.
75. I should like to refer briefly to certain suggestions
which we have heard and which merit our fullest consideration. My delegation wishes to associate itself
with the request for the immediate and unconditional
release of the Congolese leaders who have been
arrested, but it believes that the authority to order
arrests is the exclusive prerogative of the State. On the
other hand, it would be prepared to support any request
aimed at ensuring that these leaders receive a fair trial
and are sentenced in accordance with the laws in force,
for this is a fundamental human right.

75. Je desire rappeler brievement certaines suggestions que nous avons ecoutees avec le plus grand respect. Ma delegation voudrait pouvoir s'associer a la
demande de mise en liberte immediate et inconditionnelle des dirigeants congolais detenus; mais elle estime
que le pouvoir d'ordonner une arrestation ou de proceder a un emprisonnement est du ressort exclusif de
I'Etat. En revanche elle serait disposee a appuyer toute
requete visant a garantir l'impartialite du proc(~s et a
nnnner l'assurance que le jugement sera rendu en ccnformite des lois en vigueur, parce que cela entre dans
le cadre des droits fondamentaux de la personne
humaine.
76. La suggestion selon laquelle la Commission de
conciliation devrait se transformer en une commission
chargee d'etudier les conditions generales regnant au
Congo et de rechercher des solutions durables a cette
question merite un examen approfondi; peut-etre, cependant, cet examen devrait-il intervenir lors de la
discussion de ces problemes au sein de l'Assemblee
generale.
77. Pour conclure, je dirai quelques mots des projets
de resolution. Celui que presente I'Union sovietique
[Sj4579] comporte des elements qui, d'une part, sont
contraires aux dispositions de la Charte et, d'autre
pad, presentent de graves dangers sur le plan politique.
Je me bornerai a en signaler deux: l'appel lance au
Secretaire general, afin que celui-ci assure la liberation
immediate de MM. Lumumba, Okito, Kasongo et autres Congolais, ainsi que le retablissement de l'autorite
au Congo, est absolument contraire aux dispositions de
la Charte. Quant a la demande tendant a ce que le
Commandant de la Force des Nations Unies au Congo
procede au ·desarmement de l'armee nationale congolaise, elle est non seulement contraire aux dispositions
de la Charte, mais constituerait en outre un cas d'agre!S-

76. The suggestion that the Conciliation Commission
should be converted into a commission to study the
general conditions in the Congo and to seek permanent
solutions warrants careful consideration, but it should
perhaps be taken up when these matters are under discussion in the General Assembly.
77. In conclusion, I shall deal briefly with the draft
resolutions. The draft resolution submitted by the
Soviet Union [Sj4579] contains provisions that are
contrary to the Charter and are extremely dangerous
politically. I shall mention just two of them: the appeal to the Secretary-General to secure the immediate
release of Mr. Lumumba, Mr. Okito, Mr. Kasongo and
other Congolese and to ensure the resumption of government activities in the Congo is completely contrary
to the provisions of the Charter; and the request that
the Command of the United Nations Force in the
Congo should proceed to disarm the Armee nationale
congolaise is not only contrary to the Charter but
would also constitute aggression. Nor could my delegation, without further information, endorse the

16

opinions expressed about Belgian actions in the Congo
and, therefore, the provision regarding withdrawal of
Belgian military, paramilitary and civil personnel.

78. I now turn to the draft resolution sponsored by
Argentina, Italy, the United Kingdom and the United
States [Sj4578]. It is my delegation's understanding
that the purpose of the third preambular paragraph is
to include in the mandate of the United Nations the
safeguarding of civil and human rights for all the inhabitants of the Congo. Even though this provision
does not appear in an operative paragraph as a statement of principle, which would have been preferable,
my delegation believes that its effect is, if not formally
to enlarge the Secretary-General's mandate, at least
to make it clear that this mandate should be interpreted to include the safeguarding of the civil and
human rights of the Congo's inhabitants. This is very
desirable, particularly as the final operative paragraph
must be interpreted in this sense.
79. My delegation will support any provision which
broa<Jens and clarifies the Secretary-General's mandate
in regard to the protection of human rights in the
Congo. Any violation of these rights, on whatever side
it may be committed, calls for our special attention.
We condemn the acts of harassment committed by the
Congolese authorities against Mr. LUlllumba and his
associates no less vigorously than the outrages and
appalling threats by Mr. Lumumba's supporters at
Stanleyviile, as set forth in the report of the SecretaryGeneral's Special Representative in the Congo
[Sj4590].
SO. My delegation would have preferred something
more forceful than the expression of the hope that the
Government of the Congo will allow the International
Red Cross to visit the prisoners. We believe that
respect for human rights is mandatory, not optional,
for Member States, and that the Congo is indisputably bound to observe the principles of the Charter.
We shall nevertheless support the inclusion of this
paragraph, since a report from the International Red
Cross would help to shed light on the actual condition
of the persons detained both at Leopoldville and at
Stanleyville.
81. The third operative paragraph will also receive
my delegation's support. I have no personal or political
reason for defending the Secretary-General, and neither
has my delegation. We realize that he is not infallible,
that, being human, he is liable to err, as he himself
has recognized. But my delegation also has no reason
to believe that his actions have been anything but
honourable and just, and it will therefore support the
recommendation that he should continue his efforts
to restore order and safeguard human rights in the
Republic of the Congo.
82. To conr' ude, I should like to express my delegation's hope Llat every effort will be made to remove
the problem of .the Congo from the dangerous sphere
of the cold war. The unusual language, which the
Soviet Union has used in its oral and written statements and which is out of keeping with the respect
due to the Security Council, cannot be endorsed by
those members of the Council who seek constructive
action. The deluge of vituperation has lasted more than
forty days and forty nights since the start of the

sion. Ma delegation ne pourrait pas davantage s'associer - sans un supplement d'informations - aux jugements qui ont ete portes sur les activites beIges au
Congo ni, par consequent, a la demande de retrait du
personnel militaire ou paramilitaire et du personnel
civil.
78. J'en arrive maintenant au projet de resolution
presente par l'Argentine, les Etats-Unis, l'Italie et le
Royaume-Uni [Sj4578]. Le troisieme considerant prevoit la necessite d'inclure dans le mandat des Nations
Unies la protection des droits civils et des droits .de
l'homme pour tous .les habitants du Congo. Bien que
ces stipulations ne figttrent pas dans le dispositif, sous
la forme d'une affirmation de principe, ce qui etit ete
preferable, ma delegation estime qu'elles tendent, sinon
a elargir, tout au moins a interpreter la portee du man-dat confere au Secretaire general dans le sens de son
application a la'protection des droits de l'homme et des
droits civils des habitants du Congo. C'est la un point
de vue plausible, d'autant plus que le contexte meme
du dernier paragraphe du dispositif doit etre interprete
de cette fac;on.
79. Ma delegation apportera son appui a tout ce qui
peut amplifier et preciser le mandat don~e.. au Secretaire general en vue de la protection d~s droits de
l'homme au Congo. De quelque cote. qpe .se produise la
violation de ces droits, nous devonsy apporter. une
attention toute speciale. Ma delegation condamne aussi
bien les traitements vexatoires infliges a M. Lumumba
et a ses partisans par les autorites congolaises que les
actes inouis et les menaces effroyables d~s partisans
de M. Lumumba a Stanleyville, tels ql1'ils ressortent
du rapport du representant special Clu Secretaire general au Congo [Sj4590].
80. Ma delegation etit souhaite l'emploi de termes
plus energiques que le simple espoir d~ v~ir le Gouvernement du Congo permettre a la Croix;-Rouge internationale de visiter des prisomriers. Elle pense en effet
que le respect des droits de l'homme n'est pas une faculte, mais une obligation pour les Etats Membres;
dans le cas qui nous occupe, le Congo est tenu, de maniere irrevocable, d'observer les principes -de la Charte.
Ma delegation appuiera neanmoins l'inclusion de ce
paragraphe, etant donne que le rapport de la CroixRouge internationale nous permettrait de no.us faire une
idee plus claire de la situation reelle des detenus, tant
a Leopoldville qu'a Stanleyville.
81. La delegation de mon pays appuiera egalement
l'adoption du paragraphe 3 du dispositif. ·Jen'ai aucune raison personnelle ou politique de m'eriger en
defenseur du Secretaire general et ma delegation n'en
a pas davantage. Elle croit qu'il n'est pas infaillible et
qu'iI peut faire des erreprs comme tout etre humain:
lui-meme l'a reconnu. Mais ma delegation n'a aucune
raison de mettre en doute l'honnetete et la rectitude
de son action. C'est pourquoi elle appuiera la recommandation le priant de faire tous ses efforts pour retablir l'ordre public et la sauvegarde des droits de
l'homme dans la Republique du Congo.
82. Je voudrais, en terminant, exprimer 1'espoir que
nourritma delegation qu'aucun effort ne sera epargne
pour sortir le probleme du Congo du terrain dangereux
de la guerre froide. Nous qui souhaitons faire reuvre
constructive, nous ne saurions approuver le langage
inhabituel, et peu digne du respect que merite le Conseil, dont a use 1'Union sovietique dans ses documents
et dans ses declarations. Depuis le debut de l'Assemblee, c'est-a-dire pendant plus de 40 jours et 40 nuits,
nous avons subi un deluge d'invectives; nous estimons

17

General Assembly and we believe that it is now time
for the olive branch to appear.
83. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian):
\iVith the consent of the Security Council, I call on
the representative of the United Arab Republic.
84. Mr.
FAWZI
(United Arab Repttbli.c):
Mr. President, please allow me to express to you and
to the members of the Council the thanks of my delegation for acceding to its request to participate in this
debate.
8S. As on previous occasions, when dealing with
developments of international concern in the Congo,
the Security Council is clearly within its rights and is
exercising some of its prerogatives, as well as assuming
some of its responsibilities. A situation such as the one
currently prevailing in the Congo is not only likely to
be, but actually is endangering world peace and
security.
86. When the Kingdom of Belgium recognized and
deferred to the wishes of the people of the Congo who
struggled for their independence, it received the
plaudits of many sections of the world's public and
official opinion; and the doubts which had been entertained relating to the policy and intentions of Belgium
and its associates regarding the Congo were, at least
in part, momentarily allayed. These doubts were, unfortunately, soon to be revived and even to grow and
crystallize into concrete, ugly and most disturbing
realities.
87. We had reason to believe, however, when the
United Nations urgently considered the situation and
took action, upon the invitation of the legitimate Government of the Congo, headed by Mr. Patrice Lumumba, that events would again take a turn towards
sanity and constructive action, with scrupulous
respect for the Congo's independence and territorial
integrity. This, unfortunately, was not to be. and we
are now facing in the Congo a situation which is
ominous in the extreme.

donc qu'it est temps de faire place a l'olivier de la paix.
83. Le PRESIDENT (tmduit du russe): Avec l'assentiment des membres du Conseil, je donne la parole
au representant de la Republique arabe unie.
84. M. FAWZI (Republique arabe unie) [tradttit de
l'anglais]: Monsieur le President, permettez-moi, au
nom de ma delegation, de vous remercier ainsi que les
membres du Conseil d'avoir bien voulu faire droit a
notre demande de participer a ce debat.
85. Comme itl'a deja fait lors d'occasions precedentes
ou it traitait d'evenements d'interet international au
Congo, le Conseil de securite exerce sans aucun doute
ses droits et certaines de ses prerogatives de meme
qu'it assume quelques-unes de ses responsabilites. Une
situation comme celle qui existe actuellement au Congo
non seulement risque de compromettre, mais menace
effectivement la paix et la securite mondiales.
86. Lorsque le royaume de Belgique s'est rendu aux
vceux du peuple congolais qui luttait pour son independance, il a ete applaudi par de nombreux secteurs de
l'opinion publique et 1'0pinion officielle mondiales; les
doutes qU'avaient inspires sa politique et ses intentions
ainsi que celles de ses associes a l'egard du Congo ont
ete, en partie du moins, momentanement dissipes.
Helas! ils devaient. bientot renaitre et redoubler pour
se muer en certitudes devant des realites concretes
aussi affligeantes que profondement troublantes.
87. Toutefois, lorsque, sur l'invitation du gouvernement legitime du Congo, qui avait a sa tete M. Patrice
Lumu111ba.. I'OND avait decide d'examiner d'urgence
la question et de prendre les mesures qui s'imposaient,
nous avions toutes les raisons de croire que la situation
serait retablie et que 1'0n s'engagerait a nouveau dans
la voie de la raison et de l'action constructive en respedant scrupuleusement l'independance et l'integrite
territoriale du Congo. Malheureusement, ces espoirs
ont ete de'Sus, et nous nous trouvons maintenant devant une situation extremement menac;ante.
88. En termes non equivoques, I'OND a defini sa
politique a l'egard du Congo comme suit:
" .... prendre, en consultation avec le Gouvernement de la Republique du Congo, les 111esures necessaires en vue de fournir a ce gouvernement l'assistance militaire dont il a besoin, et ce jnsqu'au moment ott les forces nationales de securite, grace aux
efforts du Gouv"mement congolais et avec l'assistance technique des Nations Unies, seront a meme,
de l'opinion de ce gouvernement, de remplir entiere111ent leurs taches." [Resolution S /4387.]
"[Prie: ...] tous les Etats de s'abstenir de toute
action qui pourrait tendre a empecher le retablissement de 1'0rdre public et l'exercice de son autorite
par le Gouvernement de la Republique du Congo, et
aussi de s'abstenir de toute action qui pourrait saper
runite, l'integrite territoriale et l'independance politique de la Republique du Congo." [Resolution 1474
(ES-IV) de l'Assemblee generale.]
" [Prie] le Secretaire general de continuer de
111ener une action vigoureuse conformement aux termes des resolutions susmentionnees et d'aider le
Gouvernement central du Congo a retablir et maintenir l'ordre public dans tout le territoire de la Republique du Congo et de sauvegarder son unite, son
integrite territoriale et son independance politique
dans l'interet de la paix et de la securite internationales." [Ibid.]

88. In unequivocal terms, the United Nations
defined its policy regarding the Congo as follows:
" ... to take the necessary steps, in consultation with
the Government of the Republic of the Congo, to
provide the Government with such military assistance, as may 'be necessary, until, through the efforts
of the Congolese Government with the technical
assistance of the United Nations, the national
security forces may be able. in the opinion of the
Government, to meet fully their tasks:" [Resohttion
S/4387.]
"[Req1,ests: ...] All States to refrain from any
action which might tend to impede the restoration
of law and order and the exercise by the Government of the Republic of the Congo of its authority
and also to refrain from any action which might
undermine the unity, territorial integrity and political
independence of the Republic of the Congo;" [General Assembly resolution 1474 (ES-IV).]
"[Requests] the Secretary-General to continue to
take vigorous action in accordance with the terms of
the aforesaid resolutions and to assist the Central
Government of the Congo in the restoration and
maintenance of law and order throughout the territory of the Republic of the Congo and to safeguard
its unity, territorial integrity and political independence in the interests of international peace and
security;" [Ibid.]

18

89. Such were the objectives set by the United Nations, as outlined in its own resolutions. I have mentioned them again, as I see and as we all note, that
these objectives are too often forgotten. What actually
happened, and is continuing to happen, is that Belgian
colonialism, aided and abetted by others, is defiantly
back in the Congo; that the real leaders and representatives of the country, including the Prime Minister,
the president of the Senate, the president of the
Chamber of Deputies, and other ministers and deputies,
are plotted against, treated with savagery, and imprisoned-they, not General Naguib who, despite one
of the too familiar allegations of Mr. Kasa-Vubu, is
quite free an(~ unmolested; and we see at large and
openly, at the head of the State of the Congo a motley
group of stooges and rasta.eueros) whose source of income is either unknown or, as is the general rule, quite
well known to be coming from some imperialist
Powers. And we see the legitimate government of the
Congo denied all scope for exercising authority and
for getting in touch with the people. We see Patrice
Lumumba,who 1S stilI the rightful head of that government, denied even the most elementary human
rights, Patrice Lun1Umba who, even while a prisoner in
his cell or ignominiously dragged around the streets
with his hands tied behind his back, is, on his own
and what he stands for, far stronger than all the forces
and all the stooges of reaction and of colonialism.

89. Tels etaient les objedifs vises par rONU et precises dans les resolutions qU'elle avait adoptees. Je Its
ai rappeles, car je constate, comme nous tous d'ailleurs,
que ces objectifs sont trap souvent oublies. Ce qui
s'est passe en realite et qui continue, c'est que le colonialisme belge, aide et encourage par d'autres, est de
retour au Congo ou il defie toute opposition; que les
veritables chefs et representants du pays, notamment
le Premier Ministre, le President du Senat, le President de la Chambre des repr.esentants et d'autres
ministres et deputes sont victimes de complots, traites
avec sauvagerie et emprisonnes - eux et non pas le
general Naguib, qui, malgre les allegations de M. KasaVubu qui ne sont maintenant que trop connues, jouit
de la plus parfaite legalite et n'est soumis a aucun mauvais traitement; et que nous voyons enfin a la tete de
l'Etat du Congo un groupe de comparses et de rastaquoueres dont les moyens d'existence sont ou bien inconnus ou proviennent notoirement, comme il est de
regIe le plus sO~lvent, de certaines puissances imperialistes. N ous voyons. encore refuser au gouvernement
legitime du Congo toute possibilite d'exercer son autorite et de prendre contact avec la population. Patrice
Lumumba, qui est toujours le chef legitime de ce gouvernement, se voit denier jusqu'aux droits les plus eIementaires de l'homme, lui qui, meme prisonnier dans
sa cellule ou ignominieusement traine dans les rues les
mains liees derriere le dos, est, par lui-meme et par
l'ideal qu'il incarne, beaucoup plus puissant que toutes
les forces et tous les suppots de la reaction et du colonialisme.
90. L'ONU va-t-elle se borner a adopter des resolutions sur le papier et a exprimer de futiles ressentiments lorsque ces resolutions sont meconnues et dedaignees? Allons-nous continuer a parler sans cesse
d'aider le Congo, pendant que l'imperialisme s'en empare? Allons-nous accepter d'etre, les uns apres les
autres, submerges, pietines par les forces de l'imperialisme et du mal dans le monde? Repondre affirmativement a l'une de ces questions ou a toutes serait faire fi
de nos intelligences et porter atteinte aux sources
memes de notre existence.
91. N'est-il pas evident et incontestable maintenant
que l'ONU ne peut et ne doit plus se contenter de se
tirer d'affaire tant bien que mal au Congo, et d'accepter
le role meprisable de spectateur impuissant devant le
retour de l'imperialisme beige dans ce pays? Il faut
qu'elle comprenne que, si elle n'oriente pas son action
de fat;on entierement differente, elle ne pourra bientot
plus aider le Congo, parce qu'il n'y aura plus personne
qui puisse y etre aide?
92. Il est certain, comme l'a souligne le Secretaire
general dans sa declaration [913eme sea.nee] , que les
evenements du Congo ont modifie et modifient sans
cesse les notions sur la base desquelles nous avons
entrepris, au debut, notre action dans ce pays.
93. Etant donne ces raisons et d'autres considerations
du meme ordre, le Gouvernement de la Republique
arabe unie est arrive, avec le plus profond regret, it la
conclusion inevitable qu'il ne pouvait pas etre associe
a l'action honteuse de l'imperialisme au Congo, ni etre
le temoin de ses intolerables activites. C'est ce qui l'a
amene, en fin de compte, a decider de retirer du Congo
les troupes de la Republique arabe unie qui participent
actuellement a I'operation des Nations Unies dans ce
pays.
94. Toutefois, la Republique arabe unie est toujours
resolue a poursuivre la lutte et a redoubler d'efforts
aussi bien en faveur de l'independance et de l'integrite

90. Are we, in this United Nations, merely to adopt
paper resolutions and express futile resentments if
those resolutions are flouted and looked on with disdain? Are we to continue for ever to talk about
helping the Congo, while imperialism helps itself to the
Congo? Are we to submit to being one after the other
overrun and trodden under by the forces of imperialism and of evil in the world? To say yes to any
or all of these questions would be to deny our intelligence and attack the very core of our own existence.
91. Is it not clear beyond objection that the United
Nations cannot afford, and must not choose, merely to
meddle and muddle through in the Congo; merely to
assume the miserable role of a helpless spectator of the
return of Belgium and :'mperialism to that country,
and to forget that, if thl;'. U"~':i~d is maintained and is
not reversed, we could no louger help the Congo, as
there would be nothing left of the Congo to help?
·92. Obviously, as the Secretary-General pointed out
in his statement [913th meeting] the happenings in
the Congo have been and stilI are constantly changing
the assumptions on which we first undertook our
responsibilities there.
93. For these and other related considerations, the
Government of the United Arab Republic has, with the
deepest regret, come to the inevitable conclusion that
it should not be a party to nor a direct witness of, the
shameful and intolerable action of imperialism in the
C~mgo, and has been impelled to decide finally on the
Withdrawal of the United Arab RepUblic troops which
are now participating in the United Nations operation
there.
94. In the meantime, for its part, the United Arab
Republic is as determined as ever to maintain its
struggle and redouble its efforts on behalf of the in-

19

dependence and territorial integrity of the Congo, as
well as on behalf of the Charter for the success and the
essential integrity of the United Nations.
95. Some circles, mostly well-intentioned, seem to resent
and resist any assumption that the United Nations
operation in the Congo has been a failure. These circles
could, however, hardly suggest or e..~pect us to call that
operation a resounding success. In this connexion, the
Secretary-General expressed himself before the Security
Council on 7 December to the effect that, like all the
rest of us, he does not attribute to the United Nations
any myth of infallibility. It is, furthennore, heartening
to recall that the United Nations cannot only be debited for its many failures, such as in Palestine,
Algeria and so far at least in the Congo, but can also
be credited with its few successes; and it is with a
feeling of gratitude and, one may sorrowfully add, of
nostalgia that we all remember-and the United Arab
Republic particularly remembers-the noble, courageous, alert and imaginative stand and action of the
United Nations as a whole and of the Secretariat, with
Mr. Hammarskjold at its head, when the Suez crisis
flared up and was about to blow to pieces both the
United Nations and world peace.
96. At this point I beg to submit that the various
organs of the United Nations 'which deal with one
problem or another should, through bodies appointed
by them or other means, in full and close co-operation
. with the Secretariat, assume more directly and actively
their share of responsibility in relation to the implementation of the resolutions which they adopt. Of
recent years we have got more and more into the habit
of throwing so much on the Secretariat, to the extent
that, in many minds, it has become synonymous with
the United Nations, and "Leave it to Dag" became one
of the most famous phrases of our time. This escapism
on the part of United Nations bodies was hardly fair
either to the Secretariat or to the United Nations as
a whole. It has, nevertheless, continued to be resorted
to, until the Congo affair occurrc:,. and was the last
straw-and what a straw I-which broke, or almost
broke, the camel's back.
97. A new, more realistic and responsible, approach
by all of us to the present situation and eventually to
other situations has become imperative. VIfe must not
hesitate to adopt such an approach, keeping always
in mind, as far as the Congo is concerned, our objective of safeguarding the independence and territorial
integrity of that country.
98. To attain this objective it is evident that the
obstacles besetting our way should be promptly removed. By far the biggest and worst of such obstacles
is imperialism, recurrent, obstinate and dominating at
present the whole Congo scene. No one here or elsewhere can doubt that, as long as there is any imperialist presence in the Congo, even under a different name,
there will continue to be dissension, "stoogism" and
disruption of the very concept of Congolese independence and territorial integrity. No one can doubt either
that, once imperialism disappears, stooges will too, the
real leaders of the country will again be effectively at
the forefront, and unity and independence will both
prevail and rapidly flourish.
99. Persuasion should be used and, if necessary,
pressure should be brought to bear on all, particularly
Belgium, so that foreign interference in the affairs of
the Congo may be promptly stopped.

100. At the same time, Mr. LtlIllumba and the other
leaders of the country who are at present apprehended
should be immediately freed and allowed' full scope for
exercising their official, as well as human, rights and
prerogatives.
101. Furthermore, a much more positive attitude
should be adopted by the United Nations, so that the
Congo is not left as a vacuum to be filled only by the
return of Belgians and Belgian domination, and the last
vestiges of any false pretext for Belgium's return to
the Congo are completely eliminated.
102. It would be neither fair nor realistic to overlook
or belittle the immensity and intricacy of these tasks.
But this Organization can certainly muster enough
strength and use enough resourcefulness to carry them
out adequately and honourably. If we were to try to
carry out only the tasks that are easy, we should
hardly be doing anything that was worthwhile.
103. I wish to recall that in his address to the
General Assembly on 27 September last, President
Nasser stated that: "in the opinion of the United Arab
Republic matters should be restored to what they were
Rectification of the error necessitates that we should
re-establish the situation as it was." He added:
"If it occurs to a:lY one of us that the way back is
hard to take and that the fa.it a.ceompli is now the
true basis for rectifying the whole situation, I shall
permit myself, because of our own experience and
the sufferings in our part of the world, to raise my
voice in warning and admonition. To condone a
mistake will most assuredly engender a series of mistakes, the seeds of error which, if left to take rootno matter how small-time will not cover with
oblivion. The seeds will grow bigger and bigger as
the days go by. The passing of a year will add to
their ramification and complexity." [813rd plena1'y
meeting, para. 128.]
104. My delegation has carefully studied the draft
resolution submitted by the delegations of Argentina,
Italy, the United Kingdom and the United States of
America, and the other draft resolution, submitted by
the delegation of the Soviet Union.
105. We find that the first of these two draft resolutions falls far short of what, under the circumstances,
the people of the Congo, of the United Nations and of
the whole world are entitled to expect. It does not even
do ;>s little as to grope faintly for a solution. It does
'lot, so to speak, take the bull by the horns. It does not
even venture to come anywhere near the bull. All that
it stipulates is that there should be respect for human
rights in the Congo. That is very good-but that is all
the draft resolution recommends. It does so as if to
commemorate the signing of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, the atmiversary of which, will be
celebrated tomorrow. Are the authors of that draft
resolution really so oblivious of the harsh realities, of
the great human values, of the implications and vital
issues involved? Whatever answer one gives is bound
to be extremely disheartening. The contrast between
the vast dimensions of the crisis we are facing today
in the. Congo and this meek and timid draft resolution
is really appalling.

1(\'). D'autre part, M. Lumumba et les autres dirig,. ':lts du pays qui sont a l'heure actuelle emprisonnes
doivent etre immediatement liberes et mis en mesure
d'e.'\:ercer integralement' leurs fonctions officielles et
leurs droits individuels.
101. Enfin, il importe que l'ONU adopte une attitude
beaucoup plus positive, afin de ne pas laisser au Congo
de vide qui ne puisse etre rempli que par le retour des
Belges et de la domination beIge et pour que les derniers prete:h.'i:es invoques pour ce retour soient definitivement elimines.
102. Il ne serait ni juste, ni realiste, de sous-estimer
ou de meconnaitre l'immensite et la comple.xite de ces
taches. Mais notre organisation dispose certainement
d'assez de force et de ressources pour les remplir d'une
maniere satisfaisante et honorable. Si nous devions nous
borner a n'entreprendre que ce qui est facile, nous ne
ferions rien qui eut la moindre valeur.
103. Je voudrais YOUS rappeler que, le 27 septembre
dernier, le president Nasser, dans la declaration qu'il
a faite devant l'Assemblee generale, a dit: "De l'avis
de la Republique arabe ume ... la situation anterieure
doit etre retablie. Cela est indispensable pour corriger
les erreurs commises." I1 a ajoute:
"Si run de nous estime qu'il est difficile de revenir
en arriere et que nous devons partir du fait accompli
pour redresser la situation, je me pemlettrai d'elever
la voix pour le mettre en garde et pour l'en dissuader, fort que je suis de notre experience et des souffrances subies dans notre partie du monde. Accepter
l' erreur ne pourra manquer d'engendrer toute une
serie d'autres erreurs, et si on laisse germer les
graines de l'erreur, si menues qu'elles soient, le temps
ne les fer2. pas oublier. Les graines se developperont
de jour en jour. Au bout d'un an, la situation sera
de plus en plus complexe." [873em.e sea.nee pleniere,
par. 128.]
104. Ma delegation a etudie avec soin le projet de
resolution presente en corr.unun par les delegations de
l'Argentine, des Etats-Unis, de l'Italie et du RoyaumeUni, ainsi que le projet de resolution presente par
l'Union sovietique.
105. Nous estimons que le premier de ces deux projets est loin de repondre a ce que, etant donne
les circonstances, le peuple du Congo, les autres peupIes des Nations Unies et le monde entier sont en droit
d'attendre. Ce projet n'essaie meme pas de chercher
une solution, il ne prend pas, si je puis m'exprimer
ainsi, le taureau par les cornes. Il se borne a poser en
principe qu'il faut respecter les droits de l'homme au
Congo. Cela est parfait, mais ne suffit pas. Ce projet
semble n'avoir d'autre but que de commemorer la
signature de la Declaration universelle des droits
de l'homme, dont l'anniversaire sera celebre demain.
Ses auteurs ont-ils a ce point oublie les dures realites?
Ignorent-ils les grandes valeurs humaines, la portee et
la gravite des questions qui se posent au Congo? QueUe
que soit la reponse, elle ne saurait etre qu'extremement
decourageante. Le contraste entre les proportions de la
crise congolaise et ce modeste et timide projet de resolution est vraiment incroyable.

106. On the other hand, we find ourselves in general
agreement with the draft resolution submitted by the
Soviet delegation. We find that it rises to the occasion,
meets the situation boldly and robustly, and recommends the adoption and implementation of measures

106. En revanche, nous approuvons dans son ensemble le projet de resolution soumis par la delegation
de I'Union sovietique. Nous estimons qu'il est a la
hauteur de la situation, qu'il l'aborde avec hardiesse
et energie et qu'il recommande l'application de mesures
21

which are all in conformity with the J:.esolutions already
adopted by the United Nation.....
107. Before closing, I find it appropriate, in view of
what I have submitted to the Security Council today,
to quote the following from the address by the President of the United Arab Republic to the General
Assembly, to which I have already referred:
"I felt it my duty to say all I have said of the
United Nations, of its Charter, of its activities and
of the circumstances surrounding the Organization,
not with the purpose of criticizing or embarrassing
anyone, but out of concern for the United Nations
and its Charter and because of the full faith which
we place in it, we who lived with the United Nations
throughout its most glorious days during our struggle
and fight against imperialism, we who consider the
co-operation e..xtended to us by the United Nations
during the difficult conditions through which our
fatherland passed to be one of the brightest hopes
for the future of the international community, we
who have witnessed the United Nations record in
our country its greatest triumph for its principles
and Charter, we who in our country have seen the
existence of the United Nations emerge as a reality
above imperialist ambitions and the interests of the
big Powers." [Ibid., para.. 152.]

qui sont toutes confonnes aux resolutions deja. ac1optees par l'ONU.
107. Avant de terminer et a. la lmniere des considerations qui precedent, je crois devoir citer l'extrait
suivant de la declaration faite par le President de la
Republique arabe unie devant l'Assemblee generale et
dont j'ai deja rappele un passage:
"J'ai pense qu'il etait de mon devoir de parter
ainsi de l'Organisation des Nations Unies, de sa
cha,te, de ses activites et des circonstances qui entourent les travaux de cette organisation, non pas
dans le dessein de critiquer ou d'embarrasser qui que
ce soit, mais par intert~t pour l'Organisation des N ations Unies et pour sa charte et a cause de la foi que
nous mettons en elle sans reserve, nous qui avons
<Ceuvre avec l'Organisation dans ses jours les plus
glorieux, pendant notre lutte et notre combat contre
l'imperialisme, nous qui consicIerons comme l'une des
raisons les plus hautes de croire en l'avenir de la
collectivite internationale la cooperation que les Nations Unies nous ont apportee au cours des moments
difficiles que notre patrie a vecus, nous qui avons vu
les Nations Unies remporter dans notre pays le plus
grand triomphe pour leurs principes et leur charte,
nous qui dans notre pays avons vu l'existence des
Nations Unies apparaitre comme une realite vivante
au-dessus des ambitions imperialistes et des interets
des grandes puissances." [Ibid., pa·r. 152.]
108. Le PRESIDENT (traduit dn mssc): Avec
l'assentiment des membres du Conseil, je donne la parole au representant de l'Indonesie.
109. M. WIRJOPRANOTO (Indonesie) [tradu:it
de l' atlgla.is] : J e remercie le President et les membres
du Conseil de securite de me pennettre de prendre part
a ce debat et d'e..xposer les vues de l'Indonesie sur la
situation au Congo qui ne cesse de s'aggraver. J e voudrais exprimer fonnellement au Conseil la profonde
preoccupation qu'eprouve le president Sukarno devant
les evenements du Congo.
110. Lorsque, le 16 septembre dernier, j'ai pris la
parole pour la premiere fois devant le Conseil [905clIIe
seance], j'ai dit qu'en realite la h'lte qui se deroule au
Congo est celle du nationalisme contre le colonialisme.
Lorsque j'ai parle devant la quatrieme session extraordinaire de l'Assemblee generale, le 19 septembre
[863em.e sean.ce plenih'c], j'ai insiste sur le fait qu'il
s'agissait au Congo d'une lutte a la vie et a la mort
entre le nationalisme et le colonialisme. Aujourd'hui, je
tiens a reaffirmer et a souligner de nouveau que le probleme du Congo n'est autre que celui du nationalisme
renaissant s'opposant au colonialisme agonisant.
111. Dans cette lutte, l'Indonesie est, bien entendu,
du cote du nationalisme. Elle prend parti pour la
democratie congolaise contre la terreur et la tyrannie
inspirees et soutenues par les puissances coloniales.
112. A l'instar de l'hydre aux neuf tl~tes de la legende
grecque, le colonialisme agonisant reIeve ses multiples
tetes au Congo. Il nous faut extirper cette hydre du
c<Ceur de l'Afrique. Telle est la condition prealable au
retablissement de l'ordre et de la legalite au Congo.
113. Le probleme congolais est reste en fait inchange
dans son essence. Mais les evenements survenus au
coms des mois ecoules ont evolue si rapidement qu'ils
ont cree une situation encore plus mena,;;ante. En les
examinant, je m'inspirerai des rapports et des documents de l'ONU ainsi que des vues exprimees devant
le Conseil de securite par le Secretaire general dans son
rapport du 7 decembre [913cmc sCQi/tce].

108. The PRESIDENT (tra.nslated from Russia.n) :
With the consent of the Council, I call on the representative of Indonesia.
109. Mr. WIRJOPRANOTO (Indonesia): I thank
the President and the members of the Security Council
for allowing me to participate in this debate and to
present the views of Indonesia on the steadily deteriorating situation in the Congo. I wish explicitly and
formally to convey to this Council the deep concern
of President Su-t..-arno over the happenings in the Congo.
110. When I first addressed this Council, on 16
September last [905tlt meeting], I said that the real
struggle in the Congo was a struggle of nationalism
againts colonialism. When I spoke in the fourth emergency special session of the General Assembly, on
19 September [863rd plenary meeting], I emphasized
that we were confronted in the Congo with a life and
death struggle between nationalism and colonialism.
Today, I wish to reaffirm and to re-emphasize that the
Congo problem is one of resurgent nationalism versus
dying colonialism.
111. In this struggle Indonesia is, of course, on the
side of nationalism. Indonesia is on the side of Congolese
democracy as against colonial-inspired, colonial-supported terror and tyranny.
112. Like the nine-headed hydra of Greek legend,
dying colonialism is rearing its multiple heads in the
Congo. We must uproot this hydra. We must burn it
out of the heart of Africa. This is the prerequisite for
restoring law and order in the Congo.
113. The essential character of the Congolese problem
has indeed remained unchanged. But the events of
past months have moved fast to create an ever more
ominous situation in the Congo. In examining those
events I shall be guided by United Nations reports and
documents and the views made known to this Council
by the Secretary-General in his report of 7 December
[913th meeting].

22

114. Dans ce rapport, le Secretaire general a note
qu'avant l'etablissement du regime Mobutu, it semblait
raisonnable de penser que, malgre certaines difficultes,
les bases d'une vie nouvelle pour la Republique du
Congo avaient ete posees. Au cours de cette premiere
periode, ajoutait le Secretaire general, l'annee nationale
congolaise "est restee, en majeure partie, inactive et,
en plusieurs occasions, des unites de l'armee nationale
congolaise ont, en accord avec les i\Tations Unies, volontairement desarme". [Ibid., par. 38.]
115. Cependant, cette situation s'est entierement modifiee du fait de l'usurpation du pouvoir par le colonel
Mobutu. A l'avenement du regime Mobutu, la terreur
et l'illegalite se sont dechainees au Congo dans un
mepris flagrant des droits et des libertt~s de I'homme;
l'armee nationale congolaise a fait irntption sur la
scene politique, s'est divisee en factions et a amene le
pays an bord meme de la guerre civile. Les forces
militaires des Nations Unies et leur personnel civil ont
ete defies directement et de fa<;on agressive. Des engagements se sont produits avec de part et d'autre des
pertes de vies hUl11aines. La derniere tentative des
autorites congolaises pour entraver les transports des
Nations Unies, notal11ment le transport du materiel
strategique. constitue, pour reprendre les tennes du
general Rikhye, "le defi le plus grave" qui ait jamais
ete lance a l'operation des Nations Unies au Congo.
116. Cette situation ne saurait etre toleree. Dans le
cadre du l11andat qui lui a ete confere pour maintenir
l'ordre et la legalite, l'Organisation des Nations Unies
ne peut continuer a fermer les yeux, par indifference
ou timidite, devant le regime illegal, anticonstitutionnel
et antidemocratique auquel sont dus principalement les
troubles et le terrorisme qui sevissent dans le pays.
117. En portant ce jugement, je ne me place pas
exclusivement sur le plan moral ou theorique. L'avenement du regime Mobutu n'est pas exclusivement un
probleme interieur du Congo. Qui est reellement responsable de ce regime? Comment a-t-il pris naissance?
Qui a paye pour le maintenir? Oil trouve-t-il ses armes
et ses approvisionnements? Quels sont ses instructeurs?
En cherchant des reponses a ces questions, on ne peut
s'empecher d'arriver a la conclusion que l'etablissement
du regime Mobutu au Congo est un probleme d'ordre
international et non interieur. Ici encore, les faits que
j'ai cites SOl1t empntntes exclusivement aux x-apports des
fonctionnaires de I'ONU.
118. C'est uniquement le retour du personnel militaire,
paramilitaire et civil beige qui permet au regime Mobutu
de continuer a se maintenir au Congo. Les BeIges, encourages par leurs amis, se sont joints a ce regime illegal et antidemocratique et 1'0nt dirige. Ce regime, dote
d'armees privees, a ete renforce et appuye grace a une
assistance technique et financiere exterieure. En fait, il
est entierement fonde sur l'intervention etrangere. Or,
c'est la precisement ce que le COl11mandement des
Nations Unies au Congo etait cense eliminer et ce dont
il devait empecher le retour. C'etait la la tache qui lui
incombait pour repondre a un appel emanant du gouvernement central legitime de la Republique du Congo.
119. Comme l'a souligne le Secretaire general, la justification juridique de la decision du Conseil de securite
de fournir au gouvernement central de la Republique du
Congo l'assistance militaire necessaire etait la menace
que constituait pour la paix et la securite l'intervention des troupes beIges au Congo. Mais quelle difference
existe-t-il entre cette intervention et celle d'aujourd'hui?
Certes, rien ne distingue l'agression annee au grand

114. In that report the Secretary-General noted that,
prior to the Mobutu regime, there appeared a reasonable
prospect that, notwithstanding certain difficulties, the
basis for revitalization of the Republic of the Congo
had been laid. During this earlier period, the Armee
nationale congolaise "remained for the most part
inactive and, in several instances, units of the Armee
nationale congolaise had, by agreement with the United
Nations, voluntarily disarmed themselves". [Ibid.,
l~a.ra.. 38.]
115. However, all this chariged with the usurpation
of power by Colonel .Mobutu. With the advent of the
Moblltll regime terror and lawlessness has been unleashed in the Congo, with flagrant disregard for human
rights and liberties, the Armee nationale congolaise has
erupted into the political scene, has broken up into
factions, and has brought the country to the verge of
civil war. United Nations military forces and its
civilian operations have been directly and aggressively
challenged. Clashes have occurred with loss of life on
both sides. The latest attempt by the Congolese authorities to obstruct United Nations transportation, including the movement of strategic materials, constitutes,
in the words of Brigadier Rikhye "the most serious
challenge" yet, to the United Nations operations in
the Congo.
116. This entire state of affairs cannot be tolerated.
Within the framework of its mandate to maintain law
and order. the United Nations cannot continue to
condone, by indifference or hesitation, a regime in the
Congo which is illegal and unconstitutional, which is
anti-democratic and which is the principal fomenter of
lawlessness and terror.
117. In making this judgement I am not speaking in
a purely moral or theoretical way. The advent of the
Mobutu regime is not exclusively a domestic problem
of the Congo. Who is actually responsible for Mobutu?
How has this regime come into being in the Congo?
Who has paid for its maintenance? Where does it get
its weapons and supplies? 'iVho are its instrtlcto~s?
In seeking answers to these questions one cannot avoid
reaching the conclusion that the establishment of the
Mobutu regime in the Congo is an international, not
a domestic, problem. Again my facts are derived solely
from the reports of United Nations officials.
118. It is only because of the return of Belgian military, paramilitary and civilian personnel that the
Mobutu regime continues to hold sway in the Congo.
The Belgians, encouraged by their friends, have been
participating in and directing this illegal, anti-democratic regime. This regime, with its private armies,
has been strengthened and sustained through outside
technical and financial assistance. It is founded and
based on foreign intervention. This is exactly what the
United Nations Command in the Congo was suppose
to eliminate and to prevent from recurring. This was
its task in response to an appeal from the legal Central
Government of the Republic of the Congo.
119. As the Secretary-General has pointed out, the
legal justification for the decision of the Security
Council to provide the Central Government of the
ReJ;lublic of the Congo with the necessary military
aSSIstance, was the threat to peace" and security which
~rose as a result of the intervention of Belgian troops
!11 the Congo. But what is the difference between that
II1tervention and the intervention going on today? There

23

jour de l'appui donne it un regime de terreul', mane si
cet appui se dissimule derriere une fa«;ade congolaise.
I1 s'agit toujOUl'S de la meme intervention etrangere,
avec ses memes principes et mobiles.

certainly is no difference between open anned aggression
and the unleashing and supporting of a regime of terror,
even if this is now done behind a Congolese fa«;ade.
It is the same foreign intervention in principle and in
motive.
120. Regrettably, Belgium still has no intention of
leaving the Congo in peace and freedom. Basically, it
has not changed one bit since 30 June last. Belgium
still wants to confer upon the Congo a pseudo-politically
independent head, while holding on to its military and
economic tail. Colonialism-all the worse for its
deception-is sowing havoc in the Congo. It is undermining the responsibilities and obligations of the United
Nations. It is threatening to engulf the Congo in a civil
war that could become an international hot war, with
all this wo'ud mean in sorrow and suffering, not only
for the Congolese people, but for the whole of Africa
and indeed the. whole world. I say with calmness, but
also with decision, that the Belgian colonial groups and
their supporters are playing a very dangerous game in
the Congo.

120. Malheureusement, la Belgique ne man5feste aucune intention de laisser le Congo jouir en paix de la
liberte. En fait, l'attitude de la Belgique n'a change
en rien depuis le 30 juin dernier. Elle est toujours
resolue, d'une part, a donner au Congo une direction
politique pretendument imlependante, tout en continuant, d'autre part, a s'y maintenir militairement et
economiquement. Frustre de ses aspirations, le colonialisme ravage le Congo, sape les responsabilites et
les obligations des Nations Unies et menace de
precipiter ce pays dans une gtlerre civile, susceptible de
(tegenerer en conflagration internationale, avec tout ce
que cela comporte de souffrances morales et physiques
non seulement pour le peuple congolais, mais pour
l'ensemble de I'Afrique et, en fait, pour le monde entier.
Je declare posement mais resoltunent que les groupes
coloniaux belges et leurs partisans jouent au Congo un
jeu extremement dangereux.
121. C'est precisement parce que noUs comprenons
toute la portee des evenements qui se deroulent au
Congo qu'a l'instar d'autres Etats Membres nous avons
decide d'y envoyer des troupes. Nous continuerons a
tout mettre en ceuvre pour eliminer les. causes de
tension et meme de conflit. I1 va sans dire que nous
prendrons toutes dispositions necessaires, le cas echeant
pour empecher que notre presence au Congo se prete:
d'une maniere quelconque, an jeu des colonialistes.
122. Les puissances occidentales nous ont souvent mis
en garde contre la subversion communiste. Pourtant,
c'est l'intrigue beIge au Congo, au cceur de l'Afrique,
qui vise a detruire l'independance et l'integrite territoriale d'un pays. C'est une puissance coloniale occidentale qui incite et prete son appui a la subversion
dans la Republique souveraine du Congo. Telle est la
realite de l'heure.
123. On nous dit que 1'0rganisation des Nations Unies
ne peut etre accusee· d'un echec au Congo. I1 est
vrai que 1'0rganisation n'a pas ete l'instigatrice des
evenements survenUS au Congo. Toutefois, nous ne
saurions admettre que cette circonstance la degage
entierement de toute responsabilite a l'egard de ces
evenements. Des le debut, au Conseil de securite et
ailleurs, la delegation indonesienne a souligne la necessite d'accorder au gouvernement central legitime de la
Republique du Congo un appui total et sans reserve.
Si, a cette heure tardive, celle peut-etre de la deruiere
chance, l'ONU ne s'emploie pas a favoriser et a soutenir
le retablissement d'un gouvernement congolais central
stable, si e11e ne met pas un terme a l'intervention et
a la subversion etrangeres, elle aura echoue et ce sera
une perte non seulement pour le Congo, mais pour le
monde entier.
124. La declaration faite id meme, le 7 decembre, par
le Secretaire general contient un certain nombre d'opinions caracteristiques, qui etaient deja implicites dans
le deuxieme rapport de son representant special au
Congo, M. Dayal [Sj 4557], et auxquelles nous souscrivons entierement et chaleureusement. Nous reconnaissons que la question du role veritable de l'ONU, dans
la nouvelle situation actuelle, merite certainement un
examen serieux; que la necessite qui se manifestait en
juillet n'a pas disparu et que les raisons initiales qui
motivaient la presence militaire de I'ONU au Congo

121. Our awareness of what is involved in the Congo
has prompted us and other Member States to send
troops there. 'Ve will continue to make every effort in
the direction of removing the causes of tension and
even of conflict. Obviously, we will take all necessary
measures, when we consider the occasion warrants it
to prevent oltr presence in the Congo from lendin;
h
itself in any way to the colonial game.
122. "Ve have often been told by the Western Powers
to beware of communist subversion. Yet it is Belgian
intrigue in the Congo, in the heart of Africa, that is
seeking to destroy the .national independence and
territorial integrity of a country. It is a colonial Power
of the west which is instigating and sustaining acts of
subversion in the sovereign Republic of the Congo.
This is the actual and present reality.
123. It is said that the United Nations cannot be
accused of a failure in the Congo. It is not the instigator
of past events there. But we cannot agree that this
fact completely relieves the United Nations of responsibility vis-a-vis these events. From the very beginning,
in this Council as elsewhere, the Indonesian delegation
has stressed the necessity of giving the legal Central
Government of the Republic of the Congo our complete
and undivided support. If the United Nations does
not now-at this late hour, perhaps the last chancepromote and support the re-establishment of a stable
central Congolese government, if it does not put a final
end to foreign intervention and subversion, then the
United Nations will have failed. It will be a United
Nations failure and a Congolese-nay, a world-loss.

124. There are certain salient views expressed by the
Secretary-General in his statement of 7 December to
this Council-views that were already implicit in
September from the second progress report of his
Special Representative in the Congo [Sj4557]-with
which we, too, agree fully and wholeheartedly. We
agree that the true function of the United Nations, in
the present changed situation, is a question that certainly requires the most serious consideration. We agree
that the need which existed in July has not disappeared
and that the original reasons for the United Nations
24

I
\

l
r

I

l
r

demeurent valables si I'on veut eviter le chaos et
I'anarchie. Nous reconnaissons, en particulier, que
I'ONU ne peut manifestement contribuer aux resultats
envisages par le Conseil si I'armee congolaise joue un
role politique contraire a la Constitution et passe outre
aux regles democratiques de gouvenlement.

military presence there are still valid, if we are to
avoid chaos and anarchy. In particular, we agree that
the United Nations obviously cannot contribute to the
results envisaged by this Council under circumstances
in which the Congolese Anny plays a political role
outside the Constitution and overriding democratic
rules of government.
125. However, we really do not comprehend how this
assessment can be reconciled with the conclusion that,
in the present circumstances, the United Nations should
exercise even greater restraint and seriously curtail
its activities in the Congo. This is indeed the cntx of
the problem. In our view, the advocacy of greater
United Nations restraint and inactivity in the face of
anti-democratic and unconstitutional ntle, would make
the United Nations a spectator, if not an accomplice,
of this development. Vie believe that, instead of inactivity, the United Nations has a duty energetically to
encourage and contribute to the restoration of constitutional and democratic rules of government. If this
is impossible, it should rather leave than lend its
presence to a situation that is in flagrant violation of
the Purposes and Principles of the Charter.

125. Cependant, nous ne voyons pas comment ce jugement du Secretaire general et de M. Dayal peut se
concilier avec la conclusion que, dans les circonstances
presentes, I'ONU devrait faire preuve de plus de retenue
encore et restreindre serieusement ses aetivites au
Congo. En fait, c'est la le cceur du probleme. Selon
nous, si l'ONU restreignait ses activites au point de
devenir passive en presence d'un regime antidemocratique et anticonstitutionnel, elle ne serait plus qu'une
spectatrice, pour ne pas dire une complice, des evenements. Or, notre conviction est qu'au lieu de demeurer
passive, l'Organisation a le devoir d'encourager energiquement et de faciliter le retour atL'I: regles constitutionnelles et democratiques de gouvernement. Si cela se
revelait impossible, elle devrait quitter le Congo plutot
que paraitre consacrer par sa presence tme situation
qui est en contradiction flagrante avec les principes et
les buts de la Charte.
126. Nous venons de recevoir, transmis par le Secretaire general, un rapport sur les evenements de
Stanleyville et de la Province-Orientale [S/4590].
Sans examiner ce rapport quant au fond, je voudrais
souligner qu'il confinne le fait que tolerer une situation
illegale entraine inevitablement de nouveaux bouleversements. L'ONU se trouvera placee devant une reaction
en chaine d'actes chaotiques, anarchiques et explosifs
aussi longtemps qu'elle acceptera le maintien d'un
regime anticonstitutionne1 au Congo.
127. C'est la que nous constatons la confusion qui
regne au sujet du mandat de I'ONU au Congo. Cette
confusion ne peut etre dissipee, a notre avis, que par
une interpretation liberale du mandat, confonnement
aux obligations que nous impose la Charte et aux
espoirs du Conseil; la seule autre solution possible
serait, pour I'Organisation, de quitter la scene congolaise.
128. Ma delegation n'a pas la presomption d'indiquer
au Conseil de securite comment I'ordre et la legalite
devraient etre promptement retablis au Congo, mais i1
est certaines mesures essentielles qui, selon nous, devraient etre prises. En premier lieu, le Conseil devrait
manifester son opposition au regime Mobutu, car
I'Organisation des Nations U nies, vouee au regne du
droit et de la paix, ne saurait reconnaitre un regime
illegal de terreur. En second lieu, le Conseil devrait
exiger de nouveau le retrait complet du personnel militaire et civil beIge, qui se trouve encore au Congo, hors
de la juridiction des Nations Unies, car il ne peut y
avoir de paix et de progres au Congo tant que persistent
les intrigues et l'intervention etrangeres. En troisieme
lieu, le Conseil de securite devrait exiger la liberation
de tous les chefs nationaux congolais actuellement
detenus; c'est la la condition prealable de la conciliation
qui peut conduire au retablissement de l'unite nationale.
129. Le retour a un gouvernement constitutionnel et
democratique, la fin de I'intervention et des intrigues
colonialistes, la mise en liberte immediate de taus les
dirigeants nationaux congolais aetuellement emprisonnes: telles sont les trois mesures etroitement liees entre
elles que nous jugeons indispensables pour le succes de
la mission des Nations Unies, c'est-a-dire pour le

126. We have just received from the SecretaryGeneral a report on developments in Stanleyville and
in Oriental province [S/4590]. Without entering into
the substance of this report, I wish to stress that it
confinns the fact that any toleration of an illegal situation inevitably invites more tubnoiI. The United Nations
will be confronted with a chain reaction of chaos and
anarchy-of explosions-so long as it acquiesces in the
continuation of an unconstitutional regime in the Congo.
127. It is in this light that we see the confusion about
the mandate of the United Nations in the Congo.
Consequently, we believe that this confusion can be
resolved only by liberally interpreting the mandate as
I have indicated, in confonnity with the obligations of
the Charter and the expectations of this Council, or by
removing the Organization from the Congo scene.
128. My delegation does not preStlllle to tell the
Security Council how the restoration of law and order
in the Congo should be brought about speedily. But
there ~re certain essential steps which we believe the
CouncIl must lay down. First, the Security Council
should pronounce its opposition to the Mobutu regime,
because this Organization, dedicated to law and peace,
. cannot rec?gnize an illegal regime of terror. Secondly,
the CouncIl should again demand the complete withdr~wal of. Belgian military and civilian personnel,
~hl~h are III the Congo outside United Nations juris~lctIon, becau3e there can be no peace and revitalization
111 th.e Congo ~s long as foreign intrigue and intervention
cont111ue. ThIrdly, the Council should call for the
lib.eration of all Congolese national leaders now imprIsoned, because this is the prerequisite for conciliation
to restore national unity.
129.

A return to constitutional and democratic govern-

~ent, <.m end of colonial intervention and intrigue, the

l!J:1medmte release of all imprisoned Congolese national
lea~ers: these <!-re the three closely interrelated steps
wh~ch we consider indispensable for carrying out the
pmted Nations mission of promoting law and order
111 the Republic of the Congo.

25

re~ablissell1ent du droit et de la legalite dans la Repubhque du Congo.
130. Ce sont la les vues de ma delegation que je me
suis efforce de presenter sans passion et de fa~on aussi
claire et concise que possible. E11es refletent la profoncle preoccupation et l'anxiete da gouvernement et
du peuple indonesiens en presence des evenements du
Congo.
131. Le PRESIDENT [rraduit du I'usse] : Avant de
donner la parole :'l l'orateur suivant inscrit sur ma
liste. je la donnerai au Secretaire general qui desire
appor!:er quelques eclaircissements :'l propos de la
derniere intervention.
132. Le SECRETAIRE GENERAL [trod-It.i.t de l'mlgla.is]: L'orateur distingue que vient d'entendre le
Conseil, tout en approuvant les opinions que j'ai formulees quant a la tH~cessite de poursuivre l'operation
des Nations Unies, ainsi que certaines mItres observations, a declare qu'il eprouvait quelque difficulte 'l comprendre les conclusions que j'en avais tirees. Il m'a
en consequence pose - indirectement en quelque sorte
- une question au sujet de Cl' que j'entendais par la
necessite d'une grande retenue. Je crois qu'il serait
utile que je danne immediatement sur ce point les explications necessaires. La phrase a laquelle s'es!: re£ere
le representant de l'Indonesie etait la sllivante: "Cette
adaptation" - il s'agit de l'adaptation aux circonstances
- "conduit inevitablement a une restriction serieuse,
pour l'heure, de notre activite, ainsi qu'a Ulle grande
retenue en Cl' qui concerne l'assistance que nous pouvons
octroyer." [9.13c11lc seance, par. 60.]
133. Cette phrase ne vise pas, evidemment, l'energie
et l'opiniatrete avec lesquelles l'operation doit se poursuivre. ElIe se rapporte a des circonstances d'ordre
purement pratique que je crois pouvoir iIlustrer facilement en indiquant que, par exemple, nous ne pouvons
continueI' d'instruire une armee qui est devenue un
instrument politique, de meme que nous ne pouyons
aider a maintenir l'equilibre d'un budget dont les
depenses vont en partie 'l des fins contraires a nos
objectifs.
134. Le PRESIDENT [tradu.it du russe]: Avec
l'assentiment des membres du Conseil de securite, je
donnerai la parole au representant du Cameroun; apres
quoi, nous serons apparemment dans l'obligation d'interrompre nos travaux.
135. M. OWONO (Cameroun): A I'occasion de
l'examen par I'Assemblee generale du rapport de la
Commission de verification des pouvoirs, lorsque les
Nations Unies devaient decider laquelle des deux delegations congolaises en presence avait le droit d'occuper
le siege du Congo, M. Okala, ministre des affaires
etrangeres du Cameroun, avait, a la 918Cme seance pleniere, defini nettement la position de notre delegation
au sujet des rapports entre notre organisation et l'Etat
du Congo. La position de ma delegation sera la meme
sur I'objet du debat en cours au Conseil de securite.
Cette position est celle de la legalite, de la liberte des
hommes et de la loi internationale. Cest llne position
simple, juste, inattaquable, et c'est justement cette simplicite qui a resiste aux nombreuses attaques et alL'i:
menees de haute envergure qui ont conduit le COl1seil
a I'examen de son ordre du jour actuel. 11 n'est, pour
s'en convaincre, que d'examiner les pieces de base de ce
debat, c'est-'l-dire la demande de convocation presentee
par la delegation sovietique et la declaratibn du Gouvernement sovietique sur la situation au Congo.

130. These are the views of my delegation which I
wished to bring to your attention without passion and
as clearly and concisely as possiblt'. They retlect the
deep anxiety and concern of the Government and
people of Indonesia over the events transpiring in the
Congo.
131. The PRESIDE,NT (tmllsla.tcd fro/ll Russian):
Before I call on the next speaker on my list. I shall
give the Hoor to the Secretary-General. who wishes
to give some explanations in connexion with the last
statement.
132. The SECRETARY-GENERAL: The last distinguished speaker. while approving the assumptions
regarding the continued need for the United Nations
operation and some observations I had made in that
context. found it difficult to understand the conclusions
which I based on these assumptions. He therefore
directed-indirectly-a question to me as to what I
meant by the need for great restraint. I think it may
be useful if I explain that right away. The sentence
to which the representative of Indonesia referred reads
as follows: "This adjustment"-that is to say, the
adjustment to present circulllstances--"unavoidably
leads to a serious curtailment for the present of our
activities and to great restraint as regards the assistance
we can grant." [913th mecti"g, pa.ra. 60].

133. This does not, of course, reter to the energy or
consistency of the operation. It refers to very practical
circumstances. which I think I can most easily illustrate
by saying that, of course, we cannot continue the
training of an army which has become a political
instrument, nor can we help financially with the budget
if expenditure is partly of a character which runs
counter to our aims.

134. The PRESIDENT (tramla.ted fro·m Russia.1I):
\\Tith the consent of the Secm'it" Council, I shall call
on the representative of Cameroun, after which we
shall probably have to recess.
135. ~1r. ~V/ONO (Cameroun) (translatcd from
Fre1lch): Vlhen the report of the Credentials Committee was being considered by the General Assembly,
and the United Nations had to decide which of the two
Congolese delegations present was entitled to occupy
the Congo's seat; Mr. Okala, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Cameroun, clearly defined, at the 918th
plenary meeting my delegation's position on the question
of the relations between the United Nations and the
State of the Congo. My delegation's position will be
the same with regard to the subject of the debate now
taking place in the Security Council. That position is
one of legality, human freedom and international law.
It is a simple position, just and unassailable, and it is
precisely that simplicity which has stood fast against
the many attacks and the large-scale schemings which
have brought the Council to the consideration of its
present agenda. That can be appreciated merely by
examining the basic material of the debate, namely the
Soviet delegation's request for a meeting and the statement by the Soviet Government on the situation in
the Congo.
26

136. Ma delegation a estime que la 1l1eilleure falion
d'aider le Conseil etait d'analyser brievement les differents elbl1ents de cette declaration a la lumiere des
decisions anterieures de l'Organisation des Nations
Unies concernant la Republique du Congo.
137. En premier lieu, Illa delegation regrette que
l'objet inavoue -1l1ais a peine cache - de cette reunion
du Conseil soit de relllettre en cause une decision recente
de I'Assemblee generate renvoyant s£nc d£c l'e.xa1l1en
du point precis de l'ordre du jour de la quinzieme
session relatif a la situation au Congo [913eme scmu:e
pl6n£ere]. Le renvoi de cette question avait ete demancle,
avec I'accord de la delegation sovietique, par le Ghana.
Le debat sur la situation au Congo, confornlelllent a
cette decision, est subordonne a I'intervention de la
Commission de conciliation qui doit se rendre dans ce
pays.
138. Ma delegation ne veut pas revenir sur les doutes
qu'elle a deja exprimes, en son temps, sur les veritables
motifs de cette commission, et elle s'en tiendra aux faits
juridiques attaches a l'ouverture de tout e.xalllen par
les Nations Unies de la situation au Congo.
139. Donc, de I'avis de ma delegation, tel est I'un des
mobiles de cette convocation quelque peu intempestive
du Conseil, et c'est d'ailleurs I'idee qui ressort de la
declaration du Gouvernement sovietique sur la situation
au Congo [5/45i3]. le n'insisterai pas sur une telle
manceuvre, qui a pour but de tourner la procedure et
de tro111per la bonne foi des delegations.

136. My. delegation thought that the best way of
assisting the Council would be to analyse briefly the
various elements in that statement, in the light of
previous United Nations decisions in regard to the
Republic of the Congo.
137. First, my delegation regrets that the unavowed
but scarcely concealed purpose of this meeting of the
Council should be to call in question a recent General
Assembly decision postponing, S£'IlC die consideration
of the particular. item on the agenda of the fifteenth
session relating to the situation in the Congo [913th
plemlry meethlg]. This postponement had been requested by Ghana, with the agreement of the Soviet
delegation. Under that decision, the debate on the
situation in the Congo was to await the action of the
Conciliation Commission due to proceed to the Congo.
138. My delegation will not revert to the doubts
which it voiced at the time with regard to the real
purposes of that Commission, and will confine itself to
the legal facts inseparable from any discussion, by the
United Nations, of the situation in the Congo.
139. This therefore, in my delegation's opinion, is one
of the motives underlying the rather inopportune summoning of the present meeting of the Security Council;
and such, indeed, is the impression derived frol11 the
statement by the Soviet Government on the situation
in the Congo [5/4573]. I will not dwell on such tactics,
the object of which is to distort procedure and abuse
the good faith of delegations.
140. The Camerounian delegation will maintain a
position in line with that which it recently adopted in
other circumstances and will oppose, if possible, any
attempt by the Security Council to reopen the Congo
debate suspended by a vote in the General Assembly,
unless such action meets the requirements of procedure
-in other words, is sanctioned by a two-thirds majority.
141. The reasons which impel me to say that we are
in the presence of a circuitous manoeuvre derive not
merely frOI11 the tenor of the Soviet statement, but also
from the purpose of the proposals contained in the
Soviet Union's draft resolution [5/4579], the fifth
preambular paragraph of which reads: "Resolutely
condemning the continuing interference by Belgium and
other colonial Powers in the domestic affairs of the
Republic of the Congo, which is undermining the
independence and territorial integrity of the Republic,
is impeding the normal functioning of its State organs
and is producing an increased danger to world peace
and the security of the peoples". The draft resolution
ends by requesting "the command of the troops despatched to the Congo by decision of the Security Council
immediately to disarm the terrorist bands of Mobutu".
142. Moreover, in a telegram dated 9 December 1960
addressed to the Secretary-General by the President
of the Council of Ministers of the People's Republic of
Bulgaria [5/4593], we read:
"When the vast majority of peoples and their
:epresentatives are coming out in favour of this noble
Idea, it is inadmissible that United Nations organs
should be giving assistance to the imperialistic States
and to the colonialists in their intrigues and attacks
upon the freedom and independence of the Republic
of the Congo."
And this is how the document ends:

140. La delegation camerounaise maintiendra une position confonne a celIe qu'elIe a recel11ment adoptee dans
d'autres circonstances et eBe s'opposera, si possible,
a toute tentative du Conseil de securite de rouvrir le
(h~bat sur la situation au Congo suspendu par un vote de
I'Assemblee generale, sauf si une telle initiative satisfait
les exigences de la procedure, c'est-a-dire obtient la
majorite des deux tiers des voix.
141. Les raisons qui me poussent a enoncer cette idee
d'une manceuvre detournee ressortent non seulement du
fond de la declaration sovietique, mais egalement de
l'objet meme des propositions du projet de resolution
presente par I'Union soviHique [5/45i9], qui, dans
son cinquicme considerant, condamne "energiquement
I'intervention peisistante de la Belgique et d'autres
puissances coloniales dans les affaires interieures de la
Republique du Congo. intervention qui porte atteinte a
I'independance et a l'integrite territoriale de la Republique ainsi qu'au fonctionnement nonllal des organes
. d'Etat, et qui entraine une aggravation de la menace a
la paix universelle et a la securite des peuples". Le
projet de resolution tenlline en invitant "le commandement des troupes envoyees au Congo en vertu de la decision du Conseil de securite it desanller il11mediatement
les bandes terroristes de Mobutu".
142. Par ailleurs, dans un telegramme, en date du 9
decel11bre 1960. adresse au Secretaire general par le
President du Conseil des l11inistres de la Republique
populaire de Bulgarie [S/4593], on lit llotal11l11ent:
"Quand I'enonne majorite des peuples et leurs
representants se declarent pour cette noble idee, il est
inadmissible qu'en meme temps les organes des
Nations Unies pretent leur concours aux Etats imperialistes, aux colonialistes dans leurs intrigues et
atteintes a la liberte et a l'independance de la Republique clu Congo."
Et voici la conclusion de ce document:

27

"The People's Republic of Bulgaria strongly urges
that immediate steps be taken to secure the release
of the Congolese Prime Minister, Patrice Lumumba,
and the other :':inisters and Deputies who have been
arrested, to '~Jnvene the legally elected Parliament
of the country and to check the aggressors and their
agents.
"The Government of the People's Republic of
Bulgaria fully supports the proposals of the Government of the Soviet Union as set forth in its statement
on the situation in the Congo and appeals for their
immediate implementation.
"The Bulgarian Government considers that the
resolutions on the Congo adopted by the Security
'Council, and the grave threat to peace which has
just arisen, place the obligation upon the United
Nations, in conformity with the principles of the
United Nations Charter, to take urgent and effective
steps to restore nonnal life in the Republic of the
Congo."
143. The delegation of Cameroun considers that the
manifestation constituted not only by the Soviet document, but also by the proclaimed manoeuvre of intervention on the part of the Soviet colonies, cannot be
reconciled with a General Assembly decision whereby
ali debate on the Congo was suspended.
144. Following this trend of thought, I must say that,
judging from the procedure adopted by the Soviet
Union, documents similar to these, which have perhaps
already reached the Council and will doubtless be
published tomorrow, will be followed-the Council may
rest assured-by other documents coming from those
Soviet colonies which have taken their places at this
table to support the Soviet standpoint.
145. My delegation believes that such a procedure,
directed towards calling in question a decision of the
General Assembly, is calculated to jeopardize the proper
working of the Assembly. I will not dwell on such
tactics, which are designed to distort procedure and
abuse the good faith of delegations.
146. I will revert to the important item on your
agenda, which, in principle, is concerned with the arrest
of the former Prime Minister, Patrice Lumumba. The
statement by the Soviet Government on the situation
in the Congo seems to link the convening of the Security
Council with the events of recent days in the Congo.
That is what I read in the very first paragraph of the
statement; the eight pages of discourse in that document,
however, are nowhere concerned with the arrest, but
simply contain a dialectical argument which my delegation refuses meekly to tolerate. In any case, the
Camerounian delegation fec:ls that it has a duty to make
a contribution to the work of the Council. To that end,
we have confined ourselves to the text of the Soviet
statement, which has been echoed, in general, by the
delegations that have supported it; at least by some of
those delegations which are unable to think for themselves and have accepted, as gospel truth, all the contradictions to which the Soviet Union has accustomed
them.
147. Regarding the arrest of Lumumba, the Soviet
statement reads as follows:
"The events of recent days in the Congo show
that the colonial1st NATO Powers, led by the United
States, have openly embarked on a policy of liquidating the Parliament of the Republic of the Congo
and the legitimate Government headed by Mr. Patrice
Lumumba and of destroying the national indepen-

"La Republique populaire de Bulgarie insiste resolument pour que des mesures soient prises immediatement pour la mise en liberte du premier ministre
congolais Patrice Lumumba et des autres ministres
et deputes arretes, pour la convocation du Parlement
legalement elu du pays et pour le refrenement des
agresseurs et de leurs agents.
"Le Gouvernement de la Republique populaire de
Bulgarie adhere entierement aux propositions du
Gouvernement de I'Union sovietique exposees dans
sa declaration sur la situation au Congo et en appelle
pour leuT realisation immediate.
"Le Gouvernement bulgare estime que les resolutions concernant le Congo adoptees par le Conseil de
securite et la grave menace pour la paix qui vient
de surgir obligent I'ONU a prendre, conformement aux principes de la Charte des Nations Unies,
des mesures urgentes et efficaces en vue du retablissement de la vie normale dans la Republique du Congo."
143. La delegation du Cameroun estime que l'attestation qui a ete donnee non seulement par la declaration
sovietique, mais par la manreuvre qui s'annonce de
l'intervention des colonies sovietiques, n'est pas en
conformite avec une decision de l'Assemblee generale
qui a suspendu tout debat sur le Congo.
144. Poursuivant dans cet ordre d'idees, je dois dire
que, si l'on fait credit a la procedure adoptee par
I'Union sovietique, des documents comme ceux-ci, qui
sont peut-etre deja arrives au Conseil et qui seront en
tout cas publies demain, seront suivis, le Conseil pent
en etre assure, d'autres documents provenant de celles
des colonies sovietiques qui ont pris place a cette table
pour appuyer son point de vue.
145. Ma delegation pense qu'une procedure pareille,
qui tend a remettre en cause une decision de l'AssembIee
general~, est de nature a compromettre la bonne marche
de ses travaux. Je n'insisterai pas sur une telle manreuvre qui a pour but de tourner la procedure et de tromper
la bonne foi des delegations.
146. Aussi, je reviens sur le point important de votre
ordre du jour relatif, en principe, a I'arrestation de l'expremier ministre Patrice Lumumba. La declaration du
Gouvernement sovietique sur la situation au Congo
semble rattacher la convocation du Conseil de securite
aux evenements qui se sont deroules ces derniers jours
au Congo. C'est ce que je lis au tout premier paragraphe
de la declaration, mais nulle part, sur huit pages de
discours, it n'est plus question de l'arrestation, mais
de.'? motifs d'une dialectique a laquelle ma delegation
refuse de s'habituer. Quoi qu'il en soit, la delegation
camerounaise pense que son devoir est d'apporter sa
contribution aux travaux du Conseil. Nous nous sommes
limites pour cela au texte de la declaration sovietique
dont les arguments ont ete generalement repris par les
delegations qui l'ont appuyee, en tout cas par certaines
d'entre elles qui ne peuvent pas penser toutes seules
et qui ont accepte comme verite d'evangile toutes les
contradictions auxquelles I'Union sovietique les a
habituees.
147. Sur l'arrestation de Lumumba, la declaration
sovietique se lit ainsi:
"Les evenements qui se sont deroules ces jours
derniers au Congo montrent que les puissances coloniales de I'OTAN, les Etats-Unis a leur tete, ont
ouvertement entrepris d'eliminer le Parlement de la
Republique du Congo et le gouvernement legitime
du pays, preside par M. Patrice Lumumba, ainsi que

28

de mettre fin a 1'independance nationale conquise par
le peuple congolais. L'arrestation et la torture de
M. Lumumba, premier ministre, de M. Okito, president du Senat congolais, de M. Kasongo, president
de la Chambre des representants, et de plusieurs
ministres et deputes, restes fideles a leur peuple, la
terreur instituee clans le pays par les colonialistes et
les agents a leur solde, confirment que 1'agression
imperialiste de rOTAN contre la Republique du
Congo, dissimulee sous le drapeau de rONU, est
entree dans une phase nouvelle et encore plus critique:" [5/4573, par. 1.]
148. Je m'empresserai de dire ainsi, au nom de mon
gouvernement, que 1'Union sovietique devrait comprendre que 1'entree de 1'Afrique sur la scene internationale
est un element clont i1 faut tenir compte suffisamment
it temps pour ne pas etre en porte a faux contre
l'Afrique. Cette premiere phrase du texte sovietique
et ce qui suit font croire que, dans la Republique du
Congo, il n'existe plus de Congolais, mais "les puissances coloniales de rOTAN, les Etats-Unis a leur
tete". Cette fac;on de presenter les affaires a peut-etre eu
des resultats dans certains pays, mais l'Afrique se
refuse a voir denaturer les realites africaines, car la
Republique du Congo existe comme existent son gouvernement et ses institutions. Ce pays frere a ete soumis
a une epreuve de force que nous devons conjurer, mais
un fait est certain, c'est que ce serait une forte meprise
que de vouloir a tout prix ignorer son existence. Les
Africains sont en droit de·se demander si 1'Union sovietique comprendra jamais un jour que le continent
africain ne peut absolument pas servir de terrain a la
guerre froide et s'y refuse. Ma delegation n'a de compte
a rendre ni a 1'Est ni a l'Ouest et la Republique camerounaise veut absolument rester africaine. Nous avons
beaucoup d'estime pour le bloc des neutralistes comprenant les Etats d'Asie et d'Afrique, mais, a la lumiere des
positions prises par certains de ces Etats, nous pensons
que, bientot, le bloc neutraliste sera neutralise.
149. Ma delegation restera conforme a elle-meme et
conforme aux traditions africaines et, s'il faut prendre
position dans les conflits opposant les puissances du
monde, sa position correspondra a 1'ideal que nous nous
sommes trace, c'est.:a-dire le respect de la h~galite, des
lois fondamentales internationales, de la logique et du
bon sens tout court.
150. D'apres ce qui precede, la delegation sovietique
nous fait croire qu'il n'existe plus de Congolais au
Congo et qu'it en sera ainsi tant que la Republique
congolaise n'aura pas accepte, sous la pression de certains pays africains, de recevoir ses instructions de
Moscou. Ma delegation s'inquiete de 1'erreur ainsi
commise qui semble attacher une condition a l'interet
spectaculaire manifeste par les uns et par les autres
vis-a.-vis de l'Afrique; s'it en etait encore besoin, le
vote recemment enregistre sur la question de l'admission de la Mauritanie a I'ONU et le marchandage
auque1 it a donne lieu seraient la. pour le confirmer.
Il importe de rappe1er ici que personne ne pourra pretendre donner a. l'Afrique mieux que les Africains
eux-memes. Nous avons forge notre independance et
nous sommes intimement convaincus que rien, plus
rien, ne peut nous empecher de donner a. notre continent
la personnalite qu'il avait temporairement perdue. C'est
notre devoir et nous y veillerons. Mais nous veillerons
aussi contre toute tentative de discrediter cette victoire,
la victoire de l'Afrique contre la coalition etrangere. Je
mets dans ces termes tout ce qui n'est pas africairr,
tout ce qui est en principe et en fait capable de porter

dence won by the Congolese people. The arrest and
torture of Prime Minister Lumumba, of Mr. Okito,
the President of the Congolese Senate, of Mr. Kason~
go, the President of the House of Representatives,
and of a number of ministers and Parliamentary
deputies who have remained true to their people, as
well as the terror tmleashedin the country by the
colonialists and their hired agents, indicate that the
imperialist aggression against the Republic of the
Congo carried out by NATO under cover of the
United Nations flag has entered a new and more
acute phase." [5/4573 para. 1.]
148. 1 hasten to say, on behalf of my Government,
that the Soviet Union should understand that the
emergence of Africa on the international scene is a
factor which must be taken into due and speedy account
if one is not to be "off balance" with regard to Africa.
This first paragraph of the Soviet text and what follows
make it appear that there are no Congolese left in the
Republic of the Congo, but only "the colonialist NATO
Powers, led by the United States". This way of presenting matters may have had some effect in certain
countries, but Africa refuses to see the truth about
itself distorted; the Republic of the Congo is a fact,
just as its Government and institutions are facts. This
sister country has been subjected to an ordeal by fire,
which we must bring to an end; but one thing is certain
-it would be a great mistake to try deliberately to
ignore its existence. Africans are entitled to wonder
whether the Soviet Union will ever understand that the
. African continent cannot arid will not be used as a
battlefield of the cold war. My delegation has no account
to render either to the East or to the West, and the
Republic of Cameroun is determined to remain African.
We have much respect for the neutralist bloc comprising
Asian and African' States, but in view of the attitudes
adopted by some of those States we think that the
neutralist bloc will soon be neutralized.

149. My delegation will remain true to itself and to
African traditions, and if it is obliged to take a position
with regard to the disputes between the world Powers,
that position will be in line with our established idealrespect for legality, for basic international laws, for
logic and for plain common sense.
150. The Soviet delegation, then, suggests to us that
there are no more Congolese in the Congo, and that
there will be none until the Congolese Republic agrees,
!lnd~r press.ure from certain African countries, to accept
. Its ll1structlons from Moscow. My delegation is concerned at such an error, which seems to make the
striking interest in Africa displayed by, all sides
dependent upon a condition; if proof thereof were
needed, the recent vote on the question of the ad,mission
of Mauritania to the United Nations, and the bargaining
to which it gave rise, would suffice. It should be pointed
out here that no one can claim to give to Africa more
~han the Africans give to it themselves. We forged our
lI1dependence and it is our deep conviction that nothing
- I repeat, nothing--ean now prevent us from restoring
to our continent the individuality which it had temporarily lost. That is our duty, and we shall discharge it.
But ~e shall also be on the watch against any attempt
to ~nng this victory, the victory of Africa against
foreIgn coalition, into disrepute. By that 1 mean any
attempt to foist upon us anything which is not African,
anythll1g which in theory and in fact can tarnish our
glorious victory over selfishness, materialism or atheism

29

ombrage a notre eclatante victoire sur l'egoisme, le
l'athelsme, ou, en somme, toutes les ideologies humaines contraires a la civilisation, a l'histoire
et a la tradition africaine.
151. La tradtion africaine est un fait etabli. Si aujourd'hui, dans certains pays, lestraditions ne remontent
pas au-dela des 40 annees d'un regime ou d'une loi qui
ont coupe le cours de leur histoire, l'Afrique tout
entiere reste conforme a elle-meme et a sa tradition,
conforme a sa civilisation africaine dont elle est fiere
et qu'elle entend preserver.
152. Plus loin, dans le paragraphe 2, la declaration
sovietique poursuit:
"Les colonialistes entendent ecarter de force les
dirigeants de l'Etat congolais et les leaders politiques
du peuple congolais et les remplacer par leurs mercenaires du type Mobutu et Tshombe. Pour accomplir
cette vile besoglle, ils se servent aussi de Kasa-Vubu,
traitre au peuple congolais."

-in a word, any human ideology conflicting with
African civilization, history and tradition.

mah~rialisme,

151. African tradition is an established fact. While
today certain countries, in their traditions, can go back
only for forty years of a system or a law which cut them
off from their history, Africa as a whole remains true
to itself, true to its tradition, and true to its African
civilization, of which it is proud and which it intends
to preserve.
152. The Soviet statement continues, in its paragraph 2:
"The colonialists desire the physical elimination
of the leaders of the Congolese State and the political
leaders of the Congolese people so that they can be
replaced by hirelings of their own like Mobutu and
Tshombe. They are employing for that d:screditable
purpose the traitor to the Congolese people, KasaVubu."
153. I must say that the Soviet Union seems deliberately to ignore the history of Africa and of the Mrican
peoples. That is what emerges from the purely theoretical statements coming from the distinguished representatives of the communist bloc, which were doubtless
prepared more or less in advance and which take into
acconnt neither historical facts nor present realities.
So when the Soviet Government refers to President
Kasa-Vubu .as "the traitor to the Congolese people",
my delegation cannot accept such a distortion of the
truth without reminding the Soviet Government that
Joseph Kasa-Vubu is the sole pioneer and the sole
instrument of the independence of the Republic of the
Congo. Need I recall-in echoing a representative who,
from this rostrum not long ago emphasized the fact
that most African leaders had served a term in the
colonialists' prisons-that I fully agree in condemning
the repression which took place during the colonialist
period? But the failure to mention the fact that President Kasa-Vubu had also been in prison, precisely
because he had championed the rebirth of Africa and
particularly the rebirth of the Congolese State, is
nothing less than deliberate suppression of the truth.
154. President Kasa-Vubu is a man whose past is
well known, whose integrity in the struggle for the
Congo's independence has become part of African
history. The great Congolese people is a people to be
reckoned with, and we salute its magnificent conduct
in the struggle which has brought it, in less than two
years, to the status of independence and international
sovereignty. To call Ileo and Kasa-Vubu traitors 'and
to recognize Lumumba, who is a newcomer, is a distortion of the truth. That is why my delegation has the
right to remind the Soviet delegation, and its Government, of the great debt which the Congolese people
and the whole of Africa owe to President Kasa-Vubu.

153. J e dois dire ici que l'Union sovietique semble
ignorer a dessein 1'histoire de l'Afrique et des Africains.
Il n'est qu'a suivre les interventions de pure forme des
distingues representants du bloc communiste, preparees
sans doute plus ou moins a l'avallce et qui ne tiennent
compte ni de I'historique des faits ni de la realite. Ainsi,
lorsque le Gouvernement sovietique traite le president
Kasa-Vubu de "traitre au peuple congolais", ma delegation ne saurait accepter une telle entorse a la verite
sans lui rappeler que Joseph Kasa-Vubu est le seul
pionnier et le seul instrument de l'independance de la
Republique du Congo. Faut-il rappeler ici qu'en faisant
echo a une remarque d'un representant qui dernierement, a cette tribune, mettait en relief le fait que la
plupart des chefs africains sont passes par les prisons
des colonialistes, j'abonde dans son sens pour stigmatiser la repression qui avait eu lieu pendant la periode
colonialiste; mais omettre le fait que le president KasaVubu a fait lui aussi de la prison, justement parce
qu'il etait en faveur de la renaissance de l'Afrique et
particulierement de la renaissance de l'Etat congolais,
ce n'est pas autre chose qu'un parti pris contre la vex-ite.
154. Le president Kasa-Vubu est un homme dont le
passe est connu, dont l'integrite dans la lutte en faveur
de l'independance du Congo est passee dans l'histoire
de l'Afrique. Le grand peuple congolais est un peuple
dont on doit tenir compte et dont nous saluons la brillante conduite dans la lutte qui l'a amene en moins de
deux ans au statut d'independance et de souverainete
internationale. Traiter Ileo et Kasa-Vubu de traitres,
reconnaitre Lumumba qui est un nouveau venu, est une
entorse a la verite. Tout cela permet a ma delegation
de rappeler ici a la delegation sovietique, pour le compte
de son gouvernement, tout ce que le peuple congolais
et l'Afrique tout entiere doivent au president KasaVubu.
1-55. La declaration continue en disant: "En fait, il
cherchait a rendre le pouvoir dans le pays cl l'administration coloniale des colonialistes anciens (beIges) et
nouveaux (americains) qui agissent de concert et conjointement avec les autorites coloniales portugaises,
britanniques et franc;aises en Afrique."
156. Ma delegation pense et confirme que ceci est pur
enfantillage. Sur 99 pays representes ici, je ne crois
pas qu'il soit possible a un seul d'entre nous d'admettre
qu'un homme qui a conduit l'epopee victorieuse de la
croisade contre le colonialisme puisse subitement en

155. The statement continues: "They are seeking in
effect to hand over the administration of the country
to new (United States) as well as old (Belgian)
colonialists, who are working hand in glove with one
another as well as with the Portuguese, British and
French colonial authorities in Africa."
156. My delegation believes and asserts that this
charge is pure childishness. Of the ninety-nine countries
represented here, I do not think a single one could.
subscribe to the view that the man who led the epic
and victorious crusade against colonialism could sud-

30

devenir un laquais. J e me pose la question suivante: si
cette partie de la declaration sovietique que je viens
de dter etait changee de fa<;ol1 inverse, a savoir le
pouvoir rendu cl I'administration communiste des colonialistes russes qui agissent de concert et conjointement
avec les autorites coloniales des autres pays du bloc
sovietique, l'independance congolaise serait-elle enfin
reconnue effective par l'Union sovietique, le president
Kasa-Vubu serait-il confirme dans son poste et son
action serait-elle reconnue legale et juridique? Ma
delegation pense qu'il y a loin entre cet espoir et sa
realisation. Le Congo u'a pas besoin de la caution
etrangere pour exister.
157. Deux representants diplomatiques ont ete expulses dernierement du Congo a la suite de leur conduite
inadmissible et d'un manquement grossier aux regles
elementaires qui regissent les relations internationales.
Nous pensons que cette le<;on servira a ceux dont
l'action constitue une immixtion intolerable dans les
affaires congolaises.
158. Voila en gros, sur quelques-uns des arguments
sovietiques, la reaction normale de tout Etat africain
digne de I'Afrique. Je n'ai pas juge utile de relever
d'autres expressions, telles que "des milliers de Belges",
"le theatre d'une nouvelle repartition de l'influence et
des capitaux des societes entre les grandes puissances
coloniales" . .. J'aimerais cependant ajouter que, a ce
sujet, les colonies russes d'Afrique ne savent plus comment heberger les colons sovietiques qui arrivent de
plus en plus nombreux. J e ne voudrais pas non plus
rappeler ici qu'en fait d'assistance technique au Congo,
les quelques semaines de I'existence de l'ambassade
sovietique a Leopoldville ont bien prouve la nature
exacte de l'assistance russe et des domaines dans lesquels elle est octroyee. Je passerai egalement sous
silence l'episode des avions sovietiques et je ne parlerai
pas non plus de certains equipages desdits avions, ni
de la mission sacree dont ils etaient charges.
159. Je ne veux pas non plus rappeler au Conseil de
securite que certaines missions diplomatiques expulsees
de Leopoldville se trouvent encore garees dans une
capitale africaine pour attendre de nouveaux developpements au Congo, ni de la promesse qui leur a ete faite
de revenir bientot a Leopoldville. La decision de l'Assemblee generale, reconnaissant au president KasaVubu le droit d'accrediter la representation congolaise,
a rendu aleatoire I'eventualite du retour de ces missions.
L'action des interesses ne s'est pas fait attendre. Le
president Kasa-Vubu etait a peine de retour du Siege
de l'ONU que les ennemis de l'ordre international
tentaient une mesure de desespoir: la secession de la
Province-Orientale. Cette mesure avait pour but ultime
de saper la stabilite qui devait suivre le retour du
president Kasa-V UbLl et en meme temps de redonner
"du poil de la bete" a l'ex-premier ministre Lumumba.
L'echec de l'aventure a ete total. On nous a habitues
a croire que le Congo vit dans le chaos et la dislocation,
que son armee est un ramassis d'indisciplines; mais
cette amlee, avant que l'evasion surprenante de Patrice
Lumumba ait ete consommee, a manifeste son efficacite
indiscutable, en meme temps qU'elle confirmait l'existence de I'unite entre les soldats et leur commandement
superiem.·, I'autorite du colonel Mobutu. Je ne peux
m'empecher de traduire mon admiration sur cet exploit
qui a mis fin au demier atout dont disposaient ou
croyaient disposer res vrais ennemis de l'Afrique.
160. Un citoyen congolais a ete arrete. I1 est lie a
l'Etat congolais par la loi congolaise et repondra de
son action devant les juri<lidio:l.s de la Republiquedu

denly become its lackey. I ask myself this question:
if the part of the Soviet statement quoted above were
reversed-if, in other words, power were handed over
to the communist administration of the Russian colonialists, working hand in glove with the colonial
authorities of the other countries of the Soviet blocwould the independence of the Congo then be recognized
as a fact by the Soviet Union, would President KasaVubu be confirmed in his post and would his actions
be recognized as legal and juridical? My delegation
believes that there is a great distance between this hope
and its fulfilment. The Congo can exist without foreign
guarantees.
157. Two diplomatic representatives were recently
expelled from the Congo because of their inadmissible
behaviour and flagrant disregard of the elementary
rules of international relations. We believe that that
will serve as a lesson to those whose actions constitute
intolerable interference in Congolese affairs.
158. That, broadly speaking, is the normal reaction
of any African State worthy of Africa to some of the
Soviet arguments. I have not thought it worth mentioning some other expressions, such as "thousands
of Belgians" and "a reallocation of influence and of
share capital among the major colonial Powers ...".
r would like to add, however, that the Russian colonies
in Africa are at their wits' end as to how to accommodate the Soviet settlers who are descending on them
in ever-increasing numbers. ~ will not recall here that,
in the matter of technical assistance to the Congo, the
Soviet Embassy at Leopoldville, in its few weeks of
existence, provided ample proof of the exact nature of
Soviet assistance and of the directions in which it was
dispensed. r will also pass over in silence the episode of
the Soviet aircraft; nor will I speak of certain crews
of those aircraft, and of the sacred mission which was
entrusted to them.
159. Nor will I remind the Security Council that
certain diplomatic missions which were expelled from
Leopoldville are still in an African capital awaiting
new developments in the Congo, having been promised
that they would soon return to Leopoldville. The
General Assembly's decision, recognizing President
Kasa-Vubu's right to nominate the representatives of
the Congo, has made the return of those missions highly
problematical. The interested parties did not delay
taking action. President Kasa-Vubu had scarcely
returned from United Nations headquarters when the
enemies of the international order attempted a desperate
measure-the secession of Oriental province. The
. ultimate purpose of that measure was to undermine the
stability which would have followed President KasaVubu's return, and at the same time to resuscitate the
former Prime Minister, Lumumba. The exploit was a
total failure. We have been led to believe that the
Congo is a prey to chaos and disorganization, and that
its army is an undisciplined rabble; but this army,
before the surprise escape of Patrice Lumumba, showed
its unquestionable efficiency and at the same time
proved that there was unity between the troops and
their high command, the authority of Colonel Mobutu.
I cannot conceal my admiration for this achievement,
which has deprived the real enemies of Africa of the
last trump card which they had, or thought they had,
in their hands.
160. A Congolese citizen has been arrested. He is
bound to the Congolese 'State by Congolese law, and
will answer for his actions before the courts of the
31

Republic of the Congo. I should like to add that this
whole story, compounded of arguments based on documentation as varied as it is baseless, has not, in my
delegation's view, been supported by any new facts.
I have already attempted to discuss some of the cheap
arguments, and can say nothing more but that,
basically, the arrest of Lumumba is of no concern
whatever to the United Nations. The fact that a
Congolese citizen once bore the title of Prime Minister
does not make him an international citizen. And if he
is a Congolese, he will answer to the laws of the Congo.

Congo. Je voudrais ajouter ici que toute cette histoire,
orchestree d'une documentation aussi diversifiee que
d'arguments sans fondement, n'a pas, de l'avis de ma
delegation, ete appuyee par des faits nouveaux. Tal
deja essaye de discuter quelques-ul1s des arguments
bon marche, mais il me reste a dire que, sur le fond,
l'arrestation de Lumumba n'interesse en aucune fa<;ol1
l'Organisation des Nations Unies. Le fait qu'un citoyen
congolais ait porte le titre de premier ministre dans le
temps n'en fait certainement pas un citoyen international. Or, s'il est Congolais, il repond des lois
congolaises.
161. L'Organisatiol1 des Nations Unies ne peut se
substituer a l'Etat congolais pour juger des actes de
ses citoyens. It s'agit ici d'un fait divers international
qui est devenu monnaie courante dans certaines parties
du monde. Dans de nombreux pays, des gouvernements
sont renverses par des coups d'Etat, generalement
militaires, sans que I'Organisation internationale soit
appelee a intervenir. Je ne me permettrai pas de citer
des exemples qui risqueraient de mettre en cause certains Etats Membres de cette organisation, mais I'histoire des renversements de gouvernement est une chose
qu'aucun de nous ne peut ignorer. Notre organisation
n'a pas eu a intervenir dans tous ces coups d'Etat, ne
pouvant en aucune maniere porter un jugement sur
les affaires interieures des Etats Membres. Et je precise
ici qu'il ne s'agit pas d'un coup d'Etat. Lumumba a ete
arrete en vertu des lois nationales congolaises et apres
conviction des actes commis contre son gouvernement,
contre la :Republique du Congo. Il ne s'agit pas ici d'un
coup d'Etat, mais d'une mesure normale de securite
interieure.
162. Je ne terminerai pas cette intervention sans
preciser la position du Gouvernement camerounais sur
les attaques portees par la delegation sovietique contre
le Secretaire general.
163. Rappelons d'abord a cet effet que le premier
acte de chaque Etat africain apres son accession a l'independance est la demande d'admission a I'Organisation
des Nations Unies. Cette admission consacre le statut
politique de l'Etat, et, suivant notre conception d'anciens colonises, elle materialise la personnalite internationale et confirme notre egalite avec nos anciens
patrons, nos amis d'aujourd'hui, et meme avec les puissances atomiques. A cote de cet interet bien comprehensible, l'Afrique a bien d'autres raisons de courir a
l'ONU, afin d'obtenir la confirmation de sa renaissance.
164. Nous ne pouvons en effet oublier que I'Organisation est, directement ou indirectement, responsable
de notre promotion it la souverainete. Je ne voudrais
pas etablir ici la part de sa contribution it la renaissance
de l'Afrique en general, mais je dois rappeler que la
Republique du Cameroun lui est directement redevable.
Les nations representees ici ont suivi nos efforts a
travers les 15 annees de l'existence de l'Organisation.
Notre foi en cette assemblee est bien comprise de tous.
Pour cette raison et pour plusieurs autres encore, ma
delegation pre£ere que l'Organisation demeure ce qu'elle
a ete jusqu'ici, dans sa charte comme dans sa structure.
La delegation camerounaise profitera de chaque occasion qui lui sera offerte pour redire l'espoir qu'en notre
qualite d'ancien Territoire sous tutelle nous avons place
dans l'ONU. Beaucoup d'Etats Membres represenb~s
ici n'existaient pas encore que le Cameroun et notre
Etat frere du Togo etaient deja sur la scene internationale, d'abord dans le cadre de la Societe des Nations
en tant que territoires sous mandat et ensuite dans le
cadre de I'OND en tant que territoires sous tutelle.

161. In judging the actions of Congolese citizens, the
Congolese State cannot be replaced by the United
Nations. \rVhat we have here is an event on the international scene which has become a common occurrence
in certain parts of the world. In many countries
Governments are overthrown by COltps d' etat, generally
of a military nature, without the world Organization
being called upon to intervene. I shall give no examples,
since I do not wish to involve certain States Members
of this Organization by naming them; but the history
of upsets of governments is something of which we
must all be aware. Our Organization was not called
upon to intervene in all these COtf.ps d' eta.t, since it
could pass no judgement on the domestic affairs of any
Member State. And I should make it clear that, in the
present case, no coup d' etat was involved. Lun1Umba
was arrested under Congolese national law, after it
had been proved that he had acted against his Government and against the Republic of the Congo. This is
not a C01tp d' etat, but a nonnal internal security
measure.
162. I cannot conclude this statement without defining
the Camerounian Government's views with regard to
the attacks which the Soviet delegation has made on
the Secretary-General.
163. \Ve must remember that the first act of every
African State, on achieving its independence, is to
apply for admission to the United Nations. This admission establishes the country's political status; it gives,
as we former colonial peoples believe, outward form
to our international personality and confirms our
equality with our former masters-who are now our
friends-and even with the atomic Powers. Apart from
this very understandable concern, Africa has many
reasons for turning to the United Nations for confinnation of its rebirth.
164. We cannot forget that the Organization is
directly or indirectly responsible for our promotion to
sovereignty. I do not wish here to assess its contribution to the rebirth of Africa as a whole but I must
point out that the Republic of Cameroun is directly
indebted to it. The nations represented here have
followed our efforts during the fifteen years of the
Organization's existence. Our faith in this Assembly
is well understood by all. For this and for many other
reasons,. my delegation prefers that the Organization
should remain as it has been hitherto, both in its
Charter and in its structure. The Camerounian delegation will take every opportunity to restate the hopes
which we, the people of a former Trust Territory, place
in the United Nations. Many States represented here
as Members did not exist when Cameroun and our
sister State of Togo were already on the international
scene, first as Mandated Territories under the League
of Nations and then as Trust Territories under the
United Nations. We have followed the United Nations
and you have followed us in the various dealings which

32

have taken place within this international Organization.
We have set ourselves the duty of using our former
position of Trust Territory in order to make our contribution to the settlement of international problems.
My delegation's action and position will always reflect
the vow which we took when we became independent:
to remain true to legality, because the existence of your
Assembly has helped us and we want it to help the
world in general and Africa in particular.

Nous avons suivi les Nations Dnies et vous nous avez
suivis dans les differentes tractations qui ont eu lieu au
sein de cette organisation internationale. Nous nous
sommes fait un devoir de profiter de notre qualite
d'ancien Etat sous tutelle pour apporter notre contribution au reglement des problemes internationaux.
L'action et la position de ma delegation sera toujours
conforme au vceu que nous avons fait lors de notre
accession a l'independance: rester dans la conception
de la legalite parce que nous avons profite de l'existence
de votre assemblee et nous voudrions qu'elle soit profitable au monde en general et a l'Afrique en particulier.

165. All will understand our faith in this Assembly;
and I am certain that a political group like that proposed by the Soviet Dnion-a sort of triumvirate, a
Secretariat with three heads-would deprive the Organization of the prestige which has attracted the
African nations, and of the impartiality which has
marked its work. We are not prepared to accept the
lessons given here by certain heads of delegation who
would turn this august Assembly into a party meeting.
Nor do we accept pounding on the table with shoes,
or insults which are a complete violation of the traditions of courtesy and propriety. The ancient civilizations
of the world were grieved by this exhibition, but the
newly independent States of Africa were disillusioned.
This demonstration of contempt for international standards, based on mutual respect and elementary courtesy, shows exactly what the atmosphere of the
Organization would be if the triumvirate proposed by
the Soviet delegation were accepted. We have witnessed
displays by the highest representative of one of the
three blocs which would make up the triumvirate.
The African States were not impressed by his behaviour and we do not wish to await an experience
from the heads of the other two blocs. ':Ve are convinced that the hope we have placed in this Organization would be injured by such a proposal. At this
moment, two blocs are in question-the East and ·the
West. Then, on the horizon, there is another miniature
bloc-the neutralist bloc, which is beginning to show
clear signs of neutralization. Later there may be a
northern bloc and a southern bloc and, when the world
is divided into blocs according to the points of the
compass, there will be north-eastern, north-western,
south-eastern and south-westun, north-north-eastern,
north-north-western, south-south-eastern and southsouth-western blocs. It seems that there are other subdivisions of the cardinal points, much more subtle than
those I have mentioned. I leave it to you to imagine
the number of political blocs which will quarrel over
.the conduct of world affairs and which will have to be
taken into account in the structural reorganization of
the Secretariat. You will admit, Mr. President, that
the principle of the triumvirate, as proposed by the
Head of the Soviet delegation will be left far behind.

165. Notre foi en cette assemblee est bien comprise
de tous et je suis certain qu'un groupe politique comme
celui que nous a propose l'Union sovietique, c'est-a--dire
une espece de triumvirat, un secretariat general a- trois
tetes, enleverait a l'Organisation le prestige qui a attire
les nations africaines, et l'impartialite qui a guide ses
travaux. Nous ne sommes pas prets a accepter les
le<;ons donnees ici par certains chefs de delegation pour
transformer cette auguste assemblee en meeting de
parti. Nous n'acceptons pas non plus les coups de
savate sur la table ou les injures, qui constituent une
denegation totale des traditions de courtoisie et de
bienseance. Les vieilles civilisations du monde ont ete
affligees de ce spectacle, mais les nouveaux Etats independants d'Mrique ont ete de<;us. Cette demonstration
de mepris envers des normes internationales etablies
sur le respect mutue1 et la courtoisie elementaire demontre exactement queUe serait "atmosphere de l'Organisation si le triumvirat propose par la delegation
sovietique etait accepte. Nous avons assiste aux demonstrations du plus grand representant de l'un des
trois blocs devant constituer le triumvirat. Les Etats
africains n'ont pas eu a envier son comportement et
nous ne voulons pas nous exposer a faire l'experience
de ce1ui des chefs des deux autres blocs. Nous sommeS
convaincus que l'espoir que nous avions place dans cette
organisation serait desservi par une teUe proposition.
A l'heure actuelle, deux blocs sont consideres: l'Est et
l'Ouest. Puis vient bien apres un bloc en miniature,
celui des ueutralistes qui commence a donner des signes
d'une neutralisation evidente. Plus tard, il y aura peutetre le bloc du nord et le bloc du sud et, lorsque le
monde sera divise en blocs conformement aux points
cardinaux, il y aura des blocs nord-est, nord-ouest, sudest et sud-ouest, nord-nord-est, nord-nord-ouest, sudsud-est et sud-sud-ouest. Il parait qu'il existe d'autres
subdivisions des points cardinaux beaucoup plus subtiles que celle que je viens de considerer. Te vous
laisse le soin d'entrevoir le aombre de blocs politiques
qui se disputeront la conduite du monde et dont il
faudra necessairement tenir compte dans la reorganisation des structures du Secretariat. Vous admettrez,
Monsieur le President, que le principe du triumvirat
tel qu'il a ete propose par le chef de la delegation sovietique sera largement depasse.

166. The delegation of the Republic of Cameroun
cannot accept such a proposal, and will oppose any
attempt to change the post of Secretary-General. Last
September's spectacle, of unhappy memory, was enough
for us. That was a display by a single delegation, the
Soviet delegation, which was joined by its lackeys and
by the representatives of the Soviet colonies in Africa.
But it will be quite different when blocs from all the
cardinal points begin to pound the' table with their
hands or shoes. It will be the end of the Organization
and the beginning of world chaos, which is undoubtedly

166. La delegation de la Republique du Cameroun
ne peut accepter une telle proposition et s'opposera a
toute tentative de modification du poste de Secretaire
general. Le spectacle de septembre dernier, dont nous
avons garde la triste memoire, nous a suffi. Cette manifestation etait le fait d'une seule delegation, la delegation sovietique a laquelle se sont joints ses laquais
et les representants des colonies sovietiques d'Afrique,
mais ce sera autre chose lorsque les blocs de tous les
points cardinaux se mettront a cogner sur la table, ase dechausser et a jouer de la savate. Ce sera la fin de

33

provided for in the meticulously prepared Soviet plan
launched last September.

169. My delegation takes strong issue with all the
Soviet attacks on ~he person and office of the SecretaryGeneral. Mr. Hammarskjold deserves the confidence of
the whole world for the integrity with which he has
approached the Congo problem. The delegation of
Cameroun requests you, Mr. President, to assure the
Secretary-General of its admiration and complete
support.
170. Lastly, my delegation does not believe that this
Council was convened because of a sincere desire to
help the Congo solve its problems. On the contrary, it
was convened in order to bring new confusion into the
calm which would have followed President Kasa-Vubu's
return to the Congo. As you must know, the basic
element is the arrest of Patrice Lumumba. But this
arrest is only a consequence of an earlier event-Patrice
Lumumba's escape. The Congolese authorities had
issued a warrant, in good and due form, for the arrest
of the ex-Prime Minister, Patrice Lumumba. Effect
could never be given to this warrant because the
United Nations troops had taken Citizen Pratice
Lumumba under their protection. The Congolese authorities yielded, and the United Nations guard was
joined by another guard of Congolese soldiers around
Patrice Lumumba's residence. Nothing happened for

1'0rganisation et le debut d'un chaos mondial tel qu'il
figure sans aucun doute sur le plan sovietique minutieusement con<;u dont l'application a commence en
septembre dernier.
167. Je voudrais maintellant, avallt de terminer,
apporter l'appui total du Gouvernement camerounais a
l'interpretation, par le Secretaire general, des mesures
prises par 1'0rganisation des Nations Unies au Congo.
Ma delegation a deja eu l'occasion de dire - et nous le
repetons ici - que, sauf stipulations precises de la
Charte, 1'0NU ne peut pas intervenir dans les affaires
interieures d'un Etat Membre. La 1l1ajorite de mes
colU~gues ici presents sont d'accord sur ce point C01l1me
ils 1'0nt prouve recemment lors de l'examen du rapport
de la Commission de verification des pouvoirs 1. Je ne
reviendrai plus sur les arguments invoques a ce sujet,
mais j'attirerai cependant l'attention du Conseil sur un
aspect precis des consequences d'une eventuelle intervention de l'Organisation des Nations Unies dans
l'arrestation de Patrice Lumumba, ex-premier ministre
du Congo. Ma delegation desapprouve les termes du
projet de resolution sovietique demandant la liberation
de Patrice Lumumba. Ma delegation est tout aussi
opposee a l'appui donne par les colonies sovietiques
d'Afrique a une telle idee.
168. La delegation camerounaise a voulu enregistrer
sa position sur ce point precis, car nous sommes persuades que dans un an ou dans deux ans, sinon dans
un mois ou dans deux mois, I'Union sovietique essaiera
encore, dans d'autres parties d'Afrique, de creer les
memes incidents et les memes personnalites fictives
qu'au Congo. Elle pourra egalement demander it 1'0NU
de cautionner cette politique par des resolutions du
genre de celle que nous avons devant nous. Ma delegation a voulu porter a la connaissance du Conseil de
securite son opposition irreversible a une telle manreuvre. Car, si I'Afrique n'etait pas vigilante, elle
deviendrait d'abord un continent sous la tutelle de
1'0NU, ce que nous ne pouvons pas accepter; et,
lorsque 1'0rganisation des Nations U nies aurait ete
eliminee, notre continent ne serait plus qu'une colonie
sovietique, ce it quoi nous devons nous opposer.
169. Ma delegation fletrit vigoureusement toutes les
attaques sovietiques contre la personne et le poste du
Secretaire general. M. Hammarskjold merite la confiance du monde entier pour l'integrite avec laquelle
il a aborde le probleme congolais. La delegation du
Cameroun vous prie, Monsieur le President, de transmettre au Secretaire general l'expression de son admiration et de son appui total.
170. En conclusion, ma delegation estime que cette
convocation du Conseil ne correspond pas it un desir
sincere d'aider le Congo a resoudre ses problemes;
elie avait pour but au contraire d'introduire un nouvel
element de confusion dans le calme qui devait suivre
le retour du president Kasa-Vubu au Congo. Comme
vous devez le savoir, l'element de base est l'arrestation
de Patrice Lumumba. Or cette arrestation n'est qu'une
consequence d'un fait antecedent, celui de l'evasion de
Patrice Lumumba. L'ex-premier ministre .Patrice
Lumumba faisait 1'0bjet d'un mandat d'arret en bonne
et due forme des autorites congolaises. Ce mandat
d'arret n'a jamais pu etre execute, les troupes des
Nations Unies ayant pris sous leur protection la personne du citoyen Patrice Lumumba. Les autorites
congolaises se sont inc1inees devant le fait, et au cordon
de la garde des Nations Unies s'etait ajoute un autre

1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifteenth
Session, Plenary Meetings, 917th-924th meetings.

1 Documents officiels de rAssemblee generale, quinzieme
session, Seances plenihes, 917eme a 924eme seance.

167. Before I end, I should like to say that the
Camerounian Government ~ntirdy subscribes to the
Secretary-General's interpretation of the measures
taken by the United Nations in the Congo. My delegation has already had occasion to say-and we repeat it
here-that, except as specifically stated in the Charter,
the United Nations cannot intervene in the domestic
affairs of a Member State. The majority of my colleagues here present agree on this point, as they recently
showed when they considered the Credentials Committee's report. 1 I shall not go over the arguments put
forward in that connexion, but I would draw the Council's attention to one aspect of the consequences of any
United Nations interference with the arrest of Patrice
Lumumba, ex-Prime Minister of the Congo. My
delegation disapproves of the terms of the Soviet draft
resolution calling for the release of Patrice Lumu1l1ba.
My delegation is equally opposed to the support which
the Soviet colonies in Africa have given to this idea.
168. The Camerounian delegation has wished to put
its views about this particular point on record, because
we are convinced that in one or two years, or even in
one or two months, the Soviet Union will try again,
in other parts of Africa, to create the same incidents
and the same fictitious personalities as in the Congo.
It may also ask the United Nations to countenance this
policy by means of resolutions similar to that which is
before us. My delegation has desired me to inform
the Security Council of its unshakable opposition to
such a manoeuvre. For, if Africa were not vigilant,
it would first become a continent under United Nations
trusteeship, to which we cannot agree; thereafter when
the United Nations had been eliminated, our continent
would be no more than a Soviet colony, which is something we must oppose.

34

nearly two months. Given the hubbub which Soviet
Russia and its African colonies have set up about the
arrest of Patrice Lumumba, we are entitled to wonder,
today, whether they are not directly responsible for the
escape which is the reason for the convening of the
Security Council; I hope this is not correct; but everything indicates it, and any honest man would come to
that conclusion.

cordon de garde de soldats congolais autour de la
residence de Patrice Lumumba. Rien ne s'etait passe
pendant pres de deux mois. Devant I'orchestration qui
a ete faite au sujet de l'arrestation de Patrice Lumumba,
par l'Union sovietique et ses colonies d'Afrique, nous
sommes en droit de nous demander aujourd'hui si elles
ne sont pas directement responsables de l'evasion qui
a motive cette convocation du Conseil de securite; je
souhaiterais que ce ne soit pas vrai; mais tout porte a
le croire et tout homme honnete aboutirait a cette
conclusion.
171. Quoi qu'il en soit, le projet de resolution de
l'Union sovietique est absolument inacceptable, et quand
il demande la liberation de Patrice Lumumba, et quand
il demande le desarmement de l'armee nationale congolaise. Si l'Organisation des Nations Unies pouvait
assumer une telle responsabilite et entreprendre une
telle action, rien n'explique que rUnion sovietique
n'ait pas accepte son intervention dans plusieurs de
ses colonies d'Europe.
172. Ma delegation estime que la convocation du
Conseil de securite est injustifiee par les faits, pour les
raisons que nous avons citees plus haut. Son but inavoue
etait de rouvrir les debats sur le Congo renvoyes sine
die sur la proposition du bloc communiste. Ma delegation ne peut pas approuver une telle manceuvre; elle
estime qu'aucune resolution a ce sujet ne doit etre
adoptee ni par le Conseil, ni par l'Assemblee generale.
Cependant, ma delegation n'aura pas d'objection contre
tout projet de resolution portant appreciation du travail
accompli jusqu'ici par rONU au Congo.

171. In any case, the Soviet draft resolution is completely unacceptable, both in its demand for the release
of Patrice Lumumba and in its request for the disarming of the Armee nationale congolaise. If the United
Nations could assume such a responsibility and undertake such an action, nothing explains why the Soviet
Union has not accepted United Nations intervention
in several of its European colonies.
172. My delegation thinks that the calling of this
Security Council is not justified by the facts, for the
reasons we have already given. Its unacknowledged
purpose was to reopen the debate on the Congo which,
on the proposal of the communist bloc, was postponed
sine die. My delegation cannot approve of such a
manoeuvre. It believes that no resolution on the subject
should be adopted, either by the Council or by the
General Assembly. However, my delegation has no
objection to any draft resolution expressing appreciation of the work so far done by the United Nations
in the Congo.
173. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian):
Before adjourning the meeting I shall call on the representative of the United Arab Republic who apparently
wishes to make a few remarks in connexion with the
preceding statement.
174. Mr. ASHA (United Arab Republic): During
his statement the representative of Cameroun made
some insinuations about our Embassy in Leopoldville.
I shall not take the Council's time to refute his allegations, because I do not regard them as worthy of a
reply. I would, however, like to say that he has been
badly advised. r would suggest that in the future he
should study the facts more carefully before making
allegations about my country.

173. Le PRESIDENT (tradztit du msse): Avant de
lever la seance, je donnerai encore la parole au representant de la Republique arabe unie qui desire vraisemblablement faire quelques breves remarques a propos de la derniere intervention.
174. M. ASHA (Republique arabe unie) [traduit de
l' anglais]: Dans sa declaration, le representant du
Cameroun s'est livre a des insinuations au sujet de
notre ambassade a Leopoldville. J e ne retiendrai pas
l'attention du Conseil pour refuter ses allegations, car
je ne les juge pas dignes d'une reponse. Je veux simplement faire remarquer que M. Owono a ete mal informe.
Je suggere qu'a l'avenir il etudie les faits plus soigneusement avant de formuler des allegations concernant
mon pays.
175. Le PRESIDENT (traduit du russe) : Je donne
la parole au representant du Cameroun.
176. M. OWONO (Cameroun): Pour repondre aux
observations que vient de formuler le representant de
la Republique arabe unie, je precise que je crois bien
n'avoir cite le nom d'aucun pays dans ma declaration.
Je me souviens que j'ai tres attentivement evite toute
mention et je pense qu'il est de mon devoir de refuter
et de rejeter categoriquement l'allusion qu'il vient de
faire a ce sujet.
La seance est levee le smnedi 10 decenzbre,
a 0 h 10.

175. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian) :
I call on the representative of Cameroun.
176. Mr. OWONO (Cameroun) (translated from
French) : In r::'91r to the remarks which the representative of the ~;n~ted Arab Republic has just made,
I must say that I do not think I mentioned, in my statement, any country by name. I remember that I very
carefuliy avoided any such reference, and I think it
my duty categorically to refute and reject his observation on the subject.
The meeting rose on Saturday, 10 December,
at 12.10 a:m.

35

DISTRIBUTORS FOR UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
DEPOSITAIRES DES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS VNIES
ARGENTINA·ARGENTlNE
Editoriol Sudamericanc, S.A., Alsina 500.
Buenos Aires.
AUSTRAlIA·AUSTRALlE
Melbourne University Preu, 369 lons.
dale Street. Melbourne C. I.
AUSTRIA-AUTRICHE
Gerold & Co•• Graben 31. Wien. 1.
B. Wiillerstorff, Markus Sittikusstrasse 10.
Salzburg.
BElGIUM·BElGIQUE
Agence et Messagerie. de la Presse.
S.A., 14·22. rue du Persil, Bruxelles.
BOLlVIA..aOllVIE
libreria Seleccione., Casilla 972. la Paz.
BRAZll·BRESIL
livraria Agir, Rua Mexico 98·B, Caixa
Postal 3291. Rio de Janeiro.
BURMA.BIRMANIE
Curator. Govt. Book Depot, Rangoon.
CAMBODIA.CAMBODGE
Entreprise khmere de Iibrairie, Impri.
merie & Papeterie Sari, Phnom-Penh.
CANADA
The Queen's Printer/lmprimeur de la
Reine. Ottawa. Ontario.
CEYLON.CEYLAN
lake House Bookshop. Assoc. Newspapers
of Ceylon, p.a. Box 244. Colombo.
CHllE.CHIlI
Editorial del Pacifica. Ahumoda 51.
Santiago.
Libreria Ivens. Casilla 205. Santiago.
CHINA·CHINE
The. World Book Co., Ltd., 99 Chung
King Road, ht Sedion, Taipeh. Taiwan.
The Commercial Press. Ltd•• 211 Honan
Rd.• Shanghai.
COlOMBIA.COlOMBIE
libreria Buchholz. Av. Jimenez de Quesoda 8-40. Bogota.
COSTA RICA
Imprenta y libreria Trejcs. Aparlado
1313. San Jose.
CUBA
la Casa Belga. O'Reilly 455. la Habana.
CZECHOSLOVAKIA.
TCHECOSlOVAQUIE
Ceskoslovensky Spisovatel. Narodni Ti'ida
9. Praha 1.
DENMARK.DANEMARK
Einar Munksgaard. Ltd., Nfrregade 6,
KIlbenhavn. K.
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC.
REPUBlIQUE DOMINICAINE
Libreria Daminicana. Mercedes 49. Ciu·
dad Trujillo.
ECUADOR-EQUATEUR
libreria Cienllfica, Casilla 362. Guaya·
quil.
El SAlVADOR~AlVADOR
Manuel Navas y Cia.• la. Avenida sur
37. San Salvador.
ETHIOPIA.ETHIOPIE
fnternational Press Agency. p.a. Box
120. Addis Ababa.
FINlAND.FINLANDE
Akateeminen Kirjakauppa. 2 Keskuskatu.
Helsinki.
FRANCE
Editions A. Pedone. 13. rue s"umot.
Paris (V0).
GERMANY·AllEMAGNE
R. Eisenschmidt. Schwanthaler Str. 59.
FrankfurtlMain.
Elwert und Meurer, Hauplstrasse 101,
Berlin-Schoneberg.

Alexander Horn. Spiegelgasse 9, Wies.
baden.
W. E. Saarbach. Gertrudenstrasse 30.
Koln !l).
GHANA
University Bookshop. University College
of Ghana. legon. Accra.
GREECE-GRECE
Kauffmann Bookshop, 28 Stadion Street,
Athenes.
GUATEMALA
Sociedad Econcimico-Financiero, 60. Av.
14-33. Guatemala City.
HAITI
librairie"A la CarQvelle"" Port.gu-Prince.

HONDURAS
libreria Panamericana; Tegucigalpa.
HONG KONG - HONG.KONG
The Swindon Book Co., 25 Nothan Road,
Kowloon.
ICELAND.ISLANDE
Bokaverzlun Sigfusar E}'mundssonar H.
F.• Austurslraeti 18, Reykjavik.
INDIA-INDE
Orient Long",ans. Calcutta. Bombay, Ma.
dras, New Delhi and Hyderobad.
Oxford Book & Stationery Co.. New
Delhi and Calcutta.
P. Varadachary & Co.• Madras.
INDONESIA.INDONESIE
Pembangunan. ltd•• Gunung Sohari 84,
Djakarta.
IRAN
tU':,. ';62 Ferdowsi Avenue, Teheran.
IRAQ·IRAK
Mackenzie's Bookshop. Baghdad.
IRElAND.IRLANDE
Stationery Ollice. Dublin.
ISRAEL
Blumstein's Bookstores. 35 Allenby Rd.
and 48 Nachla! Benjamin St.• Tel Aviv.
ITALY·ITALlE
libreria Commissionaria Sansoni, Via
Gina Capponi 26. Firenze, & Via D. A.
Azuni lel A. Rama.
JAPAN·JAPON
Maruzen Company. Ltd.• 6 Tori·Nichome.
Nihonbashi. Tokyo.
JORDAN·JORDANIE
Joseph I. Bahous & Co.. Dar.ul-Kulub..
Box 66. Amman.
KOREA-COREE
Eul-Yoo Publishing Cc.. Ltd., 5, 2·KA.
Chongno. Seoul.
lEBANON·L1BAN
Khayat'sCollege Book Cooperativ,""
92·94. rue Bliss. 8eyrouth.
LUXEM80URG
librairie J. Trausch-Schumm"r, place du
Theatre. Luxembourg.
MEXICO·MEXIQUE
Editorial Hermes. S.A.• Ignacio Mariscal
41. Mexico. D.F.
MOROCCQ-MAROC
Centre de diffusion d~cumentaire du
D.E.P.I•• 8. rue Michaux-Bellaire, Rabat.
NETHERLANDS·PAYS.BAS
N.V. Martinus Nijhoff, lange Voorhout
9, 's-Gravenhage.
NEW ZEAlAND.NOUVEllE·ZELANDE
United Nations Association of New Zea.
land. C.P.O. 1011. Wellington.
NORWAY.NORVEGE .
Johan Grundt Tanum Forlag. Kr. Augustsgt. 7A. Oslo.

Orders and inquiries from counlries not lisled above may be
sent to: Sales Seclion, Publishing Sevice. United Nations.

New York. U.S.A.; or Sales Section. Uniled Nalions. Palais
des Nations, Geneva. Switzerland•.

Printed in Canada

PAKISTAN
The Pakistan Co.operative Book Society.
Dacca. East Pakistan.
Publishers United. Ltd.• Lahore.
Thomas & Thomas. Karachi.
PANAMA
Jose Menendez. Agenda Internacional
de Publicationes. Apartado 2052, Av.
8A. sur 21-58, ·Ponama.
PARAGUAY
Agentia de librerias de Salvador Niua.
Calle Pte. Franco No. 39-43. Asuncian.
PERU-PEROU
libreria Internacional del Peru. S.A.•
Casilla 1417. Lima.
PHILIPPINES
Alemar's Bo("' Stare. 769 Rizal Avenue,
Manila.
PORTUGAL
livraria Rodrigues. 186 Rua Aurea.
lisDoa.
SINGAPORE.SINGAPOUR
The City Book Store, Ltd•• Collyer Quay.
SPAIN.ESPAGNE
libreria Bosch. 11 Roncla Universidad,
Barcelona.
libreria Mundi.Prensa, Castello 37. Ma·
drid.
SWEDEN·SUEDE
C. E. Fritze's Kungl. Hovbokhandel A-B.
Fredsgatan 2. Stockholm.
SWITZERlAND.SUISSE
librairie Payot. S.A., lausanne. Geneve.
Hans Raunhardt. Kirchgosse 17, Ziirich 1.
THA·llAND.THAILANDE
Pramuan Mit. Ltd•• 55 Chakrawat Road.
Wat Tuk. Bangkok.
TURKEY-TURQUIE
librairie Hachette. 469 Istiklal Caddesi.
Beyoglu. Istanbul.
UNION OF SOUTH AFRICAUNION SUD-AFRICAINE
Van Schaik's Bookstore (Pty). ltd••
Church Street. Box 724. Pretoria.
UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST
REPUBlICS.UNION DES REPUBlIQUES
SOCIAlISTES SOVIETIQUES
Mezhdunarodnaya Knyiga Smolenskaya
Ploshchad. Moskva.
UNITED ARAB REPUBlICREPUBUQUE ARABE UNIE
Libroirie "la Renoissance d·Egypte". 9
Sit. Adfy Pasha, Caira.
UNITED KINGDOM.ROYAUME.UNI
H. M. Stationery Office. p.a. Box 569,
London. S.E. 1 (and HMSO branches in
Belfast. Birmingham. Bristol, Cardiff.
Edinburgh. Monchester).
UNITED STATeS OF AMERICAETATS·UNIS D'AMERIQUE
Sales Section. Publishing Service. United
Notions. New York.
URUGUAY
Representation de Editariales. Prof. H.
D·Elia. Plaza Cagancha 1342. 1 0 piso.
Montevideo.
.
VENEZUELA
libreria del Este. Av. Miranda No. 52,
Edf. GaJipan. Caracas.
VIET·NAM
librairie.Papeterie XuCin Thu. lB5. rue
Tu-Do, B. P. 283. Saigon.
YUGOSLAY;IA.YOUGOSlAVIE
Cankarjeva Zalolfba. Ljubliana. Slovenio.
Drzavno Preduzece. Jugoslovenska Knji.
ga. Terozije 27/11. Beagrad.
Prosvjeta, 5, Trg Bratstva i Jedinstva.
Zagreb.
[61B1J

Les commandes et demandes de renseignemenls emanant de
pays ou il n'existe pas encore de depositaires peuvent etre
adressees a la Section des ventes. Service des publications,
Organisalion des Nations Unies. New York (Etals·Unis cfAme.
rique). ou a la Seclion des venles. Office europeen des Nations
Unies. Palais des Nalions, Geneve (Suisse).

Price: $U.S. 0.50; 3/6 stg.; Sw. fr. 2.00
(or equivalent in other currencies)

9754-April 1961-1,725
