UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

FORTIETH

YEAR

2610th

MEETING:

UNLIBRARY

2 OCTOBER 1985

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/26 10) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...*.......*..

1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President . . . . ..I......................

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Letter dated 1 October 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17509) . . .

1

WPV.2610

‘. ’

NOTE
2.
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
,withcfwres.
Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
.:. I ’
document.
,,

I

,.!

_ Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . . ) are normally published in
.&rartiriy Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it
is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the ,,
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
.,
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2610th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 2 October 1985, at 1150 a.m.
At the invitaiion of the President, Mr. Card (Tunisia) and
Mr. Netanyahu (Israel) took places at the Council table; Mr.
Djoudi (Algeria), Mr. Salah (Jordan), Mr. AESabah
(Kuwait), Mr. Azzarouk (Libyan Arab Jamahariya) and Mr.
Ttirkmen (Turkey) took the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber.

President: Mr. Herbert S. OKUN
(United States of America).
Resent: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark, Egypt, France,
India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.

3. The PRESIDENT:
I should also like to inform
members of the Council that I have received a letter dated
2 October 1985 from the representative of Egypt
[S/175123, which reads as follows:

Provisional agenda (S/AgendaI2610)
1. Adoption
2.

“I have the honour to request that the Security Council extend an invitation to Mr. Farouq Qaddoumi,
Head of the Political Department and Member of the
Executive Committee
of the Palestine Liberation
Organization, in accordance with the Council’s past
practice, in connection with the Council’s consideration
of the item presently on its agenda.”

of the agenda

Letter dated 1 October 1985 from the Permanent Rep
resentative of Tunisia to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/17509)
The meeting was called to order at 1X.50 a.m.

4. The proposal by the representative of Egypt is not
made pursuant to rule 37 or rule 39 of the provisional rules
of the Security Council, but, if approved by the Council,
the invitation to participate in the debate would confer on
the Palestine Liberation (PLO) the same rights of participation as those conferred ‘on a Member State when it was
invited to participate under rule 37.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President
1. The PRESIDENT:
As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of October, I should like at
the very outset to pay tribute, on behalf of the members of
the Council, to the Secretary of State for Foreign and
Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom, Sir Geoffrey Howe, and to Sir John Thomson, representative of
the United Kingdom, for their service as President of the
Council for the month of September. I am sure I speak for
all members of the Council in expressing to them our
admiration and deep appreciation for the great diplomatic
skill with which they conducted the business of the Council
last month.

5. Does any member of the Security Council wish to
speak on this proposal?
6. Since no member of the Council wishes to speak at
this stage, I shall make the following statement in my
capacity as the representative of the UNITED STATES
OF AMERICA.

Adoption of the agenda

7. The United States has consistently taken the position
that under the provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council, the only legal basis on which the Council may
grant a hearing to persons speaking on behalf of nongovernmental entities is rule 39.

The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 1 October 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/17509)

8. For 39 ye& the United States has supported a generous interpretation of rule 39 and would certainly not have
objected had this matter been raised under that rule. We
are, however, opposed to’special ad hoc departures from
orderly procedure.

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members of
the Council that I have received letters from the representatives of Algeria, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Tunisia and Turkey in which they request to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

9. The United States consequently opposes extending to
the PLO the same rights to participate in the proceedings
of the Council as if that organization represented a
Member State. We certainly believe in listening to all
1

points of view, but none of that requires violating the rules.
In particular, the United States does not agree with ‘the
recent practice of the Council which appears selectively to
try to enhance the prestige of those who wish to speak in
the Council through a departure from the rules of procedure. We consider this special practice to be without legal
foundation and to constitute an abuse of the rules.

16. The first speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Tunisia, Mr. Beji CaYd Essebsi. I welcome him and
invite him to make his statement.
17. Mr. CAiD ESSEBSI (Tunisia) ,(interpretation from
French): Permit me first of all to congratulate you, Sir; on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council and to
wish you success in your task. I should have preferred to
discharge this agreeable duty in happier circumstances,
such as the commemoration of the fortieth anniversary of
the Organization. Unfortunately, the act of aggression of
which my country has just been the innocent victim has
changed all that. I venture to hope that under your presidency the Council will fulfil the noble mission entrusted to
it by the Charter of the United Nations-that
of the maintenance of international peace and security.

10. For these reasons, the United States requests’that the
terms of the proposed invitation be put to the vote, The
United States will of course vote against the proposal.
11. I now resume my function as PRESIDE.l$T
Council.
.

of the

12. If no other member of the Council wishes toipeak, I
shall take it that the Council is ready to vote on the proposal bv Egypt.

18. The Council has before it an official communication
from my Government describing in detail an act of aggression against Tunisia for which Israel has officially claimed
responsibility. That act of aggression resulted in the loss of
many human lives, which initial estimates put at more than
60 dead and more than 100 injured. Furthermore, it
caused material damage and destruction on a large scale.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

“’
: ’
Infavour: Burkina Faso, China, Egypt, India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago; ‘Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics.
Against: United States of America.

19. Contrary to what Israeli officials are claiming, the
place chosen for this cowardly attack is situated in an
exclusively residential urban area which has traditionally
been the home of Tunisian families and a small number of
Palestinian civilians who had to flee from Lebanon following the invasion of that country by the Israeli army.

..

Abstaining: Australia, Denmark, France,$ United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
l%e proposal was adopted by 10 votes to I, with 4
abstentions.

’ 20. The Israeli raid constitutes a blatant act of aggression
against the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Tunisia and a flagrant violation of the rules and
norms of international law, as well as the principles set fort
in the Charter.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. i;broug Qaddoumi
(Palestine Liberation Organization) took a place at the
Council table.

21. Nothing can justify this act of terrorism committed
by and duly acknowledged by the Government of a
Member State against another Member State, Tunisia,
which has so often unequivocally condemned terrorism of
every kind and from whatever source. Countries that have
denounced State terrorism and declared their determination to combat it cannot but join forces within the Security
Council to take appropriate measures in response to this
crime. Any attempt to justify it, any indulgence shown to
its perpetrators, no matter what the pretext, can only
encourage aggression and set the seal of approval on the
aggressor. In any case, my country would have no altemative but to consider that an unfriendly gesture, from which
it would draw the necessary conclusions.

13. The PRESIDENT: I have to inform the Council that
I have received a letter dated 2 October 1985 from the
representative of Kuwait [S/Z75I.?‘j, which reads as
follows:
.
“In my capacity as Chairman of the Group of Arab
States for the month of October, I have the honour to
request that the Security Council extend an invitation
under rule. 39 of the provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Clovis Maksoud, Permanent Observer of the
League of Arab States to the United Nations, to participate in the discussion in the Council of the item presently on its agenda.”
14. If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Maksoud.

22. Indeed, Tunisia has unfailingly denounced aggression, condemned the aggressor and assured the victim of
its active sympathy. We did so when it was United States
nationals who were the victims. We did so when it was
French nationals who were the victims. And we do so
today in this chamber, as we pay our respects to the
memory of the Soviet citizen who was the victim in Lebanon of blind violence and the deterioration of a situation
with which: the aggressor against, Tunisia today is not
unconnected:

It was so decided.
15. The PRESIDENT:
The Security Council is meeting
today in response to the request contained in the letter
dated 1 October 1985 from the representative of Tunisia to
the President of the Council [S/175!9$
2

23. The crime is particularly reprehensible hecause in
fact it is aimed at jeopardizing the tireless efforts exerted
by the peace-loving countries to bring about a peaceful,
just and lasting settlement of the Palestinian problem on
the basis of the principles of the Charter and the relevant
United Nations resolutions. Everyone is aware that the
hospitality extended by Tunisia to the Palestinian leadership falls within that framework. In any case, no act of
terrorism has been committed from Tunisia, and no Tunisian has ever been implicated in any such act.

ing and non-neighbouring Arab States, but also against
the rules of international conduct to which the civilized
nations that belong to the United Nations should be
committed.
31.’ The brutal air raid against the Tunisian capital is a
flagrant violation of the sovereignty’ of Tunisia, a sister
Arab country, as well as of the integrity of its skies and
land. ‘It ,is also an open act of aggression against the Charter of 1the United Nations, which guarantees the sovereigrity of States and their territorial integrity, and against
the international laws that disapprove such illegal intemational behaviour, and indeed against ethics, which normally constitues the major moral arbiter in the relations
among those nations that respect the Charter and cherish
the sanctity
.,: of international laws.

24. Tunisia’s aim in inviting the Council to condemn
vigorously both the deliberation act of aggression and its
perpetrators, and to demand that they make just and full
reparation for all damage caused, is not merely to seek the
-sanctions imposed by international legality and morality;
we are also calling upon the Council to declare its deter-m&
nation to avert and prevent any repetition of such acts of
terrorism committed by a Member State. We are attempting also to preserve the chances for a peaceful settlement in
the Middle East, which Israel is clearly attempting to
undermine.

32. The Arab States strongly condemn this blatant
aggression and declare their total solidarity with and full
support for the sister State of Tunisia.
33. It is indeed ironic that this aggressive Zionist entity,
which had an illegitimate birth, should persist in committing illegal acts of aggression and crimes with a total disregard for all international laws and norms represented by
the world Organization which had a major helping hand in
its creation.

25. The Tunisian Government is confident that the
Council will give its utmost attention to the grave situation
created by the act of aggression planned and carried out by
the Israeli Government against the sovereignty of Tunisia
and peace in the region, and that it will adopt the necessary
resolutions.

34. Since that alien entity was implanted in the midst of
Arab lands and Arab countries, we. have seen that the
colonialist way of thinking-from
which the idea of creating such an entity, which could not be anything but a
byproduct of colonialism, originated-still
constitutes the
cornerstone of the way of thinking and the behaviour of
the rulers in Tel Aviv, who have made a habit of not
allowing the slightest legal or ethical motive to stand in the
way of their ambitions and cyclical policies of aggression.
In addition to the iron-fist policy by which they rule the
population of the Palestinian and other occupied Arab
territories, we find them from time to time striking out at
secure, independent and sovereign Arab States, in a desperate effort to reaffirm their adherence to the colonialist
theories and traditions which the world Organization seeks
to eliminate for good.

26. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the Deputy
Premier and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait,
Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber ‘Al-Sabah, who wishes
to make a statement on behalf of the Group of Arab
States. I welcome him and invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
27. Mr. AGSABAH
(Kuwait) (interpreration from
Arabic): I congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. You represent a country which, in its capacity as a permanent member of the
Council, has a special role to play in the maintenance of
international peace and security. In addition, your wide
experience and outstanding abilities will enable you to
accomplish your task with great competence.

35. Like similar acts of aggression against the sovereignty of other Arab countries, the Israeli air raid against
the Tunisian capital summarizes the way of thinking of
Zionist colonialism, which in no circumstances whatsoever
allows the slightest check to its ambitions and objectives; it
is a way of thinking which embodies the idea that all
means are acceptable and should be used, including the
stretching of the long arm of aggression, to attack the
sanctity of independent and sovereign States on pretexts
which only the kind of sick logic used by Israel and its
supporters could accept.

28. I pay a tribute also to your predecessor, Sir John
Thomson, the representative of the United Kingdom, for
the wisdom and competence with which he conducted the
Council’s business last month.
29. May I thank the Council for allowing me to participate in the debate on the item now under discussion, on
behalf of the Arab countries, in my capacity as Chairman
of the Group of Arab States this month.
30. The Council is meeting today to discuss a new act of
aggression by the Zionist entity, which has no regard whatsoever for the sanctity of international laws and norms.
This act of aggression is now added to the very long list of
the continuous series of Israeli acts of aggression directed
not only against the Palestinian people and the neighbour-

36. The limitless arrogance of the Zionist entity, which is
a natural extension of the extinct colonial era, would not
be displayed but fcr the fact that that entity is sure that it
can do with impunity whatever it wants, no matter how
much it is in violation of international laws and norms.
3

Indeed, its experience of the international community
the past four decades confirms that painful fact.

over

41. According to the settler-colonial way of thinking of
the Zionist en&y, such a design can be iealized onlf by
destroying the institutions of the Palestinian people, notably the PLO, whether by striking at those institutions at
any time and any place, wherever they may be, regardless
of any encroachment on the sovereignty and security of the
Arab countries concerned, or by describing the PLO as a
terrorist organization in order to pass off any attack on it
as a legitimate act, a term used by the friends of Israel in
such cases, despite the recognition by an absolute majority
of Member States that the PLO is, and remains, the sole
legitimate representative of the Palestinian people.

1
37. The strange immunity enjoyed by that unique entity
is the product of two separate phenomena that do not
augur well, to say the least. The first is the paralysis of the
political will of the international community, which should
have proved its effectiveness by stopping the advance of
that dangerous colonialist octopus at the first signs of its
rebellious behaviour, directed against the very organization that participated in its creation. The second phenomenon is the protection provided by some countries that
participated in the creation of the Zionist. entity’and are
still playing a part in transforming it into a fearsome monster by supplying it with all the means of power, arrogance
and rebelliousness in the form of vast military and economic assistance, completely unjustifiable by its size and
despite its conduct in that .sensitive part .of the world.
Moreover, such assistance, coupled with full political support, continues to be given even when the Zionist entity
commits acts of aggression that violate international laws
and norms.

42. Had the Zionists read history, they would have come
across a well-known fact which has been well learned by
the former colonial Powers after they had paid dearly for
it-that attempts to suppress peoples or destroy liberation
movements by brute force, no matter what name is given
to those attempts, are fruitless, and that victory always
crowns the struggle of the oppressed peoples.
43. To justify the crime committed against the sovereignty of our sister State of Tunisia, Israel and its friends
now say that the attack was directed against the PLO and
not against Tunisia. In the past, in order to justify the
barbaric Israeli invasion of Lebanon, they said that it was
meant to protect the northern Israeli settlements. Now,
since Palestinians are to be found in innumerable Arab
and non-Arab countries all over the world, because of
their dispersal by the Zionist entity and as a result of the
creation of that entity, does that mean that those
countries-no matter how many they are or how far away
they are from the Zionist entity-are potential targets of
Israeli aggression whenever that appeals to the rulers in Tel
Aviv, and that the long arm of the Israeli forces, as the
Defence Minister of the Zionist entity announced yesterday, will reach them wherever they are?

38. We saw that happen in the aftermath of the recent
criminal raid on the Tunisian capital, when the United
States announced that that heinous Israeli crime wasjustifled and concurred with the Israeli argument that the crime
had been committed in self-defence, without any reference
whatsoever to the aggression against Tunisia’s sovereignty,
carried out by aircraft manufactured in the United States.
It seems that United States officials, who repeatedly
announced during the hijacking of the TWA airliner that
retaliation against that terrorist act would in itself constitute a terrorist act, have changed their minds and are now
saying “As a matter of policy, retaliation against terrorist
acts is a legitimate response and an expression of selfdefence”.
39. We are convinced that the Israeli crime falls within
the category of ofticial State terrorism. Israeli has made
unrelenting efforts to destroy all traces of the PLO, the
some legitimate representative of the Palestinian people,
wherever it is to be found. It has done so through its
invasion of Lebanon, with all its terrible consequences,
such as the murder of thousands of innocent people,‘the
destruction of cities and villages and even the siege of the
Lebanese capital; by its adoption of policies of coercion
and repression against the populations of the occupied
territories, where people are deported from the land of
their forefathers merely on suspicion of having connections with the PLO, in flagrant violation of the provisions
of the fourth Geneva Convention;’ and, indeed, by the
barbaric raid on the PLO headquarters in the Tunisian
capital, involving the murder of innocent people in a heavily populated, civilian area.

44. We should like to put the following question to those
who follow such logic: if the barbaric and beastly acts that
you are trying to pass off as legitimate self-defence can
indeed be regarded as such, why was there any need to
have a Charter and why is there a need for the Charter to
affirm the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States?
We also ask Israel and those who concur with its twisted
logic: where would the Israeli forces draw the line in acting
in self-defence? The Charter was adopted in order to be
implemented, in order to save the world from just such
Nazi or Fascist way of thinking, which gives those who
follow it absolute freedom to act with total disregard for
the sovereignty and security of other States.
45. When Israel insists on not abiding by relevant United
Nations resolutions, which express the will of the intemational community, the Council has a duty to discuss taking
appropriate measures under the Charter in order to ensure
that Israel abides by those resolutions.

40. All those actions point in the same direction-to
the
Zionist design to usurp the remaining Arab land of Palestine by perpetrating various crimes aimed at the.Judaization of those lands after the eviction of their Arab
population, and eventually taking possession of them, in
violation of the Charter principle of the inadmissibility of
the acquisition of territory by force,

46. Israel’s sense of total impunity in its indifference to
international law and its disregard of relevant United
Nations resolutions is organically connected with the
Council’s failure to assert itself as the body responsible for
4

wealth Affairs of the United Kingdom, for the skill with
which he presided over the commemorative meeting of the
Security Council held on 26 September.

the maintenance of international peace and security, which
have been often subjected to upheavals as a result of
Israel’s continued efforts to challenge the power of the
international community. The Council’s failure is organically connected also with the efforts of certain States to
protect Israel from the anger of the international community whenever the Zionist entity commits a new act of
aggression against an Arab country or against the norms
of international law.

52. The Council is meeting yet again, at the request of a
fellow non-aligned country, to consider the latest acts of
aggression and terrorism committed by Israel, this time
against Tunisia, a friendly and peace-loving country. It is
ironic that we should be meeting under these tragic circumstances so j soon ,after our commemorative meeting of 26
September, at which we unanimously reaffnmed our commitment to the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United ,Nations and undertook to fulfil with renewed
dedication .and determination our individual and collective
responsibility for the prevention and removal of threats to
the peace):
,
53. The ready response of Council members in agreeing
to the request by Tunisia for an urgent Council meeting to
condemn this act of deliberate aggression, to demand reparations, and to take measures to prevent other such acts
bears witness to our sensitivity to the grave challenge
posed by the latest Israeli action.

47. The international community has become a true
expert on Zionist strategy and on the twisted behaviour of
the Zionist entity. Everyone knows perfectly well that
whenever Israel feels the pinch of pressure from peace
efforts it simply commits a military act in order to blow to
pieces any initiative or other effort to push it in the direction of peace. It wants land without people, and it therefore-insists On continuing its efforts to upset all peaceful
initiatives to reach a comprehensive, just and lasting peace
in the Middle East. We could almost believe that this was
among Israel’s basic reasons for committing this act of
aggression against fraternal Tunisia.
48. The Arab countries strongly condemn and denounce
this latest act of aggression and affhm that they stand by
Tunisia in confronting this brutal act of Zionist aggression.
They join their voices to those of other nations in calling
on the Security Council to should its responsibilities and
carry out its basic task of maintaining world peace. The
Council must condemn Israel, which is seeking to impose
its will in contravention of all international law and conventions, and must restore what the United Nations has
lost in prestige as a result of Israel’s disregard of the collective will of the international community in all matters relating to the Middle East.

54. We have listened with great attention-and,
I might
add, anguish-to the statement made by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Tunisia and to the statement made by
the Deputy Premier of Kuwait, who was speaking on behalf of the Arab delegations. Those statements have given
a detailed account of the unjustified and blatant Israeli
attack against the sovereignty and territorial integrity of a
sovereign Member State, Tunisia. This attack is yet
another glaring entry in the lengthy catalogue of Israel’s
aggressive policies designed to intimidate its Arab neighbours with the threat and use of massive force. It has been
condemned world-wide; we join in that condemnation.

49. The Arab States anneal to the members of the Council to adopt the draft resolution to be submitted by Tunisia. That, we believe, is the least the Council can do if it
intends to play its role in the maintenance of international
peace and security.

55. The attack is one more manifestation of Israel’s
desire to eliminate the heroic Palestinian resistance against
it and to consolidate its stranglehold on the occupied
Palestinian and Arab territories. Such actions by the Israeli
authorities are in flagrant violation of the norms of international law and the purposes and principles of the Charter. They also serve to delay the prospects of peace in the
region.

50. Mr. KRISHNAN
(India): Allow me at the outset.
Sir, to congratulate your delegation on its assumption of
the presidency of the Council for the month of October,
which coincides with the culmination of the commemorative ceremonies marking the fortieth anniversary of the
United Nations, and during which month the Council also
has to address a number of urgent and important questions. Our two countries have friendly and co-operative
relations in diverse fields, and the ties that bind our two
peoples are many. We are both now engaged in new efforts
to give more positive content to our relationship. Let me
add, Sir, that your own diplomatic skills and wide experience are well known. I have therefore much pleasure in
extending to you my personal greetings.

56. The Israeli attack against the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Tunisia was comprehensively discussed
at the Meeting of Ministers and Heads of Delegation of
Non-Aligned Countries to the General Assembly at its
fortieth session, held yesterday, 1 October, at United
Nations Headquarters. The Ministem and Heads of Delegation noted with indignation and grave concern the
serious acts of aggression perpetrated by Israel. In the special communique adopted by the meeting,

51. We should like also to convey our appreciation to
your predecessor, the representative of the United Kingdom, for the very able manner in which he guided our
work last month. Our warm tribute goes also to Sir Geoffrey Howe, Secretary of State for Foreign and Common-

“They strongly condemned Israel for its barbaric,
cold-blooded and totally unjustified attack on Tunisia,
in flagrant violation of its sovereignty and territorial
integrity. The target of the attack was the ‘premises of
the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), in a vain
5

. ..-

.

attempt to destroy the heroic Palestinian resistance:
They expressed deep distress at the heavy- loss of life
among Tunisian and Palestinian civilians and damage
to property and affirmed their sympathy, solidarity and
support to the Government and people of Tunisia and
the PLO in the face of this aggression.” [see S/17518,
.
annex.]
._
:
.
57. At the meeting,, sentiment was overwhelmingly
against the latest instance of aggression and State terrorism by Israel, which testifies ‘to its arr.ogance and intransigence and to its utter lack of r&p&t for the purposes and
principles of the Charter.’ The Ministers and Heads of
Delegation $.u-ther renewed the call repeatedly made by
the Movementj;of Non-Aligned Countries for the imposition of ‘comprehensive mandatory sanctions against Israel
>-.
under Chapter VII of the Charter.
. ‘t,.
58. Grave concern is being expressed over ‘the escalating
cycle of violence in the Middle East. It should be clear to
all by now-and we hope it is-that there && be no end to
violence without peace, and peace cannot be achieved
except through a comprehensive, just and lasting solution
of the Middle Fast problem. The fundamental principles
of, and the basic framework for, such a solution already
exist in the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council, in the Arab peace plan adopted
at Fez [see S/15510 of 4 December 1982, annex] and the
pronouncements adopted at the Seventh Conference of
Heads of State or Government of Non-‘Aligned Countries,
held at New Delhi in March 1983 [.ree‘S/I5675 and Corr. 1
:and 2, annex].
:-.
59. Those well-recognized fundamental principles are:
first, that the question of Palestine is at the heart of the
problem of the Middle Fast and no solution to that problem can be envisaged without taking into account the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people; secondly, that the
exercise of those inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people to return to their homes and property and to exercise their right to self-determination, including the establishment of a State of their own, will contribute to a final
solution of the Middle Fast crisis; thirdly, that the participation on an equal footing of the Palestine Liberation
Organization, the sole and authentic representative of the
Palestinian people, is indispensable to all efforts to find a
solution to the Middle East problem; and, fourthly, that
no just and lasting peace in the Middle East can be estab
lished without the withdrawal of Israel from all the Palestinian and other Arab territories that ‘it has occupied since
1967, including Jerusalem, and without the guarantee that
all States of the region Can, live within secure and recognized borders. . :

61. We emphasize the importance of the early convening
of the proposed international conference on peace in the
Middle East if comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the
Middle East is to be secured. In this context, we attach
considerable importance to the forthcoming meeting of the
Security Council requested by my delegation on behalf of
the non-aligned countries, in pursuance of the decision
taken at Luanda.

60. Those * fundamental principles were reiterated and
endorsed at the recently concluding Conference of Foreign
Ministers ‘of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Luanda in
September of this year [see S/Z7620 and Corr.Z, annex].
The Ministers further decided to call for a meeting of the
Security Council to consider the situation in the Middle
Fast, including the question of Palestine, during the early
part of the current fortieth session of the General
*: >
Assembly.

67. Egypt strongly and clearly condemns that brutal act
of aggression by Israel against a sister State and states that
it is a clear violation of all the norms of international law
and the Charter of the United Nations. It is a flagrant
challenge to the United Nations and all its international
institutions. The Israeli air raid was an effort to undermine
the framework within which the Middle East is trying to
move towards peace, and demonstrates Israel’s excessive
violence. Instead of moving towards a peaceful settlement

62. The Movement of Non-Aligned Countries attaches
paramount importance to the achievement of a just, cornprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East. It is well
known that the primary reason for the lack of progress in
finding a comprehensive solution is the arrogance and
intransigence of Israel, which has deliberately defied the
will of the international community. Israel’s policies and
practices over the years in the occupied Palestinian and
Arab territories and against its Arab neighbours have
posed a serious threat to international peace and security.
The time has come for the international community to
raise its voice in outrage against these policies and to restrain Israel from such actions.
63. The Security Council should take action to deal with
the specific action by Israel with which we are at present
faced, which undoubtedly is a breach of international law
and of the Charter by Israel. I trust that the Council will
demonstrate the will to act immediately and resolutely.
64. Mr. KHALIL
(Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
At the outset I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month, the beginning of which finds us in a difftcult situation. However, we are convinced that, with your wellknown skill you will guide the work of the Council and
preside over our deliberations with efficiency, as the
United States delegation always has.
65. I should also like to express my thanks and appreciation to the representative of the United Kingdom, who
presided over the work of the Council during a very busy
month in which it held what I do not think I exaggerate in
calling an historic meeting. We look forward to the next
few years, during which we shall understand, accept and
absorb the statements delivered at that historic meeting.
66. Yesterday the Middle East region witnessed a very
dangerous escalation of tension and a major threat, Tension has suddenly escalated because of the treacherous.raid
.carried out by the Israeli air force against the Tunisian
capital.

6

of the core of the conflict in the Middle East, Israel is
attempting to undermine the possibility of achieving peace.

appreciation to the Council and to its members that voted
in favour of the decision to address an invitation to the
Palestine, Liberation Organization to participate in the
Council’s deliberations on the brutal Israeli act of aggression against sister Tunisia and against the offices of the
PLO. -.,

68. Israel has declared that it undertook its heinous act in
order to pursue those responsible for the killing of three
Israeli citizens in Larnaca, Cyprus, even though, immediately after the incident, the PLO declared that it was not
responsible for that act, which Egypt naturally denounced.

75. At a time when the United Nations is commemorating its fortieth anniversary, Israel has committed a new act
of aggreSsion, which this time was directed against Tunisian territory in violation of the sovereignty of that sister
country, g,l$ember State of the United Nations. That criminal act of aggression has claimed the lives of hundreds of
_. 6 _”
Tunisians And Palestinians.
,
76. At the$ame time, the forces of Israeli occupation
persist in ‘their most heinous. forms of oppression and
repression of Arab &i&s
within the occupied Arab and
Palestinian territories1 ..,-.._ ‘.
“. -, , . ..

69. Despite that .declaration by the PLO, Israel undertook the raid, for which it had paved the way a short time
ago. Everyone knows of the two letters sent by the representative of Israel to the Secretary-General in which he
mentioned “Force 17” of the PLO, which he said was
responsible for many acts of violence against Israel. The
first letter, dated 4 September 1985 [S//743a, mentioned
“Force 17” and said that it and its leaders were present in
Jordan; it also mentioned a socalled group of terrorists
said to be in Algeria and on its way to Israel. The second
letter, dated 27 September [S/I750Jl, accused Force 17 of
the acts that took place in Larnaca. The representative of
Jordan mentioned earlier references in which Israel
warned the sister country of Jordan that it would undertake acts against Jordan because that Palestinian force had
its headquarters in Jordan.

77. It is neither a surprise nor a coincidence that this act
of aggression has coincided with a similar raid launched by
the forces of. the other racist regime, in South Africa,
against the militant people of Angola, and that in both
instances the United States has supported and justified
those acts of aggression.

70. My country believes that such acts against the Palestinian people, wherever they take place, strengthen the circle of violence and extremism, at a time when all
peace-loving peoples in the world are trying to achieve a
lasting and peaceful settlement of the dispute in the Middle
East. My delegation believes that this new act of aggression by Israel against the PLO headquarters in Tunisia will
only increase .feeIings of hatred and anarchy in a region
that is in dire need of efforts to establish peace and stability. Unfortunately, it seems that Israel has not learned the
lesson of Lebanon, that is, that violence only breeds violence; it has not learned that it is not possible to eliminate
the PLO or its leadership.

78. it ‘is truly mgrettable that the United States claims in
another context that it is fighting international terrorism
while it justifies the Israeli act of aggression and protects
Israel from the sanctions it deserves under international
law for such crimes, Were those planes and bombs not
manufactured in the United States, and were they not provided to Israel under a strategic alliance between the two
countries?
79. By committing that crime, Israel has reaffirmed its
hostility towards peace and its insistence on undermining
all international efforts to preserve peace in the Middle
East, the area to which we belong. The United States, by
supporting and justifying that act of aggression, reveals its
lack of credibility and lack of seriousness in playing any
constructive role in the international endeavours under
way to establish a lasting and just peace in the Middle
East.

71. Egypt cannot understand the position of some that
see Israel’s right to revenge for its citizens when it undertakes actions that kill innocent people or when it threatens
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of other States. The
current situation prevailing in the Middle East cannot be
settled by such acts of aggression.

73. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the observer
for the Palestine Liberation Organization, on whom I now
call.

80.. The PLO has on numerous occasions expressed its
sincere desire for peace by its acceptance of United
Nations resolutions and its commitment to international
legality as a basis for a just solution to the Middle East
crisis. But by their intransigence and their rejection of
international initiatives, Israel and the United States have
foreclosed all avenues of peace. The Israeli act of,&ression has unveiled the real intentions of Israel, which are
hostile to peace. Moreover, the United States. position in
support of the Israeli act of aggression will definitely contribute to an increase of tension in the area. It will also
increase the prospect of war
.., and hostiitities.
.

74. Mr. QADDOUMI
(Palestine Liberation Organization) (interpretation from Arabic): It gives me great pleasure at the outset of my statement to extend my thanks and

81. We no longer have any illusions as to the United
States position, which impedes efforts towards peace. It is
therefore incumbent upon the international community
fully to shoulder its responsibilities. It is high time that the

72. Egypt declares that it stands by the people and the
Government of Tunisia; it stands by the Palestinian people
in its struggle to achieve its inalienable rights. Egypt
expects the Security Council to take a firm position in
dealing with this situation and with this heinous Israeli
attack, which has been condemned on the widest intemational scale.

7
. .. .
. .’

necessary sanctions and punitive measures be imposed by
all available means to protect the international peace and
security so jeopardized by Israel’s policy of aggression and
expansion and by the United States’. total alignment with
that policy.
82. Israel claims-and
its claims, regrettably, are supported by the United States-that it perpetrated its most
recent crime on Tunisian territory in retaliation to Palestinian acts of resistance. Here, we must ask: Is Israel’s
occupation of Arab and Palestinian territories and its
depriving the Palestinian people of their basic rights under
the Charter of the United Nations and resolutions of the
Organization not an act of terrorism? Are the actions of
the Israeli occupation army against Palestinian citizens,
actions that run the whole gamut of oppression, murder,
torture, imprisonment and arbitrary detention, not in
themselves blatant examples of State terrorism? Are the
Fascist acts of the Zionist settlers who storm Palestinian
homes, shoot the occupants, seize and confiscate their
properties and displace the inhabitants from their homeland not acts of terrorism? In the face of all this, is it not
the right of the Palestinian people to resist such systematic
Israeli State terrorism? The right to self-defence and to
defence of the homeland are legitimate rights acknowledged under international laws and norms for all the peoples of the world.
83. If Israel believes that it can, through its terrorism,
subjugate the Palestinian people and continue JO usurp
their national rights, it is indulging in self-delusion. History has proved that the will of peoples is invincible. Despite all the suffering of our Palestinian people for 70 years
under colonialism and occupation, that people are still
increasing their resistance and consolidating their will to
attain the freedom and independence of their homeland.
84. It would have been more becoming had the United
States acted with a sense of its responsibility as a major

Power and had it, rather than justifying an act of aggression, closely examined the root causes of the Israeli-Arab
conflict, at the very core of which is the question of Palestine. Unfortunately, however, the United States persists in
disregarding the causes of this conflict and in its denial of
the national rights of the Palestinian people. It is high time
the United States recognized and acknowledged the right
of the Palestinian people to self-determination on its own
national soil, as well as the fact that the PLO is not a
transient phenomenon but a firm reality in the life of the
Palestinian people, expressing that people’s will and
national aspirations, and that it enjoys complete support at
the Palestinian, Arab and international levels.
85. Those who seek or claim to seek a lasting peace in the
Middle Past must recognize those facts and deal with them
in the light of the many resolutions adopted by the intemational community, the most recent of which was the resolution calling for the convening of an international
conference within the framework of the United Nations at
which the super-Powers, the PLO and all other parties
concerned would participate on an equal footing.
86. If the Israeli raid is a response to our recent initiatives
seeking to achieve a just and peaceful solution to the problem, then let Israel and the United States know that such
terrorism will not intimidate us, nor will it discourage us
from continuing the struggle through all legitimate means
until our Palestinian people have wrested their inalienable
national rights and returned to their homeland.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

NOTE
‘Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection
of Civilian
Time of War, of 12 August 1949 (United Nations,
Treory
75. No. 973).

8

Persons in

Series, vol.

..:

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATlONS DES NATIONS UNIES
Les publications des Nations Unies sont en vente.dans les librairies et les agences d&ositaires
du monde entier. Informez+ous aup&s de votre libraire ou adressez-vous B : Nations Unies,
Section des ventes, New York ou Genbve.
KAIC IIOJIYYHTb
kI3&4I-IWI OPI-AHH3m
OEb~HHbIX
HAW
~3mm1
Opmtmamm 06aenmemaxx Ham&l MOHHO xynu~b B xmtcHb~X Maraxittax
H aretmmtax
BO ~cex paiiomx
huipa. HaBonrrTe crtpaal~ 06 xi3m3miax B ~amM KHHXHOM
bmramte msi nmI.uiTe no a,upecy: Oprami3atuia 06%eLViHeHHbIX
HatWt, Cemm no
npomxe si3~amR.
)IbrdopK
msi Xexie-Ba.
COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONES DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS
Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unklas estin en venta en librerfas y casas distribuidoras en
todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirfjase a: Naciones Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas,
Nueva York o Gmebra.

.

Litho in United Nations, New York

00300

90-61439~March

1995-1.925
