United Nations

General Assembly

A/RES/55/74
Distr.: General
12 February 2001

Fifty-fifth session
Agenda item 109

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/55/597)]

55/74.

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees on the activities of her Office 1 and the report of the Executive Committee
of the Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on the
work of its fifty-first session 2 and the conclusions and decisions contained therein,
Recalling its resolution 54/146 of 17 December 1999,
Commending the High Commissioner, her staff and their implementing
partners for the competent, courageous and dedicated manner in which they
discharge their responsibilities, paying tribute to those staff members whose lives
have been endangered in the course of their duties, and strongly condemning the
deaths and injuries and other forms of physical and psychological violence
experienced by staff members as a consequence of generalized as well as targeted
violence,
Expressing appreciation, in this year which marks the fiftieth anniversary of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, for the work
accomplished since its establishment in responding to the protection and assistance
needs of refugees and in promoting durable solutions to their plight, and
commending States for their cooperation and support,
1.
Endorses the report of the Executive Committee of the Programme of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on the work of its fifty-first
session;2
2.
Strongly reaffirms the fundamental importance and the purely
humanitarian and non-political character of the function of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees of providing international protection to
refugees and seeking permanent solutions to the problem of refugees, and reiterates
the need for Governments to continue to facilitate the effective exercise of this
function;
1
2

00 56383

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/55/12).
Ibid., Supplement No. 12A (A/55/12/Add.1).

A/RES/55/74

3.
Expresses sincere appreciation and gratitude to Sadako Ogata for her
unrelenting efforts throughout her tenure as United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees to promote innovative humanitarian solutions to the refugee problem in
various parts of the world, and for her inspiring example in performing her functions
in an effective and dedicated manner;
4.
Reaffirms that the 1951 Convention 3 and the 1967 Protocol 4 relating to
the Status of Refugees remain the foundation of the international refugee regime and
recognizes the importance of their full application by States parties, notes with
satisfaction that one hundred and forty States are now parties to one instrument or to
both, welcomes the fact that an intergovernmental event involving those States is
planned on the occasion of the fiftieth anniversary of the Convention, and
encourages the Office of the High Commissioner and States to strengthen their
efforts to promote broader accession to those instruments and their full
implementation;
5.
Notes that fifty-two States are now parties to the 1954 Convention
relating to the Status of Stateless Persons 5 and that twenty-three States are parties to
the 1961 Convention on the reduction of statelessness, 6 and encourages the High
Commissioner to continue her activities on behalf of stateless persons;
6.
Reaffirms that, as set out in article 14 of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, 7 everyone has the right to seek and enjoy in other countries asylum
from persecution, and calls upon all States to refrain from taking measures that
jeopardize the institution of asylum, in particular by returning or expelling refugees
or asylum-seekers contrary to international standards;
7.
Emphasizes that the protection of refugees is primarily the responsibility
of States, whose full and effective cooperation, action and political resolve are
required to enable the Office of the High Commissioner to fulfil its mandated
functions, welcomes the proposal of the Office of the High Commissioner to
commence a process of global consultations on international protection, and requests
a report thereon;
8.
Welcomes measures taken by the Office of the High Commissioner to
make protection effective, recognizing that international protection is a dynamic and
action-oriented function, carried out in cooperation with States and other partners,
inter alia, to promote and facilitate the admission, reception and treatment of
refugees and to ensure protection-oriented solutions;
9.
Stresses the importance of international solidarity, burden-sharing and
international cooperation to share responsibilities and partnerships in reinforcing the
international protection of refugees, urges all States and relevant non-governmental
and other organizations, in conjunction with the Office of the High Commissioner,
to cooperate and to mobilize resources with a view to reducing the heavy burden
borne by States, in particular developing countries, that have received large numbers
of asylum-seekers and refugees, and calls upon the Office of the High Commissioner
to continue to play its catalytic role in mobilizing assistance from the international

3

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545.
Ibid., vol. 606, No. 8791.
5
Ibid., vol. 360, No. 5158.
6
Ibid., vol. 989, No. 14458.
7
Resolution 217 A (III).
4

2

A/RES/55/74

community to address the economic, environmental and social impact of large-scale
refugee populations, especially in developing countries;
10. Condemns all acts that pose a threat to the personal security and wellbeing of refugees and asylum-seekers, such as refoulement, unlawful expulsion and
physical attacks, and calls upon all States of refuge, in cooperation with
international organizations where appropriate, to take all necessary measures to
ensure respect for the principles of refugee protection, including the humane
treatment of asylum-seekers;
11. Urges States to uphold the civilian and humanitarian character of refugee
camps and settlements, inter alia, through effective measures to prevent the
infiltration of armed elements, to identify and separate any such armed elements
from refugee populations, to settle refugees in secure locations and to afford the
Office of the High Commissioner and other appropriate humanitarian organizations
prompt, unhindered and safe access to asylum-seekers, refugees and other persons of
concern;
12. Calls upon States and all concerned parties to take urgently all possible
measures to safeguard the physical security and property of the staff of the Office of
the High Commissioner and other humanitarian personnel, to investigate fully any
crime committed against them and to bring to justice persons responsible for such
crimes;
l3. Encourages the Office of the High Commissioner, in cooperation with
host countries and in coordination with other relevant United Nations bodies, further
to develop and integrate appropriate security arrangements in its operations, and to
allocate adequate resources for the safety and security of its staff and the persons
under its mandate;
14. Notes that the 1994 Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel 8 is now in force, calls upon those States that have not yet done
so to consider signing and ratifying the Convention, but notes in this regard that the
Convention does not automatically apply to most humanitarian personnel, and
therefore invites States to provide a timely response to the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to extend the scope of legal protection to all United Nations and
associated personnel through the development of a protocol to the 1994 Convention
or by other appropriate means; 9
15. Urges all States and relevant organizations to support the High
Commissioner’s search for durable solutions to refugee problems, including
voluntary repatriation, local integration and resettlement in a third country, as
appropriate, reaffirms that voluntary repatriation is the preferred solution to refugee
problems, and calls upon countries of origin, countries of asylum, the Office of the
High Commissioner and the international community to act in a spirit of burdensharing and partnership to enable refugees to exercise their right to return home in
safety and with dignity;
16. Calls upon all States to promote conditions conducive to the voluntary
repatriation of refugees in safety and with dignity, including conditions furthering
reconciliation and long-term development in countries of return, and to support the
sustainable reintegration of returnees by providing countries of origin with
8
9

Resolution 49/59, annex.
See S/1999/957, para. 43, and A/54/154/Add.1-E/1999/94/Add.1, para. 13.

3

A/RES/55/74

necessary rehabilitation and development assistance in conjunction, as appropriate,
with the Office of the High Commissioner, relevant mechanisms, including those
within the United Nations system, and development agencies;
17. Reiterates the right of all persons to return to their country of origin,
emphasizes in this regard the obligation of all States to accept the return of their
nationals, calls upon all States to facilitate the return of their nationals who have
sought asylum and have been determined not to be in need of international
protection, and affirms the need for the return of persons to be undertaken in a
humane manner and with full respect for their human rights and dignity, irrespective
of the status of the persons concerned;
18. Acknowledges the desirability of comprehensive approaches by the
international community, notably at the regional level, to the problems of refugees
and displaced persons, and notes in this regard that capacity-building in countries of
origin and countries of asylum can play an important role in addressing the root
causes of refugee flows, strengthening emergency preparedness and response,
promoting and building peace, and developing regional standards for the protection
of refugees;
19. Urges States, in cooperation with the Office of the High Commissioner
and other relevant organizations, to explore and support fully capacity-building
initiatives as part of a comprehensive approach to addressing refugee issues and to
take necessary measures to promote sustainable development and to ensure the
success of capacity-building activities, and reiterates that such initiatives may
include those which strengthen legal and judicial institutions and civil society, those
which promote services for refugees, the observance of human rights, the rule of law
and accountability and those which enhance the capacity of States to fulfil their
responsibilities with respect to persons under the mandate of the Office of the High
Commissioner;
20. Reiterates its support for the role of the Office of the High Commissioner
in providing humanitarian assistance and protection to internally displaced persons
on the basis of criteria enumerated in paragraph 16 of its resolution 53/125 of
9 December 1998, and underlines the continuing relevance of the Guiding Principles
on Internal Displacement; 10
21. Calls upon States to adopt an approach that is sensitive to gender-related
concerns and to ensure that women whose claims to refugee status are based upon a
well-founded fear of persecution for reasons enumerated in the 1951 Convention
and the 1967 Protocol, including persecution through sexual violence or other
gender-related persecution, are recognized as refugees, and encourages the Office of
the High Commissioner to continue and to strengthen its efforts for the protection of
refugee women;
22. Urges States and relevant parties to respect and observe principles of
international human rights and humanitarian and refugee law that are of particular
relevance to safeguarding the rights of the child and adolescent refugees whose
situation is particularly vulnerable to abuse, welcomes in this regard the adoption of
the Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict 11 and on the sale of children, child
10
11

4

E/CN.4/1998/53/Add.2, annex.
Resolution 54/263, annex I.

A/RES/55/74

prostitution and child pornography, 12 and calls upon States to consider signing and
ratifying them as a matter of priority;
23. Underlines the particular role of elderly refugees within the refugee
family, welcomes the development by the Office of the High Commissioner of
guidelines to address their special needs, and calls upon States and the Office of the
High Commissioner to make renewed efforts to ensure that the rights, needs and
dignity of elderly and disabled refugees are fully respected and that programmes are
designed bearing in mind their special vulnerabilities;
24. Recalls that the family is the natural and fundamental group unit of
society and that it is entitled to protection by society and the State, and calls upon
States, working in close collaboration with the Office of the High Commissioner and
other concerned organizations, to take measures to ensure that the refugee’s family
is protected, including through measures aimed at reuniting family members
separated as a result of refugee flight;
25. Calls upon Governments and other donors to demonstrate their
international solidarity and burden-sharing with countries of asylum, in particular
developing countries, countries with economies in transition and countries with
limited resources that, owing to their location, host large numbers of refugees and
asylum-seekers, and urges Governments to respond promptly and adequately to the
global appeal issued by the Office of the High Commissioner, presenting
requirements under its annual programme budget, to support efforts to widen the
donor base so as to achieve greater burden-sharing among donors and to assist the
High Commissioner in securing additional and timely income from traditional
governmental sources, other Governments and the private sector so as to ensure that
the needs of persons under the mandate of the Office of the High Commissioner are
fully met.
81st plenary meeting
4 December 2000

12

Ibid., annex II.

5
