UNITEDNATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

TWENTY-NINTH

YEAR

‘1776”

MEETING:

NEW

10 JUNE 1974

YORK

CONTENTS

Page
.............;........................

1
I
/1

Admission of new Members:
Appliktion of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh for admission ‘to membership i% the kited Nations:
Repdrt of the Committee on the Admission of New Members concerning the
application of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh for admission to
membership in the United Nations (S/l 1316) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 776)
Adoption of the agenda

..............................

S/PV. 1776

.

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEEN HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-SIXTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Monday, 10 June 1974, at 10.30 a.m.
President: Mr. Moulaye EL HASSEN (Mauritania).

2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): In view
of the limited number of-places available at the Council
table I would request them to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber, on the understanding that they wiIl be invited to come to the Council
table at the appropriate time.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic,
China, Costa Rica, France, Indonesia, Iraq, Kenya, Mauritania, Peru, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Cameroon and United States of America.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. Rahal (Algeria),
Mr. D. Tsherlng (Bhutan), Mr. A. E. Abdel Meg&l (Egypt),
Mr. S. Jain (India) and Mr. I. Akhund (Pakistanj took the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l776)
1. Adoption of the agenda.

3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): May I
point out that the report of the Committee on the
Admission of New Members is before the Council in
document S/l 1316. In its report the Committee indicates
that it has considered the application of the People’s
Republic of Bangladesh and that it has decided to recommend to the Council that the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh be admitted to the United Nations. The draft
resolution recommended by the Committee appears in
paragraph 3 of the report.

2. Admission of new Members:
Application of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh
for admission to membership in the United Nations:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of New
Members concerning the application of the People’s
Republic of Bangladesh for admission to membership
in the United Nations (S/l 1316).
The meeting was called to order at 10.55 am

4. As agreed in the course of the consultations, I would
invite the members of the Council to adopt this draft
resolution without a vote. If there is no objection, I shall
take it that the draft resolution is adopted.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

It wassodecided.1

Admission of new Members

5. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I
should like to congratulate the future State Member of the
United Nations and express the hope that the General
Assembly will give favourable consideration to this recommendation which has been addressed to it by the
Council, so that the People’s Republic of Bangladesh may
be able to make its contribution to the work of the
international peace and cooperation which the United
Nations pursues. I shall therefore request the SecretaryGeneral to be good enough to transmit to the General
Assembly, in accordance with article 60, paragraph 2, of
the provisional rules of procedure, the text of the resolution which we have just adopted, together with the
verbatim records of our meetings devoted to this application since 7 June 1974.

Application of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh for
admission to membership in the United Nations:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of New
Members concerning the application of the People’s
Republic of Bangladesh for admission to membership in
the United Nations (S/l 1316)
1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I
should like to inform members of the Council that I have
received letters from the Permanent Representatives of
Algeria, Bhutan, Egypt, India and Pakistan requesting that
their delegations be invited under Article 31 of the Charter
and the relevant provisions of the provisional rules of
procedure to participate, without the right to vote, in the
Council’s discussion of the item before it. In accordance
with customary practice, and with the assent of the
Council, I propose to invite the representatives I have just
mentioned to participate, without the right to vote, in the
Council’s discussion.

6. The Council will now hear those of its members and
other delegations that have requested to be heard.
7. Mr. NJINE (United Republic of Cameroon) (interpretation from French): Mr. President, my delegation re1 See resolution 351(1974).

It was so decided.

1

joices at seeing you preside with such skill and dignity over
the deliberations of the Security Council during the present
month. It is a pleasure for me to emphasize on this occasion
.that the Islamic Republic of Mauritania, which you
represent here, and the United Republic of Cameroon have
brotherly relations which draw their strength not only from
geography and history, but, above all, from their common
assessment of the affairs of the world, an assessment which
President Moktar Ould Daddah described before the sixth
special session of the General Assembly as follows:

step towards the universality of this Organization and will,
therefore, continue to strengthen its effectiveness.
11. ‘Ike PRESIDENT (intetprefation j+om French): I
thank the representative of the United Republic of Cameroon for the warm and fraternal words which he addressed
to me and, through me, to my country. 1 have visited the
Cameroon several times and have been able to appreciate
the respect, friendship and esteem which the people and
Government of the Cameroon feel towards the fraternal
people of Mauritania.

“We are still fully convinced that, in order to wipe out
the economic and political injustices that today gravely
vitiate international relations, we shall be facing not only
the sine qua non for true solidarity but that in itself will
carry the seeds of immense fraternity and peace in the
world and set in motion a great current of progress to the
benefit of all mankind.“*

12. Mr. CHUANG Yen (China) (trandation from Chinese):
As we may all recall, in December 1971, in a plenary
meeting at its twenty-sixth session, the General Assembly
adopted, with an overwhelming majority of 104 votes, a
resolution calhmg upon India and Pakistan to ceasefire and
to withdraw their armed forces [resolution 2793 (XXW)~.
Thereafter, the Security Council adopted, with 13 votes in
favour and 2 abstentions, a resolution calling upon all those
concerned to cease fire, withdraw their armed forces and
release the prisoners of war[resolution 307(197X)].

I can assure YOU. Mr. President. that mv deleeation will at
all times co<pe&e sincerely with you;thus Teflecting the
excellent relations between our two countries, so that your
mission may be completely successful.

13. In August 1972, the Chinese delegation was opposed
to the consideration of the question of admission of
Bangladesh to membership in the-United Nations before the
relevant United Nations resolutions were implemented. At
the time and on later occasions the Chinese delegation
stated clearly that the Chinese Government’s stand for.
postponing the consideration of’this question did not mean
that we were fundamentally opposed to the admission of
Bangladesh into the United Nations. The Chinese people
cherish friendly sentiments for the people of Bangladesh.
China stood for postponing the consideration of this
question for the very purpose of upholding the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and defending the
interests of the people on the South Asian sub-continent so
as to promote a reconciliation between the parties concerned on the subcontinent free from super-Power interference from outside and bring about the full implementation of the relevant United Nations resolutions, thus
leading to the normalization of the relations between the
countries of the sub-continent.

8. My delegation also wishes to associate itself with the
words of praise that you have recently addressed, on behalf
of the Council, to Ambassador Maina of Kenya, who so
effectively and tactfully guided the work of the Council
during the month of May.
9. With respect to the item on the Council’s agenda, I
should hke to state that the Government of the United
Republic of Cameroon has since 1973 recognized the
People’s Republic of Bangladesh as an independent and
sovereign State. In supporting today the draft resolution
contained in the report of the Committee on the Admission
of New Members, which recommended the admission of the
.People’s Republic Of Bangladesh to the United Nations, my
Government wishes to express once again its desire to
develop relations of friendship and co-operation with that
State. Obiously this support does not imply any lessening
of the excellent relations of co-operation which the United
Republic of Cameroon has maintained for many years with
the other countries of the .Indian subcontinent. On the
contrary, the position of my Government is formed within
the context of the new political realities that have appeared
in that area and takes into account the encouraging
evolution of the policy of reconciliation and good neighbourliness which is presently pursued by the States of the
subcontinent. Finally, the position of my Government is in
accord with the political declaration adopted by the
Conference of Heads of State or Government of NonAligned Countries in Algiers, which stated:

14. During the twentyaeventh session of the General
Assembly, with the joint efforts of the parties concerned
and many third world countries, two interdependent
parallel resolutions were adopted calling for the return of
the prisoners-of-war by the parties concerned in accordance
with Security Council resolution 307 (1971) and expressing
the desire that Bangladesh would be admitted to membership in the United Nations at an early date[resoZurions
2937 (XXVTI) and 2938 (XXnI)],
thereby reaffirming the
just position of China and many other third world
countries.

“The Conference supports the admission into the
United Nations of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh, a
full and sovereign member of the family of non-aligned
countries.”
10. My delegation considers that the admission of Bangladesh to the United Nations will constitute an encouraging
2 See Off&l Records of the GeneralAssembly,S&h Special
Session.
PlenaryMeetings,2214th meeting.

2

15. New developments have now taken place in the
situation on the South Asian subcontinent. We are glad tc
see that with the concerted efforts of the parties concerned
and many third world countries, agreements have finally
been reached among the countries concerned of the South
Asian subcontinent which have led to the implementation
of the relevant General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions and thus created favourable conditions for the

normalization of relations among the countries of the
subcontinent. In these circumstances, the Chinese Govemment, considering that Bangladesh is, eligible for membership in the United Nations, has decided to support the
admission of Bangladesh into the United Nations, and
hopes that after its admission to membership in the United
Nations, Bangladesh will make positive contributions
towards upholding the basic principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.

20, The reestablishment of peace and good-neighbourly
relations in the South Asian subcontinent after the events
of the autumn of 1971 has required of all concerned
statesmanship of the highest level. That this statesmanship
should have been demonstrated on all sides, not least by
Prime Minister Bhutto of Pakistan himself, has been a
source of much satisfaction to my Government. We believe
that the admission of Bangladesh to membership of the
United Nations does indeed mark the end of one chapter in
the history of the area and the beginning of another.
Certainly without a genuine equality of intcmational
treatment for all the States in the subcontinent this new
chapter could not even begin.

16. The Chinese Government welcomes the positive developments in the situation on the subcontinent. We hope
that the countries of the subcontinent will further remove
outside interference, normalize their mutual relations and
live in amity on the basis of the principles of equality and
mutual respect for sovereignty. We are ready to develop
good-neighbourly relations with the countries of the subcontinent on the basis of the five principles of peaceful
coexistence and further enhance our traditional friendship
with their peoples. The Chinese Government and people
will, as always, firmly support the peoples of South Asia in
their struggle against hegemonism and expansionism.

21; We sincerely hope that the future will be marked by
real friendship and cooperation which will in turn lead to a
lasting improvement in the lives of all the 675 million
people who live on the South Asian subcontinent-more
than one-sixth of the total population of the world.
22. Mr. SCALABRR
(France). (interpretation
jiom
French): Mr. President, fust of all I should like to discharge
the most pleasant of duties-to express to you the
congratulations of the French delegation on your accession
to the Presidency of the Security Council. How could we
fail to rejoice particutarly on seeing these lofty functions
entrusted to the representative of a country with which my
own recognizes it has special affinities as a result of our
common history and the multiple bonds which it has
contributed to creating today between our leaders, our
nations and our peoples? Having expressed the- profound
satisfaction of my delegation, I shall leave it to Mr. de
Guhingaud, when he returns, to address to you his best
wishes and to express the lofty esteem in which he
holds you.

17. Mr. RICHARD (United Kingdom): Mr..President, I
should like to take this opportunity to congratulate you
personally on your assumption of the office of Pnsident of
the Security Council. I think we are very fortunate that the
affairs of the Council are going to be in such skilful and
experienced hands during the coming month. At the same
time I should like to take the opportunity of thanking your
predecessor, Mr. Maina of Kenya, for the skill with which
he directed our meetings during the month of May.
18. My delegation was delighted to support the recommendation by the Security Council to the General Assembly that the People’s Republic of Bangladesh be admitted
to membership of the United Nations. We are extremely
pleased today that the problems which led to the postponement of the admission of Bangladesh in 1972 have
now been solved and that the Security Council is apparently unanimous today. We consider it extremely important
that Bangladesh, with a population of over 70 million
people, the eighth largest country in the world in terms of
population, should be enabled to fulfi the role as a Member
of this Organization which its size, its importance and its
position in the subcontinent require. The United Kingdom
is confident that Bangladesh will have a significant and
individual contribution to make to the deliberations of the
United Nations. We look forward indeed to welcoming the
representative of Bangladesh as a colleague.

23. I also wish to express the gratitude of my delegation
to the Ambassador of Kenya, who guided our work last
month with so much competence and authority that it
would have been surprising in a permanent representative
who was so new to the Council had this not been in
accordance with the flattering reputation that preceded his
coming here.
24. On 24 August 1972 the -representative of France
stated: “Bangladesh has its place in the United Nations”
[see 1659th meeting]. The next day, noting the result of
the voting, he expressed the deep regret of our delegation
that the application of that country had not met with the
unanimously favourable agreement that the Security Council generally accords to the candidatures of new States and
that it was not possible to address a positive recommendation to the General Assembly. He added that he
would like to hope that the efforts of the parties,
encouraged by the international community, would in as
near a future as possible, result in a more favourable
situation and that the Council would be able to recommend
to the General Assembly the admission of Bangladesh [see
1660th meetingJ.

19. My country has, of course, a long history of deep
involvement and warm relations with the peoples of the
South Asian subcontinent. Diplomatic relations between
Bangladesh and the United Kingdom were established in
February 1972, and since that time relations between our
two Governments have been extremely friendly. Later that
same year Bangladesh was unanimously accepted as a
member of the Commonwealth, and it is a particular
pleasure for me to support Bangladesh’s application, speaking as I am today on behalf of a British Government which
has recently pledged itself to renewed support for the
Commonwealth and has tried to make that pledge a reality
here at the United Nations itself.

25. This is the situation we all see today. We are ill very
happy about this and we pay a tribute to all the parties
which, despite the considerable difficulties inherited
because of the dramatic circumstances that surrounded the
3

birth of Bangladesh, have chosen and imposed the course of
peace, conciliation and reconciliation. We have followed
their efforts with all the attention warranted by the real
friendship that unites us with each of them. We have
encouraged these.efforts whenever it has been possible for
us to do so.
26. However, fortunately, this is not the time to look
back. Now we see our friends on the subcontinent
resolutely looking to the future, for which they have jointly
built the foundations with courage and dignity and also
with hope. In this connexion, the recommendation which
the Council has just adopted unanimously will make a
contribution to that edifice. The General Assembly in the
autumn will obviously make this recommendation effective,
and then Bangladesh will occupy its proper place in our
Organization. It is already a full-fledged member of the
international community for most of us and here it will join
the countries with which it is called on to forge its destiny.
There is no doubt that it will draw its inspiration from
.them and will wish to bring to the United Nations a
contribution as positive and abundant as that which India
and Pakistan have made for more than 25 years. They can
be sure that from my country and from the French
delegation they will receive mutually beneficial cooperation and genuine sympathy.
27. Mr. KUSUMASMORO (Indonesia): Mr. President, it is
a great pleasure indeed for my delegation to see you assume
the position of President of the Security Council for the
month of June. Permit me to offer you the congratulations
of my delegation on this occasion and to pledge to you the
full co-operation of Indonesia in the work of the Council.
28. I should like also to take this opportunity to express
the appreciation of my delegation to your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Kenya, Ambassador Maina,
for the great skill and ability he demonstrated as President
of the Council during the month of May.
29. The unanimous decision of the Security Council to
recommend the admission of Bangladesh to the United
Nations is indeed a source of great satisfaction to my
delegation. Although the path that led to that decision was
a notably long and thorny one, we may rejoice .in the fact
that the spirit of cooperation and goodwill displayed by all
the parties concerned has at last made it possible for us to
welcome Bangladesh into our midst in order that it may
participate on an equal footing in the work of our
Organization .
30. That the Council has been able to act in a unanimous
fashion today is, in the view of my delegation, a fact that
should be a source of profound gratification for all
members. That unanimity clearly testifies to the wish of all
of us to avoid any action which might divide and instead to
exert such efforts as may contribute to surmounting the
differences that have been a source of division in the past.
Such an attitude promises to bring lasting peace and
reconciliation to the subcontinent.
31. The admission of Bangladesh will also bring us
appreciably closer to the goal of universal membership of
the United Nations. The attainment of that goal, which

Indonesia has consistently supported throughout its membership of the Organization, will surely assist in the
strengthening of the fabric of international peace and
security, which the Charter is designed to promote. It is the
deep conviction of my delegation ‘that the admission of
Bangladesh to United Nations membership will greatly
contribute to the establishment of conditions which will
promote the maintenance of peace in the area and which
will enable the peoples of the ,region to devote all their
efforts, funds and forces to the urgent task of erecting a
substantial and viable structure of peace on the foundation
of regional securityand well-being.
32. As a country close to the South Asian region,
Indonesia has always had a deep concern for the maintenance and-promotion of peace and stability in the area. It is
therefore with special satisfaction that Indonesia welcomes
the effort that has been undertaken by Bangladesh, India
and Pakistan for peace and reconciliation on the Asian
subcontinent, which has culminated in the conclusion of
the tripartite Agreement between the three countries of last
April. That Agreement, which has fmally resolved the
remaining humanitarian issues arising out of the December
1971 conflict, and the admission of Bangladesh to United
Nations membership will open a new chapter in the history
of the region, an era no longer marked by disagreement but
by friendly relations and close co-operation.
33. In addition, the admission of Bangladesh will strength;
en the fabric of peace on a more than regional scale. It will
now be able to participate fully in the activities of the
nonaligned group of countries within the United Nations
and will thus be able to contribute its ideas and initiatives
to the efforts of the non-aligned countries to achieve more
stable conditions of world peace and security.
34. As a member of the non-aligned group it therefore
gives Indonesia particular pleasure to view the imminent
entry of Bangladesh into our Organization. From the early
days of the establishment of the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh Indonesia has maintained very close and cordial
relations with it, and the two countries are now making
serious efforts intended to expand and to strengthen those
relations. My delegation therefore looks forward to welcoming the representatives of Bangladesh as full-fledged
participants in the coming session of the General Assembly,
and we take this opportunity to assure them of our close
co-operation in the common efforts of the international
community towards the building of global peace and
progress.
35. Mr. JANKOWITSCH (Austria): Mr. President, let me
first of all offer you sincere congratulations and best wishes
on your assumption of the Presidency of the Security
Council for the month’ of June. The exceptional talent and
skill, as well as the prestige of your country, which you
bring to this high office augurs well for the performance of
your duties.
36. I also wish to pay a special tribute to our President for
the month of May, the Ambassador of Kenya, Mr. Maina.
Towards the end of his term, Ambassador Maina had a
particularly busy period in presiding over the Council’s
informal and formal deliberations, and he performed his
duties with admirable skill and impartiality.

37. In recommending a short while ago, the admission of
the People’s Republic of Bangladesh to the United Nations,
the Security Council has made a historic decision. The
eighth largest country in the world, now accorded diplomatic recognition by more than 120 States, will now be
able to take its well-deserved place within the world
Qrganization. This is, however, more than a formal procedural decision. It is also a most welcome contriiution
towards a process of reconciliation and consolidation in the
whole of the subcontinent of India, Pakistan and Bangladesh. An area beset by three wars in the last decade, an area
troubled by manifold problems, mutual hatred, mistrust
and unspeakable suffering now seems to be well on its way
to a more general atmosphere of peace and better understanding.

shadows of controve.rsies the past may hold, the common
bonds of history, kinship and neighbourly relations will
now strengthen and guarantee a new era of peaceful
coexistence.
43. It. was in this spirit and hope and in an effort to
contribute to the best of its abilities to a new era on the
subcontinent that Austria on 4 February 1972 was among
the first States formally to recognize Bangladesh. When
Bangladesh applied for membership in the United Nations
on 8 August 1972 [see S/107.59], Austria again demonstrated its support for the early admission of the People’s
Republic of Bangladesh to the world Organization. Since
then my country has consistently advocated the admission
of Bangladesh to the United Nations. In doing so we at the
same time expressed the hope that the outstanding issues
which seemed to prevent the admission-of Bangladesh at
that time could be settled among the parties themselves in a
spirit of conciliation, magnanimity and far-sightedness. It
turned out to be exactly this attitude and this spirit on the
part of all concerned which characterized the following
years and which made possible four landmark agreements in
the recent history of the subcontinent: the Simla Agreement of 2 July 1972, the New Delhi Agreement of 28
. August 1973 concerning repatriation of prisoners of war,
the recognition of Bangladesh by Pakistan in February of
this year, and., finally, the tripartite Agreement of 9 April
1974.

38. The countries of the region have given many signs of
their willingness to build on that peace and to combine
their efforts to overcome the many grave problems still
lying ahead. That could have been achieved only by the
admirable statesmanship and the farsighted and conciliatory attitude of all the leaders of the subcontinent,
among whom the former President and present Prime
Minister of Pakistan, Mr. Bhutto, the Prime Minister of
India, Mrs. Gandhi, and the Prime Minister of Bangladesh,
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, all deserve the highest praise.
Today’s debate in the Security Council affords us an
excellent opportunity to perform that duty.

44. A long and most difficult road lies behind and a long
and perhaps no less difficult way still lies ahead. In the past
the world community has recognized its responsibility to
help Bangladesh in. overcoming the most imminent problems and?n alleviating the most pressing and urgent needs
that it faced. it may be recalled in this context that my
country, within its limited means and resources, has always
been ready and prepared to contribute its share to assist the
population of Bangladesh both through multilateral channels and bilaterally, in helping to meet some of its most
basic needs to overcome hunger and to control disease.
Many other countries have helped in a most generous
manner, and the United Nations Secretariat deserves great
credit for doing a marvellous job in organizing and directing
international assistance to that country.

39. It is in this context also pleasant to recall that Austria
has always enjoyed the best of relations and the closest of
ties with the countries of the subcontinent.. Those good
relations were underscored by visits of leaders of those
countries to Austria and by recent visits of the Austrian
Foreign Minister, Mr. Rudolf Kirchschlaeger, to Islamabad
and New Delhi. The relations of Austria and the Austrian
people with the nations of the subcontinent have always
been of a peaceful and friendly character, and they have
been marked by the highest regard for the ancient culture
and the modem political wisdom of those countries.
40. For the people of Austria, the names of India,
Pakistan and Bangladesh are synonymous with the names of
some of the greatest statesmen and philosophers, humanists
and scientists humanity has ever known. Many ideas on
which modem civilization rests, such as the idea of
non-violence, have come from the great thinkers of the
subcontinent.

45. Now that the People’s Republic of Bangladesh will
shortly become a full Member of our Organization, the
spirit of compassion for the needs of 75 million people has
to be characterized and marked even more clearly by a
sense of collective responsibility and solidarity for a new
State Member of the United Nations. I feel that our
Organization, its abilities and its machinery must continue
to stand ready to assist the Governments and peoples of all
countries of the subcontinent, both politically and economically, whenever the need arises.

41. If problems largely inherited from the past have often
been rekindled in past years and have also been further
accentuated by contemporary tensions of our world, these
things have not always allowed this message, this legacy of
peace, to be lived out. But we are immensely hopeful that
now the future will look different to the peoples and
countries of the subcontinent.

46. The action that the Security Council has just taken
opens a new chapter in the history of the subcontinent. I
am confident, and indeed convinced, that the contribution
that Bangladesh can make to this Organization will be of
great significance.
\
47. In wholeheartedly welcoming Bangladesh as a new
Member of the United Nations, I wish to express again the

42. It was largely due to this start and tragic legacy of the
past that the birth of Bangladesh as a nation was accompanied by a process painful not only to the new-nation and
its people but also to its former companion in historyPakistan. But if Bangladesh had to be born out of war, its
destiny promises to be one of peace, one of understanding,
between the peoples of the subcontinent. Whatever dark
5

deep admiration of the Austrian Government and people
for the courage and dedication of the leaders and people of
this new State and at the same time for the statesmanship
of all the other great leaders of the subcontinent who have
made this day possible.

54. The existence of Bangladesh has not been a matter of I
dispute during the unusually long period taken to consider
the application just decided upon by this Council. Rather
the questions raised by some members have concerned the
settlement of issues that were still unresolved at the time of
the cessation of hostilities. We join others in expressing
gratification regarding the return of prisoners of war in
accordance with the Geneva Convention of 1949 and with
Security Council resolution 307(1971).

48. Mr. STUBBS (Peru) (interpretation from Spar&h):
Mr. President, I should like to express to you my delegation’s congratulations on your assuming the office of
President of the Security Council for the month of June.
We are familiar with your diplomatic skill, so we can easily
forecast success in your functions-success which we are
already witnessing with the results we have achieved today.

55. My Government considers that the efforts of the
former belligerents in South Asia to initiate a process of
regional reconciliation deserve the encouragement and
admiration of all peace-lovingnations. We fully endorse the
concept that regional problems should be solved by
negotiation among the nations most immediately involved
in the region itself. The determination of the Governments
of Bangladesh, India and Pakistan to do so has given new
life to the hope that historic rivalries in the subcontinent
can soon give way to fruitful co-operative relationships.

49. We congratulate and are grateful to Ambassador Maina
of Kenya, who so effectively and wisely guided the work of
the Council during the month of May last.
SO. With the decision to. recommend to the General
Assembly the admission of Bangladesh as a Member of the
United Nations, the Security Council has taken an enormous step towards the aspiration to universality of the
United Nations. In respect of this decision, my delegation
not only wishes to express its greetings of solidarity with
the people and Government of Bangladesh but also to say
that we consider it particularly timely to congratulate the
United Nations, because Bangladesh, a non-aligned and
peace-loving country, a flourishing nation with a population
of more than 89 million, with an old cultural tradition
which has had repercussions throughout the entire world,
has a great deal to contribute in assisting us to put into
effect the principles and purposes of the Organization.

56. We should note that the Government of Bangladesh,
under the leadership of Prime Minister Sheikh Mujibur
Rahman, has played a statesmanlike role in those develop
merits. Bangladesh has over the past two and a half years
clearly demonstrated its dedication to the ideals and to the
Charter of this Organization.
57. The United States Government looks forward with
sincere pleasure to the assumption by Bangladesh of its
rightful place in this community of nations. I am confident
that Bangladesh will contribute a constructive and fresh
new voice to the deliberations of the United Nations.

5 1. This unanimous decision of the Council, on the other
hand, represents a milestone in the pacification of the Asian
subcontinent, which was overwhelmed by violence a little
less than three years ago. It is also a happy augury for the
continued improvement in relations among all the States of
the area by way of co-operation, because this admission
takes place with the unreserved support of the neighbouring States and in au atmosphere of friendship and
understanding. Peru is convinced that the General Assembly
will, in a little more than three months, unanimously
endorse the recommendation of the Council.

58. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translation from Russian): Mr. President, it gives me great
pleasure to welcome you to the post of President of the
Security Council on behalf of the Soviet delegation to the
Council. I should also like to take this opportunity to
express my great satisfaction at the development of
relations of friendship and co-operation between our
countries.
59. Your Grst 10 days in this responsible post have shown
that with your experience, erudition, tact and skill in
overcoming complex problems you are brilliantly discharging the duties of President of the Security Council.
The Soviet delegation would like to assureyou that we will
co-operate actively with you in all matters which the
Councihconsiders this month.

52. Mr. SCHAUFELE (United States of America): My
delegation was.pleased to concur in the recommendation of
the Committee on the Admission of New Members regarding -the application of the Government of the People’s
Republic of Bangladesh, and to join other members of the
Courrcil in recommending to the General Assembly the
admission of Bangladesh to membership.

60. We sincerely hope that no international conflict will
arise during your Presidency requiring your active intervention and that of the entire Security Council in its
solution. We believe that at present the only important
problem which the Council faces in connexion with the
strengthening of peace and security is that of conducting
the United Nations peace-keeping operations in the Middle
East. The Council’s task is to observe and supervise the
course of those operations on a regular basisand advance
the cause of peace in the Middle East.

53. The United States recognized the Government of the
People’s Republic of Bangladesh on 4 April 1972. Formal
diplomatic relations were established on 18 May of that
year. My Government has had continuous representation in
Dacca since 1349. Through those years, ties of trade, shared
concern for economic development, and personal friendships have grown ever stronger. Consequently the United
States Government has taken particular satisfaction in the
development of the excellent bilateral relations which now
exist between our two countries.

61. We also have great pleasure in expressing our gratitude
to your predecessor in the post of President ofthe Security
6

Council, the representative of Kenya; Ambassador Maina.
He was faced with a good many complex problems during
the month of May and he dealt with them brilliantly. That
is a source of great satisfaction to all members of the
COURCil.
62. The Security Council has once again considered the
application of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh for
admission to membership in the United Nations and has
adopted a unanhnous decision recommending that the
General Assembly admit this new State as the one hundred
and thirty-sixth Member of the Organization.

Etrongest argument in Eupport of an immediate and positive
solution to the question of the admission of Bangladesh to
membership in the United Nations is the fact that the
People’s Republic of Bangladesh has rightfully acquired
great authority in international affairs, as is demonstrated
by its recognition by a large number of States. In a
relatively short period of time, more than 100 of the
world’s States have officiahy recognized this new State on
the Asian continent-the
People’s Republic of Bangladesh-and have established diplomatic, economic, cultural
and other relations with it on a mutually acceptable basis.
The Republic of Bangladesh has already been admitted to
membership in a number of speciahzed agencies within the
United Nations system, including the World Health Organiration and the International Labour Organisation. It has
observer status at the United Nations itself, and we
welcome with satisfaction the presence here in the Security
Council chamber of the Permanent Observer of Bangladesh
to the United Nations, Ambassador Karim, and the Secretary General of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the
People’s Republic of Bangladesh, Mr.Ahmed. Also of
considerable international significance is the fact that such
a highly representative forum as the Fourth Conference of
Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries at
Algiers, in which more than 70 States took part, expressed
its support for the admission of Bangladesh to membership
in the United Nations. The position of the “third world”
countries on this matter coincides fully with that of the
USSR. This decision was also a serious warning from the
“third world” countries to-those who oppose the admission
of Bangladesh to membership in the United Nations.

63. The fundamental policy of the Soviet Union, as the
General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, L. I. Brezhnev, said at
the ftiteenth congress of trade unions, is “to support the
Republic of Bangladesh and cooperate with it”. This policy
derives from the basic principles of the foreign policy of the
Soviet State. As in the past, the USSR is in favour of
granting as speedily as possible the legitimate request of the
Government of Bangladesh for admission to membership in
the United Nations. As far back as August 1972, the Soviet
delegation stated in the Security Council that, in spite of
the deliberate and artificial obstacles being created, the
People’s Republic of Bangladesh would be admitted to
membership in the United Nations and its representatives
would have their proper place in the work of this
Organization.
64. In the time which has elapsed since the founding of
this new, independent Asian State, important changes have
occurred in the political climate of our planet, Favourable
changes have taken place in the world situation which are in
the vital interests of the peoples of all countries and have
also left their mark on relations between States of the
South Asian subcontinent. Thanks to the efforts of the
statesmen of India, Bangladesh and Pakistan, impo-rtant
concrete steps have been taken towards ensurh-ig peace and
stability by collective efforts in that important part of the
world. We firmly believe that it is precisely those goals
which are served by the agreements signed by the interested
parties at Simla and New DeIhi.

67. The Soviet Union bases its relations with the People’s
Republic of Bangladesh on the principle of peaceful
coexistence, full equality, mutual respect, sovereignty and
independence, and non-interference in each other’s internal
affairs. The Soviet people has great sympathy and respect
for the people of Bangladesh, for its heroic efforts to create
its own sovereign, independent national State and for the
policy of non-alignment and friendly co-operation pursued
by Bangladesh, a policy designed to strengthen peace and
friendship among peoples and to easeinternational tension.
68. Very-recently, from 17 to 22 May of this year, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh, Mr. Kamal Ho&n, made an official visit to the
Soviet Union. In the course of negotiations be-tween A. A.
Gromyko, member of the Politburo of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the USSR, and Mr. Hossain,
both sides noted with satisfaction the complete uniformity
of the positions of the Governments of the two countries
on matters relating to friendly Soviet-Bangladesh relations
and on the most important international problems. Both
Governments confirmed their conviction that, in order to
ensure lasting peace and the social and economic progress
of countries, an effort must be made to ensure that the
process of easing international tension. and of detente
becomes irreversible.

65. Implementation of the tripartite Agreement signed on
9 April 1974 at New Delhi will contribute to normalization
of the situation on the subcontinent and the establishment
of good-neighbourly relations among the countries of the
area. There can be no question that the peoples of the
South Asian subcontinent need a stable, l@ing peace and
that they have a vital interest in improving the situation on
the subcontinent and ensuring their security. The Soviet
Union has expressed great satisfaction at the initiative taken
by the Governments of Bangladesh and India with a view to
settling the situation on the subcontinent and also at the
action of Bangladesh and Pakistan in extending recognition
to each other.
66. With regard to the substance of the matter before us,
the application of the Government of Bangladesh for
admission to membership in the United Nations was, of
course, well founded and justified at the time when that
Government first submitted it to the Security Council [see
S/10759, of 8 August 29721; it remains so today. The

69. I should like to take this opportunity to‘point out also
that co-operation between the Soviet Union and the
People’s Republic of Bangladesh is developing successfully
and growing also in the economic field. The USSR is
7

development of Bangladesh and the other States of the
region. History demonstrates convincingly that the maintenance of a state of tension in certain parts of the world and
the presence of dangerous conflict situations do not serve
the interests of the progressive development of peoples and
States in the economic and social spheres but are exploited
by reactionary forces for their far-reaching hegemonistic
plans and ambitions which are so dangerous to the peoples
of the world. These forces have used and are still using any
pretext for direct or indirect interference in the internal
affairs of other countries and peoples and for the expansion
and strengthening of their economic and political positions
in the countries of that region.

providing assistance in the economic development of this
young developing country, the people of which ha?
suffered exploitation and despoilment for a century. A
number of agreements have been signed by the USSR and
Bangladesh on co-operation in the construction of industrial enterprises, geological surveying and the rehabilitation
and development of the fishing fleet and other shipping.
The Soviet Union is also providing appropriate assistance in
the rehabilitation of rail transport and the training of
national cadres for various branches of the national
economy. The USSR has also given the young State
substantial assistance in the rehaSilitation of such important economic arteries as the port of Chittagong. The
importance of this friendly, disinterested assistance has
been acknowledged and noted wie satisfaction by the
Secretary-General, Mr. Waldheim. I have found it necessary
to mention this because there have appeared would-be
experts who have attempted, in connexion with the
problem of the Indian Ocean, to cast aspersions on and,
frankly, to slander these sincere efforts and the noble
assistance provided to Bangladesh and its people by the
Government and the people of the Soviet Union at a most
difficult time for the people of Bangladesh.

73. We are convinced that the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh will make a worthy contribution to the work of
the United Nations.
74. In the light of all these considerations, the Soviet
delegation has from the very beginning lent active support
to the application of Bangladesh for admission to membership in the United Nations and has called for an immediate
decision on this matter.

70. Both sides, Bangladesh and the USSR, have more than
once expressed their satisfaction at the successful development of co-operation between the two countries. The
Soviet Union has provided and will continue to provide all
possible assistance and support to the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh on a bilateral basis, as provided for in the
relevant agreements between our States.

75. The Soviet Union and all Soviet people were with the
people of Bangladesh in the most difficult days of the birth
and growth of this young State. The historical correctness
and rightness of the policy of consistent support for
national liberation movements-a policy handed down to us
by the great Lenin-has once again been convincingly
confirmed by actual experience. Today not only the right
of the people of Bangladesh to a free, independent andsovereign existence but also the imperative need to put an
eng to the policy of neglect and discrimination with regard
to this young State and to admit it ,to full and equal
membership in the family of States Members of’the United
Nations is obvious to all.

71. The need for a speedy and positive decision on the
question of admitting Bangladesh to membership in the
United Nations is confumed by the fact-known to all-that
this young independent State obviously fulfils each and
every one of the specific conditions which Article 4 of the
Charter of the United Nations directly and clearly lays
down for all States admitted to membership. The People’s
Republic of Bangladesh is a peace-loving State. Its Govemment has officially stated that it accepts the obligations
imposed by the Charter and solemnly undertakes to comply
with those obligations. Nor can there be any doubt that
Bangladesh-a country .of 75 million people, or, in other
words, the world’s eighth largest State in terms of population-is fully equipped to discharge the obligations incumbent upon States Members of the United Nations.

76. The PRESIDENT (inteqvetation from French): I
thank the representative of the Soviet Union for the very
kind words he was so good as to address to me. I should
like to assure him that my country rejoices at the excellent
relations of co-operation which exist between our two
countries and which are being streng’hened in the wellunderstood interests of our two peoples. As President of
the Security Council I hope a good mood will continue to
prevail so that there will be no crisis during this month.

72. The admission of Bangladesh to membership in the
United Nations will promote the achievement of universality in our Organization. Full and equal participation by
this major new State in the life and work of the United
Nations will assist in enhancing the effectiveness with which
the United Nations solves the important problems before
it-the strengthening of international peace and security,
the non-use of force in international relations, the permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons, the saving
of mankind from the threat of thermonuclear war and the
development of equal co-operation among States. Nor can
we fail to stress that the participation of the People’s
Republic of Bangladesh in the United Nations will unquestionably help greatly to advance the cause of peace on the
South Asian subcontinent itself and contribute to a
solution of the compIex tasks of the economic and social

77. Mr. ZAHAWIE (Iraq): Allow me, Mr. President, first
to express to you my delegation’s deep satisfaction at
seeing you, the distinguished representative of a sister Arab
State, the Islamic Republic of Mauritania, presiding over
the deliberations of the Council for the month of June. It
goes without saying that my delegation will co-operate fully
with you in fulfilling the duties of your high office. We are
confident that you will perform your task with the
distinction and the dignity which has earned you the
respect and admiration of the United Nations community.
78. I should also like to thank and to congratulate the
representative of Kenya, Ambassador Maina,-for his outstanding contribution to the work of the Councilduring his
presidency of the Council in the month of May.
8

79. Iraq was among the first States to extend diplomatic
recognition to the People’s Republic of Bangladesh; in fact
it was the fast Arab State-to do so. My delegation therefore
not only welcomes but whole-heartedly supports the
admission of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh to
membership of the United Nations.

waited for this decision with anxiety. This anxiety was
clearly visible in Mr. Karim in the last four weeks and I am
sure he deserves this relief and praise for the skill he has
shown.
86. We are happy to be associated with this decision. My
country has many deep ties with Bangladesh. In my
country there are many people with family ties in Bangladesh, and this, in a very important way, has made
Bangladesh contribute to the variety and wealth of culture
of the people of Kenya. Bangladesh is a member of the
non-aligned group and a member of the Commonwealth,
and in all these we look forward to continued co-operation
and to fruitful cordial relations which will now bb further
.strengthened through the United Nations.

80. We must salute on this happy occasion the courage,
the wisdom and the statesmanship of the leaders of the
subcontinent which led, after bitter strife and great
suffering, to the remarkable reconciliation enabling Bangladesh now to join the United Nations as a full-fledged
Member. We welcome the representatives of Bangladesh as
the representatives of a State with which Iraq has deep
cultural, historical and religious ties. We look forward to
the positive role it will play within the United Nations and
as an important new member within the non-aligned
community of nations.

87. We are happy to know &at the problems that have I
delayed the decision which we have taken today have been
resolved and that it will now be possible to continue
without any strains the cordial relations that my country
seeks and has maintained with all the peoples and nations
inhabiting this part of the world.

81. Before concluding, I find it appropriate to quote a few
lines by the great poet-philosopher of the subcontinent,
Muhammad Iqbal, written nearly 40 years ago, and this is
the English translation of Iqbal’s words:

88. My delegation wishes the People’s Republic of Bangladesh all successin the future as a Member of the family of
the United Nations, of which it is finally going to be a
Member.

Brighter shali shine men’s clay
Than angels’ light, one day;
Earth through our Des tiny
Turn to a stm sky.

89. Mr. SMIRNOV (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic) (translation from Russian): Mr. President, the delegation of the Byelorussian SSR associates itself with the
congratulations which have been offered to you upon your
assumption of the high post of President of the Security
Council and expresses its readiness to co-operate with you
in solving the problems before the Council.

The fancies in our head
That upon storms were fed
One day shall soar, and clear
The whirlpool of the sphere.

Let us hope that the vision of Iqbal will some day become a
reality for all mankind.

90. We should also like to take this opportunity to
congratulate the Ambassador of Kenya, Mr. Maina, who so
skilfully conducted the Council’s proceedings last month.

82. Mr. MAINA (Kenya): Mr. President, may I, on behalf
of the Kenya delegation, congratulate you on your taking
over the presidency of the Security Council this month. I
have reason to know what a burden it is to the incumbent. I
wish you every success in the remaining period of the
month. I should also like to take this opportunity to thank
you for the assistance you personally rendered to the
out-going President, particularly with regard to the subject
on our agenda this morning, which has now been resolved
by unanimous decision of the members of the Council.

91. The Security Council has met today to resume its
consideration of the application of the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh for admission to membership in the United
Nations. In the view of the delegation of the Byelorussian
SSR, this application from the Government of Bangladesh
was and remains entirely justified. The time which has
elapsed and the events which have occurred since the
Government of Bangladesh first made its application for
membership in the United Nations in August 1972 have
demonstrated most convincingly the readiness of the people
and Government of Bangladesh to play in actual practice
their proper and active part in the various areas of
international co-operation.

83. Finally, I should like to thank all those members of
the Council that have expressed such generous sentiments
about the work I did during my first month as a member of
this Council.
84. The Kenya delegation welcomes and supports the
unanimous decision of the Security Council to recommend
to the General Assembly the admission of the People’s
Republic of Bangladesh to membership in the United
Nations.

92. From the first days of its existence, the young
independent State of Bangladesh has proclaimed as the
constant objective of its foreign policy the preservation of
peace, non-alignment and equal co-operation with all
countries which respect its interests and rights.

85. The Council has been handling this problem for a
considerable period of time and today’s decision must come
as a relief to many members of the Council, to many
Member States of the United Nations and, most directly, to
the Government and the people of Bangladesh which have

93. By pursuing this peace-loving foreign policy, the
People’s Republic of Bangladesh h,;, in abrief period of
time, achieved wide recognition in international affairs,
particularly in connexion with the solution of the problems
9

of the South Asian subcontinent. The Republic has been
officially recognized by a majority of States Members of
the United Nations. More than 100 of the world’s States
have established diplomatic, economic, cultural and other
relations with it. The People’s Republic of Bangladesh is a
member of many specialized agencies of the United
Nations, and its representatives have been and are participants in many major international conferences, including
those conducted under the auspices of the United Nations.

Republic of Bangladesh to membership in the United
Nations. The adoption of this decision will unquestionably
promote further movements towards the attainment of
universality in the United Nations.
100. The participation of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh in the work of the United Nations will enable that
State to make its valuable contribution to the solution of
the problems of strengthening peace and security and
developing equal co-operation among States. The admission
of Bangladesh to membership in the United Nations will be
an important positive factor in promoting further improvement of the situation on the Asian continent.

94. Thanks to the purposeful and consistent peace-loving
policy of Bangladesh, constructive decisions aimed at
overcoming the dark heritage of the past on the South
Asian subcontinent have been reached in a short period of
time and in circumstances in which passions have been
inflamed by reactionary circles and outside forces with an
interest in maintaining tension in Asia. The implementation
of the tripartite Agreement signed in 9 April 1974 at New
Delhi by India, Bangladesh and Pakistan will unquestionably promote the further normalization of the situation
on the subcontinent and the establishment of goodneighbourly relations among the countries of the area.

101. In the light of these considerations, the delegation of
the Byelorussian SSR unhesitatingly supports the resolution
calling for the admission of Bangladesh to membership in
the United Nations.
102. Mr. MORALES HERNANDEZ (Costa Rica) [inferpretation from Spanish]: Mr. President, my delegation
wishes to express its profound satisfaction at seeing you
presiding over-the meetings of the Security Council during
the month of June. We are sure that with .your good
judgment and diplomatic perspicacity the meetings of the
Security Council will be fruitful.

95. The People’s Republic of Bangladesh, with its 75
million people, extensive territory and rich and varied
natural resources, is living through and solving the complex
problems associated with the assertion of its identity and its
development in full compliance with each and every one of
the requirements imposed on all States admitted to
membership in the United Nations by Article 4 of the
Charter of the United Nations. The entire foreign policy of
the Government of Bangladesh is proof of this.

103. We also wish to express our gratitude to the
Ambassador of Kenya who so brilliantly guided the work of
the Council during the past month.
104. For the delegation of Costa Rica it is a matter of
spec,@l gratification to have voted in favour of the draft
resolution recommending the admission of the People’s
Republic of Bangladesh to membership in the United
Nations. This decision not only makes manifest once again
the principle of universality which is enshrined in the
Charter and is the basis for the foundation of this
important Organization. Last year we were joined by the
two Germanys and the Bahamas, and now we are to be
joined by the Republic of Bangladesh, which, means in
numbers that approximately I50 million human beings
have joined the great international family of the United
Nations. It is a matter for satisfaction and rejoicing for
those of us who believe that united we can create a more
ideal, more peaceful and more just world.

96. The country is now engaged in strenuous constructive
_ labour for the purpose of fulfilling the plans for the
restoration and strengthening of the economy and ensuring
the steady movement of the young State of Bangladesh
along the path of progressive social and economic reforms.
In these circumstances, the State of Bangladesh has a
particularly acute need for effective co-operation from
friendly States and the United Nations to assist it in
achieving its development objectives and aims.
97. We can only regret that the question of the admission
of the young State of Bangladesh to membership in the
United Nations was blocked for two years for no objective
or vatid reason even though, as is well known, the General
Assembly expressed the desire back in 1972 at its twentyseventh session that the People’s Republic of Bangladesh be
admitted to membership in the United Nations at an early
date [resolution 2937(XXM.)].

105. The Government of Costa Rica has already on
different occasions expressed its position with regard to
entry of Bangladesh to membership in the Unite~d Nations,
and in particular during the general debate at the twenty.
seventh session of the General Assembly, when the. Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Costa Rica, Mr. Gonzalo Facie, said:

98. The Fourth Conference of Non-Aligned Countries
expressed unanimous support for the admission of the
People’s RepubIic of Bangladesh to membership. in the
United Nations as a full and sovereign member of the
family of non-aligned countries. It is also important to bear
in mind the desire of the Government of Bangladesh that
the question of the admission of Bangladesh to membership
in the United Nations should be settIed as soon as possible.

The State of Bangladesh came into being as a result of
the resistance of a people heroicaIly united. . . . Now that
the people have achieved self-determination, after a
bioody battie, we cannot close the doors of the international community to them.
. . . Costa Rica, which was the frost Latin American
country to extend diplomatic recognition to the new
Bengali State, will enthusiastically support the recommendation it hopes the GeneraI Assembly will make for
“

99. It is therefore with great satisfaction that our deiegation supports the Security Council’s decision recommending that the General Assembly admit the People’s
10

the purpose of opening the doors of the United Nations
to the representatives of Bangladesh.“3

ment could not be reached last year. The resolution of
these remaining issues after some two and a half years of
both formal and informal negotiations has, my Government
believes, ended a particularly painful period in relations
between the countries on the subcontinent and opened a
new era in which all three countries should now be able to
move forward in pursuance of their objective to promote
friendly and harmonious relations among ,them. These
decisions can scarcely fail to contribute to the relaxation of
tension throughout the world, and especially in the
subcontinent, where peace has at times appeared to be an
elusive goal. We are confident, too, that Bangladesh’s
admission to the United Nations will further enhance the
process of normalization and progress,towards peace.

106. My delegation believes that this quotation summarizes our position, and we reiterate to the delegation of
Bangladesh our best wishes and hopes for great successin
the future.
107. Sir Laurence MCINTYRE (Australia): Mr. President,
let me first of all welcome you into your first occupancy of
the presidential chair of this Council and express my
delegation’s full confidence in your experience and capacity
to conduct our proceedings with fumness and impartiality
We assure you of our full co-operation. I should also like to
pay a tribute to the outstanding manner in which our
colleague and your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of Kenya, in his first month at the United Nations, so
ably fulfilled his duties as President of the Council for the
month of May.

112. We have already had an indication of the earnestness
of Bangladesh’s desire to play a useful and constructive role
in this Organization. Its sincere and close observance of the ,
many issues and matters important to it here in New York
has been matched by the no less positive and constructive
contributions it has already begun to make in the several
specialized agencies of which it has sought and obtained
membership. My delegation has been pleased to give our
fti support to Bangladesh’s desire to participate as a
member of these agencies.

108. The Council has had before it today the report of the
Committee on the Admission of New Members which has
recommended to the Council that it adopt a resolution
recommending in turn to the General Assembly that the
People’s Republic of Bangladesh be admitted to membership in the United Nations. It has given my delegation great
satisfaction to support the Committee’s unanimous recommendation and I express the sincere hope that, following
adoption by the Council this morning, it will be overwhelmingly accepted by the General Assembly at its
twenty-ninth session.

113. Australia greatly values the close and friendly ties
that have been a feature af our relations with Bangladesh,
both within and outside the United Nations. We are
confident that the warm and co-operative association
between our two countries will be further strengthened and
consolidated as a result of the decision we have taken here
today.

109. It follows that my Government is fully satisfied that
the People’s Republic of Bangladesh is eligible, indeed
eminently qualified, to take its seat in this Organization. As
a member of this Council which has the duty under the
Charter of examining the new applicants for membership
we have no hesitation in giving the application at present
before us our full endorsement. The second and fmal
decision will be taken by the General Assembly, and we can
look forward with confidence to its favourable consideration. We feel sure, as Mr. Kamal Hossain, Foreign
Minister of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh expressed
in his letter to the Secretary-General on 14 May 1974, that
membership by Bangladesh in the United Nations will
enable his country to play a larger role in the furtherance of
the objectives of this Organization, ‘.

114. Australia was among the first countries to extend
recognition to Bangladesh following its attainment of
independence. We have sought to develop and expand our
ties with the People’s Republic, a country with which we
share not only the geographical affinities of the Asian and
Pacific region but also that special sense of association that
comes from having a shared background of tradition and
‘experience as fellow members of the Commonwealth of
Nations. We have already had occasion to welcome Bangladesh’s participation in a meeting of Commonwealth Prime
Ministers, where our respective Heads of Government had
an opportunity to meet together and discuss issues of
mutual concern at the highest political level.

110. We are certain also that Bangladesh will bring to the
United Nations those qualities of statesmanship, farsightedness and diplomatic skill which have so recently
been in evidence in the successful negotiation by Bangladesh, India and Pakistan of the outstanding issues between
them arising out of the 1971 war.

115. In other spheres too we have developed a close
working association with Bangladesh. We have been particularly pleased to be able to make a contribution to the
country’s economic progress and to the development of
both its human and its natural resources.

111. The agreement concluded in New Delhi on 9 April
1974 has resolved two major questions, the first concerning
the nonBengalis in Bangladesh whom the Government of
Pakistan had agreed, under the New Delhi agreement of 28
August 1973, to accept as its nationals and the second
concerning prisoners of war, on whose repatriation agree-

116. The exchange of visitors between our two countries
at both the governmental and the nongovernmental level
has been a welcome and natural development in our
relations. We were happy to have in Australiain December
last year the Bangladesh Minister for Food and Civil
Supply, Mr. Majumdar, accompanied--by senior officials of
the Bangladesh Government. The visit, the fast by a
Minister of the Bangladesh Government since BangIadesh
attained independence, provided an opportunity for useful

3 Ibid., Twenty-seventh Session. PZe&ry Meetings, 2049th meet-

ing, paras.170 and

172.

11

.

discussions with Ministers
Australian Government.

and senior officials of the

and this reconciliation which does honour to the people of
that region and should be a matter of pride to the leaders of
those countries. We are firmly convinced that the creative
genius of those peoples will continue to be harnessed
towards achievements which would be in keeping with their
peace-loving traditions and towards the economic and social
progress of the people in the subcontinent.

117. Let me conclude by repeating that on behalf of my
delegation and of the Australian Government I have been
bPPY to SUPPort the recommendation that the People’s
Republic of Bangladesh be admitted to membership in the
United Nations and I wish it well for the future.

124. In conclusion, I should like to say once again that my
delegation takes pleasure in the decision of the Security
Council and at the next session of the General Assembly
will be happy to give a most cordial welcome to the
delegation of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh.

118. The PRESIDENT finrerpreration from French): I
should now like, with the Council’s permission, to make a
brief statement as the representative of MAURITANIA.
119. It was with great pleasure that my delegation
supported the decision of the Council to recommend to the
General Assembly the admission of the People’s Republic
of Bangladesh to the United Nations. This feeling derives
from the common membership of Bangladesh and Mauritania in the Islamic community, a source of so many
well-marked cultural affmities. It is also based upon the
adherence of our two countries to the principles and
objectives of the non-aligned movement, within which they
have been fighting for the same causes and harbouring the
same aspirations.

125. The next name on the list of speakers is that of the
representative of Pakistan. As PRESIDENT, I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make a statement.
126. Mr. AKHUND (Pakistan): Mr. President, I want first
of all to express to you and, through you, to the other
members of the Security Council the deep appreciation of
my delegation for being given the opportunity to address
this meeting.
127. The matter on the Council’s agenda is one to which
my country attaches very particular importance and significance. We consider it specially felicitous, Sir, that it has
fallen to you to preside over the Council as it has taken up
the application of Bangladesh for membership in the United
Nations. You represent a country which, along with my
country, is part of the third world and a member of the
Islamic fraternity, a fraternity which, members of the
Council are aware, played such an important role during the
Islamic Summit Conference held at L&ore in February this
year in bridging the gulf between two States that had been
one nation and in enabling my country to extend recognition to Bangladesh. It is not surprising that under your
able, impartial and friendly guidance the matter under
consideration has been so smoothly and speedily settled.

120. Furthermore, we consider it a happy event that the
United Nations has been enriched by the admission of a
new Member which has already so concretely manifested its
will to apply scrupulously the resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council. In doing so the
People’s Republic of Bangladesh not only has served the
cause of peace in the subcontinent but has demonstrated its
attachment to the principles laid down in the Charter and
its acceptance of the obligations flowing from those
principles.
121. The decision taken today by the Council follows
certain events which have recently occurred in the region to
which the People’s Republic of Bangladesh belongs. Among
these events we should like to highlight the very felicitous
development of an atmosphere of detente and a growing
mutual understanding and reconciliation which becomes
more evident each day among the States of the subcontinent. This situation has been made possible thanks to
the wisdom of the Security Council and thanks also to the
political’ perspicacity and the moderation of the leaders of
the countries concerned in that area.

128. It is my pleasant duty also to pay a tribute to your
predecessor, Ambassador Mama of Kenya, who, as President of the Council for the month of May, showed a keen
understanding of the many facets of the question at issue.
He handled it with skill and patience and helped ensure that
the Council was able to settle the matter, as it-has done this
morning, in an atmosphere of amity and conciliation.

122. I should like to pay here a well deserved tribute to
the political courage and the constructive spirit of the
leaders of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and particularly
to the Prime Minister, Mr. Ali Bhutto. The actions of Prime
Minister Bhutto have been, in what was in so many ways a
painful problem for his country, constantly forwardlooking-looking
forward to the establishment of relations
of peace and trust and towards the substitution of hope for
bitterness and understanding for the distrust which prevailed of yore. This conduct-and we must be gratified at
this-was echoed among the leaders of Bangladesh and
India. -We found there the same will for peace and
understanding, the same concern to start a new chapter of
history and to look towards the future only.

129. When Pakistan last appeared before this Council my
country was wracked by internal upheaval and overrun by
foreign armed forces. We came to the Council to seek a
cessation of the fighting and in the hope that the Council
would assist in creating conditions for a peaceful and
generally acceptable settlement. But that was not to be.
The Council was immobilized while the war pursued its
appointed course and achieved its predeterminedalm.
130. I recall the past not in bitterness-though the present
occasion is not without poignancy for my country-but to
indicate what a long road we have travelled in the relatively
brief period of two and a half years that has elapsed. If
today Pakistan speaks here in order to welcome as a
member of the United Nations a State which a brief few
years ago was an integral part of Pakistan, it is the

123. By its decision today the Security Council without
any doubt intended to consolidate this rapprochement
12

culmination of a process which the:hew- Government of’
Pakistan set in motion with the deliberate and conscious
design of creating a new order of relationships in the
subcontinent.

to. act as host to the-Prime~Minister of Bangladesh during
the Conference, and, in the words of Sheikh Mujibur
Rahman, opened “a new chapter” in our relations based on
sovereignty and the promotion of peace.

131. Even in those, for my country, tragic days of
December 1971, the Prime Minister, Mr. Zulfikar Ali
Bhutto, who at that time was leading Pakistan’s delegation
to this Council, spoke of a new era in relations on the
subcontinent. At that time of deep emotional stress, he
stated on 15 December 1971 that the choice for us is either
to accept living in the same subcontinent and
cooperating for peace and progress, or to be implacable
enemies of each other for ever [see 1624th meeting,

136. The manner in which the Council has today decided
on the application of Bangladesh to join the United Nations
would not have been possible had not the organs of the
United Nations shown an understanding of the basic issues
which were the cause of tension and conflict in the
subcontinent and whose resolution would pave the way for
the establishment of a durable peace. I wish to express here
my Government’s sincere appreciation of the efforts of all
our friends, who, forsaking expediency, stood up for the
defence. of right and justice. I wish to express my
Government’s and my appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, and to his associates, in
particular the Under-Secretary-General for Special Political
Affairs, Mr. Roberto Guyer, for the constructive and
positive role they played at all times in facilitating a
settlement in the subcontinent.

para. 651.

I32. That Pakistan chose the path of reconciliation, peace
and progress was manifest from the first act of the new
Government of Pakistan. On 3 January 1972 the then
President, Mr. Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, announced the unconditional release of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman from detention.
At the same time he offered a hand of friendship to India.
He declared on that occasion that if India reciprocated his
gesture of friendship, he was ready to fly to Delhi the very
next day to initiate a dialogue.

137. I should like in particular to express the deep and
abiding gratitude of the Government and people of Pakistan
to the People’s Republic of China, whose unswerving,
far-sighted and principled stand in upholding the letter and
the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations and whose
sympathy for the true interests of all the peoples of the
subcontinent were vital factors in furthering the process of
reconciliation in the subcontinent and in strengthening the
role of the United Nations.

133. It is a matter of great satisfaction to my Government,
and, I am sure, to all members of this Council and the
United Nations, that Pakistan’s offer to tread the path of
reconciliation and to initiate a step-by-step process aimed at
the establishment of a durable peace in the subcontinent,
evoked a positive response from the leaders of both India
and Bangladesh. The Simla Agreement of July 1972, the
Indo-Pakistan Agreement signed at New Delhi in August
1973 and the New Delhi Tripartite Agreement of April of
this year were the fruit of the sincere endeavours of all to
break away from the conflicts of the past and to embark
upon a new era of relations in the subcontinent based on a
common desire for peace and the well-being and prosperity
of all our peoples.

138. On 29 November 1972, during its twenty-seventh
session, the General Assembly took the same position when
it simultaneously adopted two interdependent resolutions
which, while expressing the desire for the admission of
Bangladesh to membership in the United Nations at an
early date, at the same time called for the return of the
prisoners of war to Pakistan in accordance with the 1949
Geneva Conventions and the relevant provisions of Security
Council resolution 307 (1971) (resolutions 2937(XXVII)
and 2938 (XXVII)].

134. In this context I cannot pass over in silence the
sombre event that has taken place in the last month. I refer
to the explosion on 18 May of a nuclear device by India in
the Rajasthan Desert, close to the borders of my country.
Against the background of the persistent and sincere efforts
of my Government to establish sound foundations for an
enduring pea& in the subcontinent, I cannot overemphasize
the gravity with which my Government views that event.
On this occasion I should like to state that my Government
has not given up its firm resolve to tread the path of
reconciliation and peace in the subcontinent despite the
dark cloud that has appeared on the horizon.

139. When the question of the admission of Bangladesh
was being inscribed on the agenda of the twenty-seventh
session of the General Assembly I made a statement in the
General Assembly, on behalf of my Government, to explain
its position on the subject. Allow me to recall what I said
then:
“I wish to reiterate, on behalf of my Government, that
we are not irrevocably opposed to the admission of
Bangladesh to the United Nations once the outstanding
issues have been resolved and the situation arising out of
the recent conflict has been norm&red. My delegation
has not suggested the rejection’ of the application of
Bangladesh; on the contrary it has merely suggested that
consideration should be deferred until such, time as the
obligations which devolve upon the Dacca regime under
the United Nations Charter have been fulfilled.“’

135. At the time of the Islamic Summit Conference held
in February of this year at L&ore, with the assistance of
members of the Islamic fraternity, my Government was
able to extend recognition to the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh. I wish here to pay a tribute to the sincere
efforts of all the leaders who participated in the Conference
and in particular to the members of the seven-member
goodwill mission which was entrusted by the Conference
with the task of promoting reconciliation between Pakistan
and Bangladesh and whose efforts enabled my Government

140. As representatives are aware, by an agreement signed
in New Delhi in April of this year the Government of India
4 Ibid., 2037th

13

meetingipara. 49.

of wisdom, patience, prudence and perseverance which are’
so necessary for the affirmation of the authority of the
Security Council.

agreed to return &l Pakistani prisoners of war it had held
since the war ended in December 1971. The Government of
Bangladesh, for its part, gave up its demand to hold alleged
war-crime trials in Bangladesh. Thus, the last prisoners of
war returned to Pakistan from India on 30 April 1974, and
on that date ended the prolonged incarceration of our
prisoners of war, the Geneva Convention of 1949 relative to
the Treatment of Prisoners of War was given effect and the
provisions of Security Council resolution 307 (1971) were
implemented. My delegation, accordingly, takes satisfaction
in welcoming the decision of the Security Council to
recommend to the General Assembly the admission of the
People’s Republic of Bangladesh to membership in the
United Nations, and we took forward in due course to
co-operating with it in this Organization in our common
aims and endeavours.

145. We are gratified at the decision just taken by the
Council to recommend that the next session of the General
Assembly admit the People’s Republic of Bangladesh. That
decision in fact puts an end to a difficult and tragic phase in
so many ways of the history of the Asian continent. We do.
not want, and I am sure nobody wants, to reopen the still
recent wounds and revive quarrels which time alone can
finally alleviate. The history of mankind through the ages
and the continents is full of instances of deep wounds and
scars never completely healed, and of indications of the
folly and the wisdom of men, but is also witness to the
inflexible rule of the life of peoples who must survive in the
present to build their future.

141. My country looks upon this decision of the Security
Council as yet another step in the process of reconciliation
that I have described. As my Prime Minister stated on the
occasion of the recognition by Pakistan of Bangladesh:

146. The question of the admission of Bangladesh to the
United Nations has been a matter pending for two years
before the Security Council; that lapse of time in itself gives
an indication qf the problems which have had to be solved
and the difficulties which have had to be overcome. A
decision has been taken today, unhesitatingly and unambiguously, and that is sometig
which proves that the
situation has improved in the subcontinent and that a new
balance has now been established. It is now for the whole
of the international community to register that fact and
strengthen it.

“We hope this mutual rec&ciliation, which is in the spirit
of Islamic fraternity, will now bury a past that the
peoples of both our countries would prefer to see
forgotten.”
’

142. It is in this spirit that we shall welcome the admission
of Bangladesh to the United Nations at the next session of
the General Assembly. It is in the same spirit that my Prime
Minister will soon visit Dacca in the furtherance of the
desire of our peoples to establish a new and enduring
relationship based on mutual trust, friendship and equality.

147. After the Simla Agreement and that of New Delhi
between India and Pakistan new prospects were created for
the restoration of peaceful relations throughout the region.
We must, of course, see in this a mark of wisdom and
courage on the part of the leaders of those countries for
having been able to bury their resentment and rise above
theii own resistance. We therefore should like to pay
tribute to them because we are fully aware of the great
complexity of the problems which face them in a context
so painful for peoples and for individuals. These human
problems have been fmaliy settled in a way satisfactory to
Pakistan and Bangladesh. Algeria was both proud and
happy to have taken part in the representations which, in
the course of the Islamic Conference in ,Lahore, led to the
recognition of Bangladesh by Pakistan and the reconciliation of the leaders of those countries.

143. The PRESIDENT (inferprerariun from lhnch): The
next name on the list of speakers is that of the representative of Algeria. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and make his statement.
144. Mr. RAHAL (Algeria) (interpretation from French):
In speaking in the Council’s debate after it has already
taken its decision I must say quite frankly that I have very
little to add to the very eloquent statements that have been
made. However, I must thank you, Mr. President, and all
the members of the Council for having permitted me to
express my views here, not only as representative of Algeria
but also on behalf of the entire group of non-aligned
countries, and say how important we find the problem
which has been the subject of discussion and how much
importance we attach to the decision that the Council has
just taken. It is not a matter of indifference to us to stress
that it is precisely under your presidency that the Council
has just recommended the admission of the People’s
Republic of Bangladesh to the United Nations. As a
representative of an African country I should like to
congratulate you and to say how proud we,.are to see for
the second time in succession the presidency of the Council
assumed by ti African, thus associating our continent with
the responsibility for the guidance of world affairs and the
maintenance of international peace and security. It is, of
course, for us an occasion for legitimate satisfaction
because we are certain that in the discharge of these
delicate functions you will bring to bear the personal
qualities which we are all aware you possess-the qualities

148. At this stage of the Council’s debate, obviously it is
no longer necessary for me to plead for the admission of
Bangladesh to the great family of the United Nations.
However, I must make it clear that Bangladesh is already a
member of the group of non-aligned countries and has been
ever since the summit conference in Algiers, and that as
such it comes to the United Nations with the best possible
references of a country devoted to the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, a.country which is anxious
within the context of its principles to, make its whoiehearted contribution to our common effort for the maintenance of peace and co-operation among peoples. We take
pleasure in expressing here our whole-hearted satisfaction at
the decision just taken by the Security Council. which is so
perfectly in keeping with the wishes expressed by the Heads
of State of the non-ali8ned countries when they decided to.
support the application for admission from the People%
14

Republic of Bangladesh to the UnitedNations. The way is:
now open to this young country-born&r-the most tragic of
circumstances, a country which has had to confront the
difficult task of its own construction with courage and
determination-to
take its place within our Organization.
We shall have occasion to convey to that country our warm
congratulations when the General Assembly confirms the
recommendation of the Council. But we should like to take
this opportunity to welcome this recommendation as a
well-deserved tribute to the people of Bangladesh and its
leaders and as a good omen for a new era of peace and
prosperity for all the peoples of that region which we view
with the same sympathy and for which we feel the same
friendship.

the United Nations. but-has also demonstrated its ability
and sincerity to do so through its unremitting efforts in
furthering the cause of peace and understanding, conciliation and co-operation, particularly in our part of the
world, even though United Nations membership has been
denied to it so far.
154. In spite of the sufferings that it has endured and the
sacrifices it has made in the past, Bangladesh has shown
tremendous courage in taking bold initiatives which have
furthered the cause of normalization and establishment of
durable peace in the subcontinent. This is indeed a
testimony to the generosity of its people, the statesmanship
of its leaders and the magnanimity of its spirit. We in the
United Nations should indeed be proud to welcome this
peace-loving nation, which will enrich the Organization
with its cultural heritage, wisdom and grace, maturity and
modem outlook.

149. The PRESIDENT (inrerprerarion from French): The
next name on the list of speakers is that of the representative of India. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

155. India welcomes today’s Council decision since it
opens the doors of the United Nations to a neighbouring
and fellow-Asian country with which India has close and
growing bonds of friendship and with which it is united by
a dedication to the principles of democracy, secularism,
socialism and the establishment of an egalitarian society in
which there will be no discrimination on the basis of
religion, sex or creed. In the field of foreign relations we
share the commitment to non-alignment, peaceful coexistence, the cause of development, particularly of the
developing countries, and opposition to colonialism,
racialism and imperialism in all its manifestations.

150. Mr. JAIN (India): Mr. President, the delegation of
India is grateful to you and to the members of this Council
for this opportunity to participate in the proceedings of the
Council today when it has decided unanimously to recommend to the General Assembly the admission of the
People’s Republic of Bangladesh to membership in the
United Nations. The decision of the Council on the
renewed request of the Government of Bangladesh at last
opens the way for Bangladesh-the eighth most populous
country in the world, a great country of Asia whose people
have bravely and successfully weathered many a calamity
both natural as well as man-made and a distinguished
member of the non-aligned movement and the developing
world-to take its due place in our Orgahation
as a full
Member. India warmly welcomes and applauds both the
decision of the Council and the manner of its adoption
today.

156. At the Fourth Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Algiers last
year, Bangladesh was warmly embraced as a member of the
non-aligned family, and the Conference called for the
admission of this independent non-aligned country to
membership in the United Nations without delay. It is
indeed gratifying, as the Ambassador of Algeria already
pointed out, that Bangladesh has declared its determination
to continue to adhere to a policy of non-alignment which
has played a positive and constructive role in strengthening national sovereignty and independence and the forces
of peace and stability and social and economic justice and
growth in international relations.

151. We are happy that it was possible to come to this
agreed and unanimous conclusion thanks to the intensive
consultations conducted informally following the request
of Bangladesh for the renewed consideration of the
application for membership that it made originally in 1972.
Our warm tributes go to you, Mr. President, and to your
distinguished predecessor in office, Ambassador Maina of
Kenya, for the skill and the ability, the pragmatism and the
persuasiveness with which you have both guided the
Council towards unanimity on this question.

157. Both Bangladesh and India have made determined
efforts to normalize the relations of all the countries on the
subcontinent, based on mutual trust and understanding,
respect and friendship. The process of conciliation initiated
with the conclusion of the Simla Agreement between India
and Pakistan culminated in the tripartite Agreement concluded on 9 April 1974 between Bangladesh, Pakistan and
India, which affirmed the common resolve of these countries to achieve a friendly and harmonious relationship. We
are dedicated to this cause and renew its expression here.
We believe that it should not be interrupted for any reason
or on any pretext. Challenging tasks lie ahead for all the
three countries in the field of exploitation and harnessing
of resources to meet the legitimate aspirations and needs of
their people for a better life. All the three countries should
now look forward to the consolidation of the new era of
constructive co-operation to achieve peace, progress and
justice for their people. It is not the time to look back or to

152. India welcomes the resolution just adopted, as it will
enable the General Assembly at its forthcoming session to
take a significant step towards giving the United Nations a
more universally representative character, which is so vital
for its effectiveness. Bangladesh has been an independent
sovereign State for some time now. It has been recognized
.’ by over 120 countries from different regions of the world.
It has already made an effective contribution in various
organs and specialized agencies of the United Nations of
which it has been a member for some time now. Its
presence in our Organization as a full Member is indeed
overdue.
153. Since its inception it not only has expressed its
willingness and enthusiasn about abiding by the Charter of
15

cling to the hangover of the past but the time to look
forward, to look ahead, to forge such eo-operation and
friendship, which will be to the maximum good and welfare
of the people of the subcontinent.

efforts and the efforts of all great nations in that area will
now be directed, in close and fruitful co-operation, towards
the common goals of mankind in prosperity and peace.
167. The occasion which we are observing today provides
a justified optimism on our part, opt&m
for-a more
concerted action by the third world, optimism for a deeper
participation by the subcontinent in all causespertaining to
world peace, development and security, and, above all,,
optimism for well-being which should prevail among all the.
peoples of the subcontinent as a result of this coma
mendable step of harmonization and amicability.

158. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Sknch): The
next name on the list of speakers is that of the representative of Egypt. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
159. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt): Mr. President, it
would be remiss on my part if I did not hasten to extend
my congratulations to you on your assuming the high office
of the presidency of the Security Council for this month. It
is my firm conviction that the Council will benefit
immeasurably from your renowned wisdom and experience.

168. The identification of the problems beleaguering that
vital part of our globe makes it all the more pertinent to
eliminate all sources of tensions, a step which should be
concomitant to eliminating destitution and misery which
have for long impeded the third world in approaching-the
thresholds of advancement and prosperity.

160. Likewise, I wish to pay tribute to Ambassador Maina
of Kenya who very ably and competently steered the vital
deliberations of this Council in a most constructive and
commendable manner last May.

169. The admission of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh should herald a new era in international relations free
from alienation but imbued with fraternity and cooperation.

161. Having said that, I should like to emphasize the fact
that Egypt is second to none in rejoicing at the recommendation for the admission of the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh to United Nations membership. The resolution
adopted by the Council to this effect has in fact realized a
sentiment of normal expectation which wasentertained by
all those who wish to see this Organization a genuine and
ubiquitous reflection of all the human community.

170. Time and again the United Nations demonstrates that
only within its framework and solely emanating from its
Charter can all disputes be solved and differences accommodated. The United Nations is the haven of all those who
strive to resolve their disparities by means of international
law and justice.
.

162. Egypt, which takes pride in being one of the
founding Members of the United Nations, feels today-as a
new Member is about to be ushered into the Organizationthat the momentum which started in 1945 is ceaselessly
functioning, that the imagerof the United Nations is not
eroding but, fortunately, acquiring more solidity and
approaching further towards wider universality.

171. On behalf of the Egyptian people and Government,
my delegation welcomes the soon to be ne-w:Member,
wishing the people and Government of Bangladesh all the
.prosperity and progress of which they are worthy.
172. ln concluding, I should like to express to you,
Mr. President, and through you to the members of the
Council, my indebtedness and profound thanks for granting
me the opportunity of addressing the Council,

163. Egypt will be particularly gratified to see the People’s
Republic of Bangladesh become a Member of the United
Nations because such step not only will enhance the
Afro-Asian Solidarity Movement and the non-aligned movement, but also should have a significant impact on the
contribution of these movements.

173. The PRESIDENT (interpretation porn Rench): I call
now on the last speaker on the list, the representative of
Bhutan. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

164. Indeed, the second Islamic Summit Conference
recognized this elementary dimension by stating, in its
Declaration of 25 February 1974, adopted at L.&ore, the
“determination to preserve and promote solidarity and to
resolve the differences through peaceful means in a fraternal spirit”.

174. Mr. TSHERING (Bhutan): Mr. President, thank you
for giving me this opportunity. My delegation is taking the
floor in this Council for the first time, and I hope that you
will allow me to extend to you, and through you to the
members of the Council, the warmest good wishes of my
delegation.

165. It was Egypt’s privilege to take part in the prominent
role played by friendly countries during the last years, in
order to restore peace in the Indian subcontinent and the
brotherly relations between the peoples of Pakistan and the
People’s Republic of Bangladesh.

175. The Security Council, by adopting the decision to
recommend to the General Assembly that it should admit
the People’s Republic of Bangladesh into the family of the
United Nations has fulfilled the cherished hopes and
aspimtions not only of the 75 million .people of &ngladesh
but also of those nations which supported the legitimate
right of Bangladesh to be seated in this great Organization.
On this occasion my delegation welcomes the important
decision just taken by the Council.

166. We should like to hail the statesmanship of the great
leaders of India, Pakistan and Bangladesh, and their
determined willingness to pursue the path of conciliation
and co-operation. We hope and indeed expect that their
16

.

176. We aho wish to compliment the leaders of the
subcontinent on their courage and vision, and we hope that
it will continue to prevail in the interest of a durable peace
in the region.

183. The PRESIDENT (interprefarion from Bench): I call
now on the representative of China, who has asked to speak
in exercise ,of his right of reply.
184. Mr. CHUANG Yen (China) (translation from
Chinese): In their speeches, some representatives attempted
to provoke a controversial debate by mentioning what they
called “artificial obstacles” and the need for the earlier
admission of Bangladesh to membership in the United
Nations. I would like to point out here that those who
obstructed the relaxation of the situation on the South
Asian subcontinent and an earlier solution of the question
of Bangladesh’s admission into the United Nations were
none other than the outside forces that had been engaged in
aggression and in wanton intervention in the affairs of the
South Asian subcontinent for their own expansionist aims
and that had obstinately obstructed the earlier implementation of the relevant United Nations resolutions so as to
maintain and aggravate the tension in the subcontinent and
fish in troubled waters. Their schemes have repeatedly been
frustrated by the concerted resistance of the peoples of the
South Asian subcontinent and the people of the numerous
third world countries. Consequently, as pointed out by
many representatives, this has led to theimplementation
of
the relevant General Assembly and Security Council resolutions and the emergence of a new situation on the South
Asian subcontinent.

177. Bhutan has warm and cordial relations with its close
neighbour, Bangladesh. We welcomed the emergence of
Bangladesh as an independent sovereign State. We extended
our sympathy and support to the people of Bangladesh
during their days of struggle and we are happy today that
we were one of the first to recognize the reality of
Bangladesh, a reality which has now been recognized by
almost all the nations of the world.
178. Ever since its emergence as an independent and
sovereign State, the people and Government of Bangladesh
committed themselves to peace, not only with their
neighbours but also with all friendly countries. It is
therefore natural that today we are working towards
establishing co-operation in all the fields. These happy
developments derived not only from the geographical
proximity, but also from our common heritage of concern
for human dignity and our desire for co-operation. In this
regard His Majesty the Ring, in May 1973, while welcoming
the first Ambassador of Bangladesh to Bhutan, had stated:
“Of the many links of history, trade and geography that
bind us together, may I add that we share a pressing
common goal, namely, that of working through a policy
of non-alignment to achieve a durable peace in our region
as a whole, in order to ensure the security of our
countries, and thereby enable us to concentrate our
efforts and our resources in promoting the welfare of our
peoples. I hope that our two Governments will work
closely together in the pursuit of this vital goal.”

185. In our opinion, judging from past experience and the
present reality, it remains the joint militant task of the
peoples of the South Asian subcontinent and the people of
the numerous third world countries to maintain vigilance
against super-Power expansionism and hegemony.
186. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from I+ench): I call
on the representative of the Soviet Union.

179. The common aspirations for co-operation and friendship were further strengthened by the gracious presence of
the President of Bangladesh, His Excellency Mr. Mohammedullah, at the recent Coronation of His Majesty Jigme
Singye Wangchuk, which was held in Thimphu from 2 to 4
June 1974. This historic occasion in the modem history of
Bhutan has been graced by the presence of the President of
India, the Chogyal of Sikkim and many other representativeS
from the friendly countries including the representatives of the five permanent members of this Council.

187. Mr. MABIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translatiqn from Russian): I should like to make a few
remarks, not as a response or reply to any statement, but
simply by way of clarification and explanation. Delaying
the admission
of Bangladesh to the United Nations has not
in any way contributed to or facilitated agreement between
the three States of the South Asian subcontinent. Of this
we are deeply convinced.~ On the contrary, it has complicated the process of reconciliation, and the admission of
the People’s Republic of Bangladesh to the United Nations
when the first application was made in August 1972 would
have greatly simplified this complex and difficult task.

180. The people of Bhutan have great admiration for the
people of Bangladesh for their endurance, perseverance and
ability.

188. The PRESIDENT (ifitepretation fkom French): If no
other member wishes to speak at this time, I shall take it
that the debate on the item of our agenda is concluded. It
only remains for me to thank members of the Council for
their co-operation, which has enabled us to conclude this
debate happily. I also wish to express my gratitude to the
representative of Bangladesh, who has shown complete
co-operation and understanding. I wish him every successin
the duties that await him here at the United Nations.

181. There can be no doubt that the representatives of
Bangladesh will make important contributions across the
whole range of this Organization’s activities. Under the
leadership of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, the
people and the Government of Bangladesh have already
demonstrated their ability and determination to work
towards prosperity and peace.
182. Let me conclude by stating that we look forward to
welcoming the delegation of Bangladesh to the General
Assembly this fall and to working in close co.operation
with it.

189. Before adjourning the meeting, I should like to
inform members of the Security Council that on 5 June
1974 the SecretaryGeneral received a letter &ted 30 May
17

’

from the Prime Minister of Grenada, with a formal request
that Grenada be admitted to membership in the United.
Nations. The letter is accompanied by a formal declaration
to the effect that the Government of Grenada accepts the
obligations enunciated in the United Nations Charter and
solemnly commits itself to fulfi them. The text of the

Litho in United Nations, New York

letter and the declaration appear in document S/l 1311. I
intend to hold appropriate consultations with members of
the Council and I hope the Council will be able to consider
this application for membership in the near future.
The meeting rose at 1.30 pm

Price: $U.S. 1.00 (or equivalent in other currencies)

74-820764une

1975-2.050
