TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR
th

MEETING: 11 AUGUST 1969
NEW

YORK

<CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1496) . . , . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . .

Page

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . - 1
The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 24 July 1969 from the representatives of Chile, Colombia, Guyana,
India, Indonesia, Nigeria, Pakistan, the United Arab Republic, Turkey,
Yugoslavia and Zambia addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/9359) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

I

SIPV. 1496

FOURTEEN HUNDRED AND NINETY-SIXTH MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 11 August 1969, at 3 p.m.
President: Mr. Jaime DE PINIES (Spain).

extended to the Secretary-Generalon his return. We are
indeedvery happy to seehim with usagain.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
P&&an, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.

4. I now turn to the item on our agenda.The question
before usis a seriousone: seriousin itself andseriousin its
implicationsfor the future of this Counciland of our whole
Organization.
5. My delegationhasmadeclearon a numberof occasions
the attitude of my Governmentto the developmentswhich
havebeentaking placein the Territory. Webelieveaboveall
that the peopleof South WestAfrica shouldbe enabledto
exercisethe right of free and full self.determination.We
believe that South Africa hasnot been administeringthe
Territory in accordancewith the Mandate originally entrusted to it, Webelievethat South Africa has indeedforfeited the right to administer this Mandate over the
Territory.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 496)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in Namibia:

Letter dated24 July 1969 from the representatives
of
Chile, Colombia, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Nigeria,
Pakistan,the United Arab Republic, Turkey, Yugoslavia
and Zambiaaddressedto the Presidentof the Security
Council(S/9359).

6. My delegationhasrepeatedlyexpres@sed
its repugnance
for the TerrorismAct, which we considerto be offensiveto
the principleswhich shouldunderliethe framingof criminal
legislation.Wehave expressed
particularabhorrencefor the
retrospectivenature of this law, a law which carriesthe
penalty of death. We have sharedthe universal concern
about the trials of South West Africans which have been
conductedunder this legislation.We have made clear our
views on this matter to the Governmentof South Africa
and we demonstratedour concernby sendingobserversto
thesetrials.

Adoption of the agenda
Theagendawasadopted.
The situation in Namibia
Letter dated 24 July 1969 from the representativesof
Chile,Colombia,Guyana, India, Indonesia,Nigeria,Pakistan, the United Arab Republic, Turkey, Yugoslaviaand
Zambia addressedto the President of the Security
Council(S/9359)

7. In previous statementsin this Council my delegation
hasexpressedits concernat the extensionto the Territory
of the evil practicesof apartheidand hasfurther set out in
detail its objectionsto the notoriousHomelands
legislation
which has extended the systemof Bantustansto South
WestAfrica.

1. The PRESIDENT (translatedfrom Spanish):In accordancewith the Council’spreviousdecision,I shallnow invite
the representativesof Chile and India to take placesat the
Counciltable,

At the President’sinvitation, Mr. F. Zegers(Chile) and
Mr. A. Gonsabes(India) took placesat the Council table.

8. At the sametime we have consistentlyexpressedour
2. The PRESIDENT (translatedfrom Spanish):The Coun- concernat the courseof action which the United Nations
has followed. Our differences, as we have emphasized
cil will now continue its considerationof the questionof
throughout, are about means,not about ends.Quite apart
Namibia.
from our seriousdoubts in regardto the legal basis,we
3. Mr. HILDYARD (United Kingdom): Mr. President,may
believethat the courseof action followed will in practice
I first of all associatemy delegation with the congratu- lead nowhere.It will not advancethe causeof the peopleof
lations which have been expressed to you on your
South West Africa and indeed the only people who will
assumptionof the Presidencyof this Council. We all know
take comfort and encouragement
will be the Government
Yourlong experienceof the United Nations andappreciate of South Africa. Speakingin the General Assemblythe
the outstandingqualitieswhich you have shown.May I also United KingdomPermanentRepresentative,
Lord Caradon,
join in the tributes which have been paid to Ambassador said:
BOYeof Senegal,who presidedover our affairs last month
“ . . . we had an obligation not only to the people of
with such great ability and energy. Finally may I also
South West Africa but to the United Nationsitself. We
associate
my delegationwith the warmwelcomewhich you
1

17. I now turn to the subject on our agenda.The position
of the United States on the question of Namibiais clear.
The United States supportedGeneralAssemblyresolution
2145 (XXI) of 27 October 1966 becauseSouth Africa, by
its actions,in the former Mandated Territory of South West
Africa, had failed to fulfil its obligations.Weagreedthat, in
consequence,the old League of Nations Mandate was
terminated, South Africa had no other right to administer
the Territory, and South West Africa cameunderthe direct
responsibilityof the United Nations. The United Statesalso
supported Security Council resolutions 245 (1968) and
246 (1968), and most importantly, resolution 264(1969)
of 20 March.

had, and we still have, an obligation not to raise false
hopes by hasty or ineffective methods, not to deceive
ourselves or anyone else by shutting our eyes to practical
barriers, not to imagine that those barriers can be
overcome by words alone . . .“I
9. All along we have urged that the United Nations must
act within its capacity and that the adoption of resolutions
which are ineffective and inoperative cannot serve the
interests of the people of the Territory. It can only help to
increase their indifference and disillusion; it can only
aggravate the divisions between us; and it can benefit only
South Africa.
10. In his statement to the General Assembly on 26
September 1967 the then Foreign Secretary said that the
United Kingdom Government have always made it clear
that they cannot and will not now contemplate an
economic war with South Africa.2 Lord Caradon repeated
again in this Council that the United Kingdom would not
be prepared to agree to commitments under Chapter VII of
the Charter in this regard. We know that the same is true of
other permanent members of this Council and of South
Africa’s other main trading partners.

18. In resolution 264 (1969), the Security Councilfor the
first time formally endorsed the historic action of the
General Assembly and called upon the Government of
South Africa to withdraw immediately its administration
from the Territory. In accordancewith paragraph7 of that
resolution, my Government approachedthe Republic of
South Africa to urge compliance with the strongly held
views of an overwhelmingmajority of the international
community. I regretto report that the efforts of the United
States have thus far met with negative resultssimilar to
those reported by the Secretary-Generalin document
s/9204.3

Il. When it comes to action we cannot act beyond our
capacity. We cannot go further than the measure of
agreement that exists between us. We all know that there is
no chance of agreement on effective measures against South
Africa such as are envisaged in Chapter VII of the Charter.
It is all very well to dismiss as inadequate some of the
limited proposals which have been put forward. Is it really
better to give to those who may look to us the impression
that we can accomplish things which we all know that in
practice we cannot accomplish?

19. There is virtual unanimity in the Council as to the
situation which has given rise to the complaintbefore us.
There is general agreementamong us that South Africa
remainsin the Territory illegally. There is generalconcern
that South Africa hasnot lived up to its solemnobligations,
either to the Namibiansor to the international community,
to foster conditions under which the people of the
Territory can exercisetheir right to self-determinationor
independence.

12. My delegation believes that the path so far followed
has been mistaken and does not believe that this Council
should take further steps along that path. We remain ready,
however, to join in a common search to see if there is not
another, more hopeful line which the United Nations could
follow.

20. Indeed, far from fulfilling its obligations,the illegal
occupying authority has proceededunilaterally to create
so-calledHomelandsin pursuit of its policy of virtual
annexation. It hascompoundedthis evil by applyingto this
international Territory the odious practice of apartheid,
with all of the miserablehuman consequences
that that
practice entails. And, to enforce its unlawful authority, it
has continued to conduct arrestsand trials of South West
Africans under the infamous Terrorism Act. An unknown
number of Namibiansremain under indefinite detention
under the Act. Thus South Africa introduces into a
Territory where it hasno right to governthe worst features
of that racially discriminatory rule which is its own
unhappy trade mark,

13. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): I wish to
thank the representative of the United Kingdom for the
kind words he addressed to me at the beginning of his
statement.
14. Mr. YOST (United States of America): May I first,
Mr, President, welcome you to your high responsibilities as
our presiding officer. We know that you will direct our
deliberations with the skill, sympathetic consideration and
impartiality for which you have been known for so many
years at the United Nations.

21. Those are the essentialfacts of the state of affairs in
Namibia. On those facts, and their causes,there is no
significant difference between the view of my Government
and those of the previousspeakerson thisissue.The honest
differences that do arise rather concern what steps or
measureswe can now most appropriately take. When
resolution 264 (1969) was adopted, I explainedin these
words why the United Stateshad beenable to support it:

15. I should also like to join my colleagues in expressing
appreciation to Ambassador Boye for the outstanding
fashion in which he presided over this Council last month.
16. Finally, I should like to join in welcoming the
Secretary-General back to our midst and expressing our
very great satisfaction at his prompt recovery.

“The United Statesis able to support the text of the
draft resolution before us becauseit wisely does not

1 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Special
Session, Plenary Meetings, 1504th meeting,
para.150.
2 Ibid., Twenty-second Session, Plenary Meetings, 1567th meeting,para.102.

3 See Official Records of the Security Council, WentY-fourth
Year, Supplement for April, May and June 1969.

2

I

’

commit the Council to the narrow path of mandatory
sanctions under Chapter VII of the Charter. As we have
repeatedly made clear, we believe it would be inappropriate in this situation to consider measures contained in
Chapter VII. In our judgement, this is not a situation
which can sensibly and humanely be remedied by
mandatory sanctions.” /146.5th meeting, para. 15.1

with other flagrantviolationsof the purposes
and principles
of the Chartersuchasthat which is occurringin Namibia.It
should be our constant endeavour to strengthen our
Organization so that it will be ableto do so. It would not
serve this purpose,however, if we were prematurely to
imposeupon the United Nationsburdenswhich it is still
incapableof carrying, to demandthat it fulfil taskswhich
we Member Stateshave not yet collectively @.venit the
power to fulfil. For us to do so in this case,far from
ensuring the compliance of South Africa with Utiited
Nations decisions,would, I fear, more probably demonstrate in evenmoreconspicuous
fashionthe inability of our
Organization, at its presentstageof evolution and growth,
to carry out vast enforcementmeasures
of a sort which
public opinion in many States is not yet prepared to
support.

22. Our view as to the wisdom and efficacy of action
under Chapter VII of the Charter remains unchanged.
23. I have listened with attention to the eloquent stateaeats by previous speakers who have, with justified
indignation, charged South Africa with disregard of more
than ninety resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council on this sub.ject. These speakers maintain
that the time has come for the Council to compel
compliance with previous resolutions by adopting measures
under Chapter VII, such as mandatory sanctions.

28. Let USnot, I beg of you, even though impelledby
honestand legitimateindignation,subjectour Organization
to testswhich we ourselves
havenot yet preparedit to meet
and overcome.Let us in comingyearsfind meansand will
to give it the necessarycollective strengthand authority,
but let us not in the meantimeconfusethe goalwe seek
with the reality we face.

24. In all sincerity, my Government still cannot support
that view, Tragic and deplorable though the existing state
of affairs in Namibia is, my Government still would not
consider that in present circumstances the application of
international sanctions in this case would be wise or
effective. Despite our indignation at the callous behaviour
of the illegitimate occupying authority, we should all be
careful not to embark on an unrealistic course of action
which could have the opposite result from the one we
intend.

29. Thosearethe realitiesto which my Governmentfeels
obligedto call attention, unpleasantthough they are to all
of us who opposeSouth Africa’s policy. There are many
wrongs and injusticesin the world which, unfortunately,
cannot be corrected quickly; and wrongsof racismand
colonialismin southernAfrica are amongthem. This is no
causefor despair.The evils we face are stubbornbut they
arenot eternal.

25. It has not been demonstrated to the satisfaction of my
Government that the application of sanctions under Chapter VII would induce South Africa to abandon its present
policy in Namibia or elsewhere, As long ago as March 1965,
the Council received, at its request, a thorough report on
this subject by a committee of experts who concluded that
South Africa, while not immune to damage from economic
sanctions, “would not be readily susceptible” to such
measures. The experts commented in particular on “the
psychological effects of these measures” along with “South
Africa’s present economic capacity to withstand such
measures and the will of its people to do so” [S/6210and
Add.l.14.

30. Our oppositionto them shouldbe steadfast.There are
ways availableto this Council,andto eachof usasMember
States, to expressthat opposition. We can and should
continue to assertthe responsibilityof the United Nations
for Namibia. We should observeeventsthere closely and
inform the world fully and candidly on what is taking
place. We should keep the pressureof world opinion
focusedon the actionsof the illegaloccupyingauthority in
violation of the Charter, of GeneralAssemblyresolution
2145 (XXI) and the other relevant resolutions of the
United Nations. We should unswervingly insist on the
application to Namibia of the standardsof the Charter
concerningthe right of dependentTerritories to self-determination and independence.All of our Governments,
moreover, are free to take whatever further action is
permitted by their constitutionalprocesses
to expresstheir
cognizance of the illegitimacy of the South African
presencein Namibia and hence of the illegality of all
actionsand transactionscarried out in Namibiaunder the
authority, the lawsandthe regulationsof South Africa.

26. Nothing in the intervening four years gives ground for
any brighter prognosis than that of 1965 which I have just
cited. On the contrary, there is strong reason to doubt that
such measures would be effective either economically or
politically. Their economic effect could be considerably
offset, especially in the short run, by rationing or redeploy
merit of resources within South Africa; and, in the long run,
would further.depend on how long present and potential
trading partners could be expected to co-operate with a
sanctions programme. As for their political effect, such
sanctions could well operate as a catalyst, crystallizing
public opinion within South Africa against United Nations
decisions on Namibia and producing further defiance rather
than co-operation.

31. In this connexion my Government continuesin its
bilateral relationsto call the attention of the Government
of South Africa to what the United Statesconsidersto be
the illegal application of its domesticlegislation to the
Territory of Namibia.Most recently, we haveprotestedthe
application of clauses10 and 29, the so-called“Boss”
clauses,of the GeneralLaw AmendmentAct of 1969. We
have also made clear our concern at the. continued
application of the Terrorism Act of 1967 to Namibia as

27. Al1 of us most earnestly desire that the United Nations
acquire the capability to deal more effectively not only
with threats to international peace and security but also
41bid., Twentieth Year, Special Supplement No. 2, para.13..

3

evidenced by the current trial at Windhoek. We have
continued to reiterate our concern as to the South West
African Affairs Act of 1969, the Homelands Act, and
indeed the application to Namibia of all legislation inconsistent with the rights of the people of Namibia under the
Covenant of the League of Nations, the Mandate Agreement, and Chapters IX and XI of the United Nations
Charter.
32. I realize full well that the considerations I have
outlined will not commend themselves to al1 members of
this Council. I entirely share their wish that there were
more we could effectively do. I submit to the Council,
however, that a continued assertion by this body of our
unequivocal and unrelenting condemnation of the violation
of the Charter in Namibia, coupled with whatever voluntary
steps Member States may deem it possible to take,
constitutes the most promising means of realizing our
common objectives.
33, Proposals for more drastic action, however appealing
they may seem at first blush, can in fact divide the Council,
prove ineffectual, and operate to the detriment both of the
people of Namibia and of the United Nations. Let us avoid
that unhappy result and, instead, emphasize that which
unites us and, since it demonstrates our united resolution, is
most likely to convince South Africa that it cannot stand
for ever alone.
34. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): I wish to
thank the representative of the United States for the kind
words he addressed to me in the course of his statement.
35. If no other member of the Council wishes to speak at
this time, I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of SPAIN.
36. The question of Namibia is not new to this Council.
Last March we met at the request of a large number of
countries which asked the Council to exi.nine the tense
situation created in Namibia by the attitude of the South
African authorities. The’ position of my delegation was
clearly set forth at that time (143th
meeting/, as it had
been previously when we voted in favour of General
Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27 October 1966,
which declared South Africa’s Mandate over South West
Africa terminated, and resolution 2248 (S-V), which established the United Nations Council for South West Africa,5
to which the United Nations entrusted some powers and
functions necessary to carry on the administration of the
Territory until the people of Namibia achieved complete
independence.
37. Last March, my delegation paid a tribute in this
Council to the tireless and extremely difficult work of the
United Nations Council for Namibia in its effort to be equal
to the important mission entrusted to it by the General
Assembly. \ire shall not therefore repeat the reasons which
led my delegation to vote in favour of those resolutions,
5 See Official
Session, Plenary

Records
Meetings,

of ihe
1517th

General

Assembly,

Fifth

meeting,paras. 76-86.

and of Security Council resolution 264 (1969) ratifying
what the General Assembly had laid down when it had
assumed responsibility for the effective implementation of
those provisions.
38. However, the situation in the territory of Namibia has
not improved. The Security CounciI has again been convened at the request of a large number of countries which
are gravely concerned by the attitude of the authorities of
South Africa toward the people of Namibia and toward this
Organization. The Government of South Africa has not
only failed to comply with Security Council resolution
264 (1969), but has declared itself unwilling to comply
with it and has even denied the very competence of the
Council to deal with the problem of Namibia. This Council
cannot allow its authority to be disregarded, its competence
denied, and its resolutions to go unimplemented; nor can
the United Nations, at this moment of international crisis
and tension, permit its authority and prestige to be dealt
yet another blow on a matter which has so far brought it
only bitter frustrations. It is the grave responsibility of this
Council and of every country now a member of it to see to
it that the Government of South Africa heeds the voice of
the international community, which is the voice of reason
and the voice of the period of history in which it is our
fortune to Iive.
39. My delegation would therefore be prepared to support
a draft resolution which, again affirming the authority and
responsibility of the Security Council, censured the failure
of the South African authorities to comply with resolution
264(1969). That resolution reaffirms, beyond all doubt,
that the United Nations has terminated the Maridate of
South Africa over Namibia and has assumed direct responsibility for the Territory until its independence. Consequently, the presence of the authorities of South Africa in
Namibia is illegal and must cease.
40. My delegation feels it would be advisable to enjoin the
authorities of South Africa to change their attitude; and
perhaps it would not be out of place, to set a deadline for
the withdrawal of South Africa’s administration from the
Territory, an administration which the South African
authorities are at present exercising counter to the provisions of the resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council. If, despite this new appeal, the deadline
should be reached without South Africa’s having taken
account of the provisions of the resolution which the
Security Council may eventually adopt, this body must
again meet without delay to consider the adoption of
appropriate measures to compel South Africa to comply
with the obligations it has assumed toward the United
Nations and the international community,
41. Acting now in my capacity as PRESIDENT of the
Council, I shall give the floor to any other representative
who wishes to speak. There being no other speakers, I shall
adjourn the meeting and convene the Council for the next
meeting, to take place tomorrow, Tuesday, at 3.30 p.m.

Special
The

meeting rose at 4.14 p.m.
