A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/55
12 February 1998

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 84
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/52/614)]
52/55.

Effects of atomic radiation

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 913 (X) of 3 December 1955, by which it established the United Nations
Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation, and its subsequent resolutions on the subject,
including resolution 51/121 of 13 December 1996, in which, inter alia, it requested the Scientific Committee
to continue its work,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects
of Atomic Radiation,1
Reaffirming the desirability of the Scientific Committee continuing its work,
Concerned about the potentially harmful effects on present and future generations resulting from the
levels of radiation to which mankind and the environment are exposed,
Noting the views expressed by Member States at its fifty-second session with regard to the work of the
Scientific Committee,
Also noting the provisions contained in section XII, paragraph 38, of the annex to its resolution 51/241
of 31 July 1997 on the strengthening of the United Nations system,

1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-second Session, Supplement No. 46 (A/52/46).

98-76273

/...

A/RES/52/55
Page 2

Conscious of the continuing need to examine and compile information about atomic and ionizing
radiation and to analyse its effects on mankind and the environment,
1. Commends the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation for the
valuable contribution it has been making in the course of the past forty-two years, since its inception, to
wider knowledge and understanding of the levels, effects and risks of atomic radiation, and for fulfilling its
original mandate with scientific authority and independence of judgement;
2. Requests the Scientific Committee to continue its work, including its important activities to increase
knowledge of the levels, effects and risks of ionizing radiation from all sources;
3. Endorses the intentions and plans of the Scientific Committee for its future activities of scientific
review and assessment on behalf of the General Assembly;
4. Requests the Scientific Committee to continue at its next session the review of the important
problems in the field of radiation and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its fifty-third session;
5. Requests the United Nations Environment Programme to continue providing support for the effective
conduct of the work of the Scientific Committee and for the dissemination of its findings to the General
Assembly, the scientific community and the public;
6. Expresses its appreciation for the assistance rendered to the Scientific Committee by Member
States, the specialized agencies, the International Atomic Energy Agency and non-governmental organizations,
and invites them to increase their cooperation in this field;
7. Welcomes, in this context, the readiness of Member States to provide the Scientific Committee with
relevant information on the effects of atomic radiation in affected areas, and invites the Scientific Committee
to analyse and give due consideration to such information, particularly in the light of its own findings;
8. Invites Member States, the organizations of the United Nations system and non-governmental
organizations concerned to provide further relevant data about doses, effects and risks from various sources
of radiation, which would greatly help in the preparation of future reports of the Scientific Committee to the
General Assembly;
9. Invites the International Atomic Energy Agency and the World Health Organization to consider the
functions and role of the Scientific Committee and to submit a recommendation to the General Assembly at
its fifty-third session, and, meanwhile, requests the Scientific Committee to submit its report to the
International Atomic Energy Agency and the World Health Organization, as well as to the General Assembly,
which will consider the report together with the evaluation of the report by the International Atomic Energy
Agency and the World Health Organization.
69th plenary meeting
10 December 1997
