S/2014/857

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 November 2014
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the
Central African Republic
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2149
(2014), by which the Council established the United Nations Multidime nsional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and
requested me to report to the Council every four months starting on 1 August 2014.
The report provides an update on the situation in the Central African Republic since
my report of 1 August (S/2014/562). It also provides an update on the transfer of
authority from the African-led International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic (MISCA) to MINUSCA on 15 September and on the implementation of
the MINUSCA mandate.

II. Major developments
A.

Security, human rights and humanitarian developments
2.
The security situation in the Central African Republic remains highly volatile.
Frequent clashes among armed groups or criminal elements and attacks against
civilians continue. Fragmentation, internal leadership struggles and the lack of
command-and-control authority within the anti-balaka and among ex-Séléka
factions were accompanied by continued clashes between and amo ng those armed
groups in Bangui and other parts of the country. The human rights situation remains
serious, with numerous cases of human rights violations and abuses, including
killings, lootings, the destruction of property, violations of physical integri ty and
restrictions on freedom of movement. Throughout the country, widespread
insecurity, threats of violence and gross human rights violations committed by
armed elements continue to adversely affect the dire humanitarian situation facing
the civilian population.
3.
Following a relative improvement in the security situation, particularly in the
capital, the reporting period saw a resurgence of violence largely driven by
anti-balaka elements in Bangui from 7 to 16 October. The violence was sparked by
the killing of a man believed to have been a member of the ex-Séléka who had
thrown a hand grenade into a crowded market area. The incident rapidly escalated
into a series of reprisal attacks in which 11 civilians died and 229 civilians were

14-65265 (E)

021214

*1465265*

S/2014/857

injured from both Christian and Muslim communities. MINUSCA, the European
Union Force in the Central African Republic and the French Operation Sang aris
forces were also targeted.
4.
An additional 7,500 people were displaced during the fighting, with 1,600
refugees crossing into the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Most of the reported
cases of human rights violations are believed to have been perpetrated by anti -balaka
elements. On 11 October, a MINUSCA intervention pre-empted an attack by some
100 armed anti-balaka elements on the residence of the Head of State of the
Transition, Catherine Samba-Panza.
5.
In a separate incident in Bangui, on 11 November ex-Séléka elements that had
regrouped in Camp Béal and Camp BSS launched protests claiming, inaccurately,
that the transitional authorities had planned to close the camps at the end of
November in accordance with agreements reached earlier in the year on the
relocation of ex-Séléka elements from three sites in Bangui. The following day, the
situation escalated when armed ex-Séléka elements took positions in front of Camp
Béal and threatened to explode a significant ammunition stock in the camps.
Discussions between the ex-Séléka and the transitional authorities facilitated by
MINUSCA resulted in the return of the elements to the camp pending an agreement
on future arrangements.
6.
Outside of Bangui, a continuous cycle of provocations and reprisals by armed
groups, either politically or criminally motivated, continued to adversely affect the
safety and security of civilians. Daily security-related incidents involving armed
groups reflect the deepening conflict between groups affiliated with the anti -balaka
and the ex-Séléka, as well as competition within the factions of those groups. Other
reported incidents resulted from attacks against civilians by unidentified armed
groups or opportunistic criminal elements.
7.
In Ouaka Province, the situation continued to be marked by anti -balaka and
ex-Séléka attacks. On 22 September, in Bambari, the Deputy Mayor of
Kochiotoulou-Ngakobo, Ngaza Fidèle, was reportedly killed by four ex-Séléka
elements. On 9 October, anti-balaka elements reportedly ambushed a vehicle
transporting ex-Séléka elements on the Bambari-Gassimé axis, killing six
occupants. On 15 October, ex-Séléka elements reportedly killed one woman and two
children in Bambari, as well as two young men in Kouango and two others in
Bangao on 18 October, suspecting them of being anti-balaka elements or supporters.
These incidents pushed the local population to flee the area, some crossing the
border into the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
8.
The situation in Ouham and Nana-Grébizi provinces, especially in Batangafo
and Kaga Bandoro, remained tense and fragile owing to the activities of elements of
the anti-balaka, the ex-Séléka and other armed groups. On 24 September, following
the arrest of one anti-balaka element by villagers, a group of anti-balaka elements
attacked the village of Mbata, in Nana-Grébizi, reportedly killing 10 civilians,
burning 11 houses and taking four hostages. On 2 October, a group of around
20 suspected ex-Séléka elements attacked the locality of Boguila on the Batangafo Boguila axis, reportedly killing five people and burning and looting several houses,
including a medical centre. On 19 October, in the Morobanda area of Kaga Bandoro,
16 km from Mbrès, a confrontation between ex-Séléka and anti-balaka elements left
two persons dead, while another confrontation between the two groups on
27 October resulted in at least one death. Moreover, the two provinces witnesse d

2/18

14-65265

S/2014/857

violence committed by other armed groups, perceived to be of Fulani origin. The
most violent case involved the attack by a group of armed Fulani on the village of
Morobadja, 18 km from Mbrès, on 24 October; the attack reportedly resulted in four
dead civilians and five burned-down houses. On 29 September, armed Fulani
herdsmen reportedly killed a woman and destroyed farms in the village of
Bougourou, 10 km from Batangafo, Ouham Province.
9.
The border area between the Central African Republic and Cameroon saw a
resurgence of attacks on villages by the Front démocratique du peuple centrafricain
(FDPC). On 14 September, FDPC elements reportedly abducted 10 persons in Nana Mambéré Province, demanding the release of their leader, Abdoulaye Miskine, who
was imprisoned in Cameroon. On 20 September, the same group kidnapped an
additional 12 persons in a village in Cameroon, near the border. On 13 October,
FDPC reportedly kidnapped two Polish priests in Baboua parish, in Nana -Mambéré
Province, one of whom later escaped. Efforts by the Government of the Central
African Republic to negotiate the release of the hostages, including through contact
with the Government of Cameroon to gain access to Miskine, have so far been
unsuccessful.
10. The presence of foreign and transborder armed groups in the region continued
to pose a threat to civilians and to be a cause of insecurity; incidents of abductions
and killings were reported. In the locality of Lima, Haute -Kotto Province, elements
of the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) reportedly kidnapped women and children,
including among ex-Séléka factions and the anti-balaka. In September and October,
there were seven LRA attacks resulting in 1 person killed and 22 kidnapped.
11. Separately, on 7 November, following a request by the Central African
authorities and on the basis of Security Council resolution 2181 (2014), the
European Council of Ministers extended the mandate of the European Union Force
in the Central African Republic until 15 March 2015.
12. The humanitarian situation remained critical throughout the country. In
Bangui, more than 6,000 Muslims continued to live under very difficult conditions,
with limited access to commerce or basic public services, including medical care,
especially in the PK-5 neighbourhood. The humanitarian situation worsened in the
wake of the violence that took place in almost all districts of the city from 7 to
16 October. The risk of attacks against civilians and those requiring humanitarian
assistance, as well as the direct targeting of humanitarian workers continued to limit
and, in some cases, prevent such workers from responding to the crisis, thereby
negatively affecting the delivery of life-saving assistance and civilian protection
efforts. By mid-November, there were approximately 410,000 internally displaced
people in the country, of whom 62,500 were in Bangui and 347,500 in the
provinces. More than 420,000 Central Africans have sought refuge in neighbouring
countries. An emergency food security assessment carried out by the World Food
Programme found that 28 per cent of the Central African population is experiencing
food insecurity. Some 1.2 million Central Africans r equire humanitarian assistance.

B.

Political developments
13. Heightened tension among key national actors, the tenuous security situation
and the transitional authorities’ continued lack of capacity to provide basic services
to the population posed serious challenges to the transition. The violence in Bangui

14-65265

3/18

S/2014/857

in October further weakened the transitional authorities’ ability to govern effectively
and lead the country to a successful completion of the transition.
14. After Prime Minister André Nzapayéké resigned on 5 August, the Head of
State of the Transition appointed as his replacement Mahamat Kamoun, a Muslim
who had served as Chief of Staff under the former Head of State of the Transition
Michel Djotodia and as Director General of the Treasury in the administration of
former President François Bozizé. The ex-Séléka, as well as several main political
parties and civil society leaders, criticized the appointment, citing a lack of
consultation and inclusiveness in the selection process led by the Head of State of
the Transition.
15. On 18 August, the President of the National Transitional Council, Alexandre
Nguendet, led a delegation comprising representatives of political parties and civil
society to Brazzaville for a meeting with the international mediator for the Central
African Republic and President of the Congo, Denis Sassou Nguesso, in an effort to
resolve the concerns regarding Prime Minister Kamoun’s appointment. Upon his
return, Mr. Nguendet called for the formation of a new transitional Government to
be postponed in order to allow for wider consultations.
16. On 22 August, the Office of the Head of State of the Transition announced the
formation of Prime Minister Kamoun’s Government, in which the overall number of
ministers increased from 20 to 31, including representatives of armed groups, civil
society and the country’s 16 provinces. Ex-Séléka members were appointed to three
ministerial posts while two ministers were appointed from the anti -balaka.
Ex-Séléka leaders dissociated themselves from the appointments, however, while
some anti-balaka elements continued to consider that they were not fairly
represented.
17. On 26 September, I convened a high-level meeting on the Central African
Republic in New York, on the margins of the General Assembly debate. The meeting
was attended by the Head of State of the Transition and key national, regional and
international stakeholders at the highest levels. Participants expressed their
commitment to supporting the Central African authorities in their efforts to
undertake an inclusive political process, restore State authority, address the
humanitarian situation, strengthen the judiciary, fight impunity and restore security.
They also commended the work of MISCA, the successful transfer of authority from
MISCA to MINUSCA and the exemplary cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union.
18. In early October, anti-balaka and ex-Séléka leaders began calling for the
resignation of the Head of State of the Transition. The backdrop for these calls was
a growing controversy over the transitional authorities’ accounting for $10 million
that had been donated in March 2014 to the Central African Republic by the
Government of Angola.
19. On 18 October, following nine days of violence in Bangui, the international
mediator for the Central African Republic, Mr. Sassou Ngeusso, dispatched his
Special Envoy and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Congo, Basile Ikouébé, to
Bangui, where he was accompanied by my Special Representative for Central Africa
and Head of the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa and by the
African Union Special Envoy Soumeylou Boubèye Maïga. The international
mediation team held intensive talks in Bangui with the Head of State of the

4/18

14-65265

S/2014/857

Transition, the Prime Minister and the President of the National Transitional
Council. They also took part in a town hall meeting with approximately 200 national
stakeholders, many of whom had participated in the forum on national
reconciliation in the Central African Republic held in Brazzaville from 21 to
23 July. Broad agreement was reached to work in a more peaceful and consensual
manner and to accelerate preparations for the conduct of elections by mid-August
2015. Agreement was also reached on proceeding directly, without prior
consultations, to the forum on national reconciliation to be held in Bangui in
mid-January 2015, the aim of which is to forge a national-level consensus on key
issues such as disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, security sector
reform, including the reconstitution of the Central African armed forces, the rule of
law, and political and economic governance. On 22 October, in an address to the
National Transitional Council, the Head of State of the Transition stressed the
importance of the upcoming Bangui forum and announced that an organizing
committee would be formed to begin preparations in coordination with MINUSCA
and the Geneva-based Centre for Humanitarian Dialogue.
20. On 11 November, the International Contact Group on the Central African
Republic held its sixth meeting in Bangui under the co -chairmanship of the African
Union and the Congo. The opening session took place in the pr esence of the Head of
State of the Transition, who reiterated her call for the establishment of a rapid intervention brigade to work alongside international forces, including to provide
security for the upcoming elections, and emphasized the need for the p rompt
organization of the Bangui forum. The meeting was attended by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Congo (on behalf of the international mediator) and the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Chad (on behalf of the Chair of the Economic
Commission for Central African States (ECCAS)), the African Union Commissioner
for Peace and Security, the President of the National Transitional Council and
authorities of the Central African Republic, as well as some 40 other representatives
of governments and international organizations. In the communiqué issued at the
conclusion of the meeting, participants called upon the transitional authorities to
hold the Bangui forum in January 2015 and the international mediator and President
of the Congo to extend the period of the transition by six months. They also
requested the transitional authorities, as well as the National Electoral Authority, to
urgently take the political, legal, financial and logistical steps required to speed up
the electoral process and facilitate the organization, by August 2015, of legislative
and presidential elections.
21. Political uncertainty, heightened by the violence that took place in October in
Bangui, contributed to shifting political dynamics within the ex -Séléka. New
factions, largely drawn along ethnic lines, emerged. While reinforcing their military
structures, leaders of these factions committed their groups to participating in the
political process, including in the Bangui forum and the elections, and expressed
willingness to comply with article 4 of the cessation-of-hostilities agreement signed
in Brazzaville on 23 July, which calls for the voluntar y regroupment of armed
elements. On 25 October, in Bambari, ex-Séléka leaders General Ali Darrassa
Mahamat and General Mahamat Alkhatim announced the creation of a political
movement called the Union pour la paix en Centrafrique. On 2 November, a
political wing of the ex-Séléka led by Nourredine Adam, the Front populaire pour la
renaissance de Centrafrique (FPRC), convened a general assembly meeting in Kaga
Bandoro. The meeting was attended by some 900 combatants, including a number of

14-65265

5/18

S/2014/857

ex-Séléka field commanders from Bria, Ndélé, Dékoa, Bambari and other areas of
Bamingui-Bongoran and Vakaga provinces. The meeting resulted in a new structure
for FPRC in which, inter alia, Joseph Zoundeko was replaced as Chief of Military
Staff by Arda Hakouma. On 12 November, Zoundeko issued a press release in
Bambari, Ouaka Province, stating that the ordinary general assembly meeting of his
group, the Forces républicaines, would take place on 16 and 17 November in Bria,
Haute-Kotto Province.
Peace process
22. Frustration over the appointment of Prime Minister Kamoun and subsequent
developments in the political process slowed the implementation of the Brazz aville
agreement of 23 July. Not only were there numerous violations of the agreement, it
also proved difficult to implement its provisions, including the one on the voluntary
regroupment of armed groups. In order to support the agreement’s implementation,
a follow-up commission was established in August. The commission was composed
of two representatives of the presidency, two representatives of the transitional
Government, two representatives of the National Transitional Council, one
representative of each of the seven armed groups that had signed the agreement and
representatives of the international community. The commission began meeting in
September under the joint chairmanship of the transitional authorities and the
African Union, with secretariat support provided by MINUSCA, the African Union,
ECCAS and the international mediator. MINUSCA also provided support to the
commission’s technical committee by establishing subcommissions to ensure
understanding of the agreement at the local level and respond to violations of its
terms. The commission has been slow to make decisions and take action on the
implementation of its mandate. Moreover, during the period of violence in Bangui
in October, signatory armed groups temporarily suspended their participation in the
Brazzaville process, including as members of the commission.
Elections
23. Preparations for elections moved forward at a slow pace until the end of
October. On 1 August, strategic and technical-level coordination mechanisms for
political, technical and financial assistance were established, with the participation
of the National Electoral Authority (NEA), MINUSCA and other partners. On
21 August, NEA adopted its rules of procedure, a key milestone towards the
establishment of a fully functional election management body.
24. After agreements were reached between the international mediator and the
transitional authorities at the end of October, the United Nations, together with the
European Union, the African Union and bilateral partners, worked cl osely with NEA
to explore ways of accelerating the implementation of preparatory tasks, including
the development of an electoral calendar.
25. From 23 to 27 October, NEA held consultations with national stakeholders. A
consensus was reached on proposed adjustments to a number of legal provisions,
including on simplifying voter registration, from a legally mandated biometric system
to a computerized system, and on combining presidential and legislative elections.
26. On 31 October, NEA announced a revised electoral timeline involving a
constitutional referendum in May 2015, the first round of presidential and
legislative elections in July 2015 and the second round of polls in August 2015.

6/18

14-65265

S/2014/857

NEA developed a needs assessment plan for the registration of refugees in
neighbouring States that would start with a mission in November to refugee camps
in Cameroon, Chad and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. During the
reporting period, NEA also established 14 field offices in Bangui and in Ombella Mpoko Province.
27. On 7 November, my Deputy Special Representative in the Central African
Republic and United Nations Resident Coordinator chaired the first “One United
Nations” elections task force, which comprises all relevant components of
MINUSCA and the United Nations country team.

C.

Socioeconomic developments
28. The economy of the Central African Republic remains sluggish, as forecast in
July by the International Monetary Fund, which estimated a growth rate of 1 per
cent in 2014. The transitional authorities’ weak fiscal capacity is evident in their
inability to generate revenues, collect taxes and manage finances.
29. The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) continued to support
several cash-for-work initiatives aimed at providing immediate income -generating
opportunities to youth at risk, displaced persons and women. UNDP, in partnership
with the Peacebuilding Fund, also supported the payment of salaries of the police
and the gendarmerie from May to August 2014. In parallel, the World Bank
supported the payment of salaries of the rest of the civil service for the same period,
while the transitional authorities continued to be responsible for the payment of
salaries of the armed forces. In September, the European Union began providing
general budget support until the end of 2014 with the aim of providing funding to
the transitional authorities to cover the most important and urgent expenditures,
including civil servants’ salaries.
30. On 14 May, the International Monetary Fund approved financial assistance
under the Rapid Credit Facility in the amount of nearly $13 million in support of
emergency recovery programmes. In September, the African Development Bank
provided the Central African Republic with $22 million in budgetary support .

D.

Safety and security of United Nations staff
31. United Nations personnel, including humanitarian workers, faced increasing
security threats related to armed conflict and criminality throughout the country.
The attacks against United Nations personnel during the violence t hat took place in
October in Bangui, in which two United Nations peacekeepers died, were
unprecedented. Violent incidents targeting MINUSCA included gunfire and hand
grenades thrown at United Nations vehicles, as well as armed demonstrations in
front of the main MINUSCA compound and threats to individuals. In response,
MINUSCA took security risk mitigation measures, including alternative work
modalities, to limit the number of non-essential personnel on United Nations
premises. The threat against United Nations personnel also remained high in the
area near the border with Cameroon. On 2 October, reported shooting between
armed elements in the border area 150 km west of Bouarin, Nana -Mambéré
Province, caused a joint United Nations team and around 100 people f rom the
Central African Republic to seek safety across the border in Cameroon. The affected

14-65265

7/18

S/2014/857

United Nations personnel returned safely following an intervention by the
MINUSCA leadership and United Nations security personnel in the Central African
Republic and Cameroon.

III. Implementation of the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the
Central African Republic
A.

Transfer of authority from the African-led International Support
Mission in the Central African Republic to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic
32. The transfer of authority from MISCA to MINUSCA took place on
15 September. Among the national and foreign dignitaries who attended the transferof-authority ceremony in Bangui were the Head of State of the Transition, the Prime
Minister, the President of the National Transitional Council, the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission, the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, my Special Representative in the Central African Republic, my Special
Representative for Central Africa and representatives of the international mediator,
the diplomatic community and United Nations agencies, funds and programmes.
The transfer of authority marked the completion of the MISCA mandate and the
establishment of an African Union mission for the Central Afric an Republic and
Central Africa.

B.

Support to the political process
33. MINUSCA continued to advise Central African authorities on the way forward
on the political process, including with regard to the implementation of the
Brazzaville cessation-of-hostilities agreement. Through the good offices of my
Special Representative in the Central African Republic and my Special
Representative for Central Africa, the United Nations, in coordination with other
key international partners, worked closely with all signatories to encourage their
continued commitment to the process, including the cessation -of-hostilities
agreement and the follow-on political process. They also worked closely with the
transitional authorities to ensure cohesion among the transitional institutions in
support of the implementation of the transitional road map. In addition, both of my
Special Representatives travelled extensively in the region to meet with key
stakeholders and encourage their sustained and positive engagement for a resolution
to the crisis in the Central African Republic.
34. In addition to extending its good offices, MINUSCA provided coordinated
strategic advice to the transitional authorities on the political process with regard to
an inclusive national dialogue and social cohesion between communities in conflict.
On 6 and 7 November in Bangui, MINUSCA held a workshop on the preparation
and organization of the Bangui forum that was attended by national stakeholders
and national and international partners. The meeting participants defined options
and methodological guidelines for the committee organizing the forum, including a

8/18

14-65265

S/2014/857

reformulation of the place of the committee in the peace process as a starting point
for longer-term initiatives to address the root causes of the conflict in the Central
African Republic. In partnership with the United Nations country team, MINUSCA
is working closely with the transitional authorities to plan activities in preparation
of the forum. This included serving in an advisory capacity to the organizing
committee, preparing option papers on key issues to be addressed during the forum
and preparing the conduct of workshops for transitional authorities who will visit
the country’s 16 provinces in early December to hold discussions on the forum and
its objectives at the local level. MINUSCA is coordinating support for the forum in
close collaboration with the Centre for Humanitaria n Dialogue and other
organizations active in reconciliation and dialogue support initiatives i n the Central
African Republic.
35. MINUSCA supported the development of projects to support local initiatives
and agreements that address the underlying causes of conflict and provide people
with peace dividends. With support from the Peacebuilding Fund, and in close
coordination with MINUSCA, UNDP will implement an 18 -month project to
support reconciliation initiatives and longer-term social cohesion, beginning with
financial and technical support for the Bangui forum and its follow-up mechanisms,
which include a network of mediators to promote inter- and intra-community
dialogue on peace and reconciliation. The project will support the implementation
of the urgent action plan that is the cornerstone of the national reconciliation
strategy of the Central African Republic and that was developed earlier in 2014 by
the Ministry of Communication and National Reconciliation, with technical support
and expertise provided by MINUSCA and UNDP.

C.

Extension of State authority
36. In order to operate a professional and accountable administration that can
deliver basic administrative and social services, the transitional authorities require
financial and technical resources to allow the progressive redeployment of civil
servants and local administrators in the country’s 16 provinces, together with a
sufficient number of police and gendarmerie to ensure their security.
37. MINUSCA signed a memorandum of understanding for quick-impact projects
in October and November for the light rehabilitation of key infrastructure, including
the rehabilitation of the préfécture building in Bria and of the building of the office
for the administration of social affairs of Haute-Kotto, also in Bria, and for the
construction of a sports and cultural centre for the youth of the fourth district of
Bangui.
38. MINUSCA, together with the United Nations country team and international
partners, initiated a dialogue and confidence-building measures among communities
and within ethnic and religious groups. Following the violence that took place in
October in Bangui, MINUSCA contacted local authority community representatives
in the fourth district and the PK-5 neighbourhood of Bangui to explore the
possibility of deploying MINUSCA community liaison assistants to develop
protection measures on access to health, education and other social services.
MINUSCA and United Nations country team partners began to plan efforts to
support local governance structures to build the capacity of local territorial and civil
service administrators.

14-65265

9/18

S/2014/857

D.

Protection of civilians
39. In August, MINUSCA developed a United Nations system-wide protection-ofcivilians strategy that was finalized in September and that has been di stributed to all
MINUSCA staff. MINUSCA efforts to protect civilians focused on the development
of measures to prevent threats to civilians and on the allocation of resources to
implement them. One of the tools used was a protection-of-civilians matrix that uses
joint analyses to identify communities at risk of physical violence and that is
developed and maintained in consultation with the inter-agency Global Protection
Cluster. MINUSCA responded to security incidents that endangered the general
population or vulnerable communities on the basis, inter alia, of analysis that is
consolidated and regularly updated in the protection-of-civilians matrix.

E.

Promotion and protection of human rights
40. The human rights situation remains serious. Ex-Séléka and anti-balaka
elements continue to operate in total impunity in a cycle of retaliatory attacks of
which civilians are the main victims. The number of civilians reported to have been
killed and injured as a result of the armed conflict continues to increase. Incidents
of looting and the destruction of property remain causes of grave concern. The
absence of judicial institutions in many parts of the country, in particular in areas
controlled by armed groups, makes it harder to protect human rights.
41. MINUSCA continued to reinforce its capacities to monitor, investigate and
report on human rights violations throughout the country. MINUSCA conducted
several field missions to vulnerable communities in Bangui, Bossangoa, Bozoum,
Bouar, Bocaranga, Baoro, Boali, Damara and Kaga Bandoro, the outcomes of which
helped prepare the protection-of-civilians matrix. During the reporting period,
MINUSCA investigated 85 new incidents of human rights violations that affected
142 persons; 39 of those incidents were verified and confirmed. Most of the
perpetrators were members of the anti-balaka and the ex-Séléka.
42. To increase awareness and mainstream the promotion and protection of human
rights, MINUSCA conducted induction training sessions for mission personnel and
trained representatives of 25 Central African human rights organizations on human
rights monitoring, investigation and reporting. MINUSCA continued to make efforts
to establish and strengthen collaboration with authorities of the Central African
Republic, including the national police, the gendarmerie and the prosecutor’s office,
on human rights-related issues.

F.

Child protection
43. Children were observed to have taken an active part in the violence in Bangui
in October, including by participating in violent demonstrations and establishing
roadblocks together with anti-balaka elements. The Central African Republic task
force on the Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism continues to engage in dialogue
with the leadership of the anti-balaka to advocate for an end to the association of
children with its activities. A total of 103 boys aged between 12 and 17 years were
separated from the anti-balaka and the ex-Séléka in Bambari, Grimari and Ippy,
Ouaka Province. The children are under the temporary care of the United Nations

10/18

14-65265

S/2014/857

Children’s Fund (UNICEF), which provides psychosocial assistance and vocational
training, among other services, pending family tracing and reunification. Dialogue
and engagement with anti-balaka local commanders in Ombella-Mpoko and Lobaye
Provinces led to 1,069 children, of whom 178 were girls aged between 9 to
17 years, leaving that group since July 2014. The children are currently benefiting
from community-based reintegration activities in those localities.
44. To enhance the monitoring of grave violations of children’s rights, the task
force provided training on the Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism to 74 child
protection actors. Within MINUSCA, 80 police officers, 46 military personnel (staff
officers and military observers) and 21 civilian personnel received training on
children’s rights and the protection of children. Further, MINUSCA and UNICEF
conducted awareness-raising training programmes on children’s rights and the
protection of children for 438 combatants and officers of the ex -Séléka and 25 local
commanders and members of the anti-balaka. As a result, General Darrassa of the
Union pour la paix en Centrafrique (former ex-Séléka) signed an instruction
prohibiting the recruitment and use of children.

G.

Conflict-related sexual violence
45. MINUSCA, in partnership with civil society, including women’s associations,
supported efforts to strengthen the capacity of the Central African Republic to
monitor and investigate allegations of sexual and gender-based violence, including
through awareness-raising campaigns against such violence. On victims’ assistance,
MINUSCA, in cooperation with relevant United Nations partners and local
authorities, launched an initiative to strengthen the joint evaluation of centres for
victims and survivors of sexual and gender-based violence, which support victims’
reintegration into the community. MINUSCA continues to support the national
police and the gendarmerie with the establishment of specialized units to address
sexual and gender-based violence committed against women and children.

H.

Gender issues
46. MINUSCA continued to promote women’s participation in the peace process
by raising awareness, training women leaders and providing advice and technical
guidance on intercommunal reconciliation to local actors, including women of the
Muslim community in Bangui’s PK-5 neighbourhood and women associated with
the anti-balaka in the Christian community. MINUSCA also organized meetings and
sessions with women’s organizations and leaders in Bria and Ndélé to promote
women’s increased participation at the grass-roots and leadership levels.

I.

Support for national and international justice and the rule of law
and implementation of urgent temporary measures
47. On the basis of the memorandum of intent between the Ministry of Justice and
MINUSCA on the implementation of the MINUSCA mandate on urgent temporary
measures outlined in paragraph 40 of Security Council resolution 2149 (2014), the
Ministry of Justice issued instructions on the establishment of a worki ng group, in
which MINUSCA is represented, to develop the legislation required for the creation

14-65265

11/18

S/2014/857

of a national special criminal court. In accordance with the provisions of the
memorandum, it is foreseen that the national special criminal court will be
composed of national and internationally recruited magistrates to address such
serious crimes as serious violations of human rights and international humanitarian
law, including conflict-related sexual violence and grave human rights violations
committed against children, which constitute a threat to peace, stability and security
in the Central African Republic.
48. On 11 September, the Minister of Justice requested the working group to
develop legislation for the establishment of a national special investigativ e cell to
investigate and prosecute serious crimes, with the support of MINUSCA and
international donors. Once established, the special criminal court would take over
cases processed by the special investigative cell. The mechanisms would facilitate
prompt responses to the urgent need to combat impunity for the most serious crimes,
improve the institutional capacity of the local judiciary and restore confidence in
State institutions.
49. Financial support will be needed to pay the salaries of international magistrates
and to cover the costs associated with the establishment and functioning of the
special criminal court for an initial period of at least three years. A strategy has been
developed to create the national special criminal court in phases, moving from the
special investigative cell to a body operating with international prosecutors and
investigative judges when funding becomes available and, eventually, to a full court.
50. In addition, in order to carry out its obligations under the urgent tempora ry
measures mandate, MINUSCA has adopted standard operating procedures for
United Nations police and military personnel on the arrest, detention and handover
of alleged criminals to national judicial authorities. Since 15 September, MINUSCA
has carried out 107 arrests, of which 34 were for the illegal possession of weapons.
Other offences were for murder, rape, theft and battery, among other crimes. All of
the individuals arrested have been handed over to the national police or the
gendarmerie. MINUSCA has established a mechanism to follow up on these arrests
and is providing security to key local magistrates to enable them to conduct their
work. On 20 October, the General Prosecutor of the Court of Appeal in Bangui
requested MINUSCA, the European Union Force in the Central African Republic
and Operation Sangaris to assist in the arrest of 55 persons in connection with the
violence that took place in October in Bangui.
51. In the area of corrections, only 4 of 38 officially recognized prisons, namely
those in Ngaragba, Bimbo, Bouar and Beberati, are functional. Efforts are under
way to support the rehabilitation of the prison in Ngaragba with financing from the
European Union. In addition, MINUSCA is mentoring and training 44 national
prison officers on prison management and security at Ngaragba and Bimbo prisons,
evaluating existing correctional services, supporting the rehabilitation of eight
police stations and three military gendarmerie brigades. The 20 corrections officers
authorized by Security Council resolution 2149 (2014) have been deployed and are
providing support for the improved functioning of the prison in Ngaragba and the
prison for women in Bimbo. There is an urgent need, however, for additional
corrections officers to cover the operational and security needs arising from the
implementation of the urgent temporary measures and the reopenin g of prisons
outside of Bangui.

12/18

14-65265

S/2014/857

J.

Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
52. Under MINUSCA leadership and with the support of the Peacebuilding Fund,
the International Organization for Migration (IOM) continued to implement a
relocation project for ex-Séléka combatants regrouped in the three military barracks
in Bangui. A coordination committee was established in August comprising
representatives of the transitional authorities, MINUSCA, IOM and Operation
Sangaris to support project implementation. A total of 457 combatants of an
estimated 1,308 from Camp RDOT, one of the three ex-Séléka regroupment sites in
Bangui, were relocated to their communities of origin during the reporting period.
MINUSCA and IOM were planning to accelerate operations with a view to
completing the relocation by December, but project implementation was temporarily
frozen on 12 November following the events at Camp Béal.
53. Following the establishment of a high commission for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and security sector reform within the office of the
Prime Minister, MINUSCA held discussions with the authorities to assist in defining
the commission’s structure and organization. MINUSCA also developed a
regroupment strategy for combatants in anticipation of the outcome of the Bangui
forum. The document will be presented to the strategic committee on disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and will be adapte d to reflect the agreements
reached at the Bangui forum.

K.

Security sector reform
54. In September, MINUSCA initiated a project to assist the Ministry of Defence
in regrouping the Central African armed forces. The project has two components:
the rehabilitation of major military barracks in Bangui and the creation of a database
for armed forces personnel to be used for auditing and vetting. The database will be
used for future security sector reform, including for the building of an ethnically
and geographically balanced and professional army.
55. Other partners continue to provide support to the national police and the
gendarmerie. On 15 September, three police stations were inaugurated in Bangui
with the support of UNDP and funding from the Peacebuild ing Fund. The
rehabilitation of the remaining five police stations and three gendarmerie brigades
in Bangui is ongoing. A European Union project aimed at strengthening law and
order in Bangui is also in progress; under this project, two national police and
gendarmerie units have received training and non-lethal equipment.

L.

Coordination of international assistance
56. Coordinated international assistance was provided for three projects through
the multi-partner trust fund for the Central African Repub lic. Funding has been
approved for the security sector reform project outlined above, and two other
projects. The first, which is in support of the prevention of human rights violations
and a revival of justice in the Central African Republic, is being car ried out jointly
by UNDP, the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women and MINUSCA with funds from the United States Bureau of International
Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs. The second, which is in support of the

14-65265

13/18

S/2014/857

creation of units aimed at providing holistic support to victims of rape for a period
of 12 months, is being implemented jointly by the World Health Organization,
UNICEF and the United Nations Population Fund.

M.

Weapons and ammunition management
57. The MINUSCA weapons and explosive hazards management section, which
includes members of the Mine Action Service, started to identify and assess sites for
ammunition depot and armouries. MINUSCA assessed the stocks of ammunition at
Camp de Roux in Bangui and planned for them to be moved to a safe storage site.
Under the coordination of MINUSCA, Operation Sangaris destroyed 7 tons of
unsafe ammunition. National gendarmerie personnel trained by the Mine Action
Service destroyed numerous weapons as part of their weapo ns security plan, as
agreed with the Ministry of Defence. MINUSCA continued to coordinate a working
group comprising all international and local partners with the aim of removing the
threat posed by explosive hazards and jointly identifying needs and prior ities to
effectively implement activities related to weapon and ammunition management.
The Mine Action Service continued to make efforts to gain access to a large stock of
poorly maintained ammunition and explosives at Camp Béal, which poses a
significant danger to camp residents and inhabitants of the surrounding area.

IV. Update on the deployment of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the
Central African Republic
58. On 15 September, six infantry battalions from Burundi, Cameroon, the Congo,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Gabon and Rwanda were rehatted from
MISCA to MINUSCA. Six formed police units from Burundi (two), Cameroon
(two), the Congo (one) and the Democratic Republic of the Congo (one) were also
rehatted to MINUSCA. In addition, approximately 1,800 additional uniformed
personnel were deployed to MINUSCA, including one Moroccan guard unit that
was upgraded and absorbed as an infantry battalion in MINUSCA, an engineer
company from Indonesia, an engineer company advance party from Pakistan, a level
II hospital from Bangladesh, a signal company advance party from Bangladesh, one
aviation unit from Sri Lanka and one formed police unit from Rwanda.
59. As at mid-November, some 7,451 military personnel, or approximately 74 per
cent of the total authorized military strength of 10,000 troops, and 1,083 police
personnel, or approximately 60 per cent of the total authorized police strength of
1,800, had been deployed to MINUSCA. In addition, 177 of 440 staff offi cers and
military observers (approximately 40 per cent) and 99 of 400 individual police
officers (approximately 25 per cent) had also been deployed. Pledges had yet to be
received for the attack helicopter unit and yet to be confirmed for the special force s
company and one signal company. MINUSCA air assets include three MI -8
helicopters, one small fixed-wing aircraft and three military utility helicopters.
60. Starting on 15 September, in Bangui, MINUSCA established an innovative
joint military and police task force with a unified command structure. The task force
operates under the MINUSCA police component to maintain coherence in the

14/18

14-65265

S/2014/857

Mission’s response to security incidents in Bangui. Following the violent incidents
that took place in Bangui in October, it was decided to increase the military
presence in Bangui temporarily by up to three infantry battalions to support the
efforts of the task force in Bangui.
61. MINUSCA continued to make efforts to provide logistical support for the
deployment of troops and police in various parts of its area of operations. In
addition, regional offices in Bouar and Bossangoa (Sector West), in Kaga Bandoro
and Bambari (Sector Centre) and Bria (Sector East) are operational and have heads
of office in place. As at mid-November, the overall civilian vacancy rate had been
reduced to 25 per cent, taking into account ongoing recruitment and onboarding
efforts. The incumbency rate was 44 per cent. Of the total number of senior staff,
82 per cent had assumed their posts.

V. Financial aspects
62. The General Assembly, by its resolution 68/299, authorized me to enter into
commitments for MINUSCA in an amount not exceeding $312,976,400 for the
period from 10 April to 31 December 2014, inclusive of the amount of $59,552,000
previously authorized by the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions for the period from 10 April to 30 June 2014.
63. As at 31 October 2014, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special Account
for MINUSCA amounted to $53,341,900. The total amount of outstanding assessed
contributions for all peacekeeping operations at the same date was $2,308 million.
64. As at 31 August 2014, all Member States that contribute troops to MINUSCA
had been fully reimbursed. The amount of $3.4 million for troop costs was
reimbursed for the period ending on 31 August 2014, in accordance with the
quarterly payment schedule.

VI. Observations
65. The violence that took place in October in Bangui, just one month after the
successful transfer of authority from MISCA to MINUSCA, was a stark reminder
that the situation in the Central African Republic remains highly volatile. I am
deeply concerned by the continued widespread insecurity throughout the country
caused by ongoing cycles of violence between and among armed elements of the
increasingly fragmented ex-Séléka and the anti-balaka in particular. I am also
concerned that gross human rights violations against civilians continue to be
committed by armed elements with impunity. MINUSCA, the European Union
Force in the Central African Republic and Operation Sangaris, as well as the
humanitarian community, have also been targeted directly.
66. The dire humanitarian consequences of the conflict continue to adversely
affect hundreds of thousands of lives. Almost 1 million Central Africans remain
displaced. More than 2 million people are still in desperate need of humanitarian
assistance. Women and children are exposed to extreme violence and abuse, and
thousands of children are still associated with armed groups. The incre asingly
blurred line between criminal and politically instigated acts of violence in an
environment where the presence of the State remains weak or where the State is

14-65265

15/18

S/2014/857

absent, poses a constant threat to Central Africans and undermines efforts to keep
the transition on track.
67. National ownership and genuine political commitment remain essential for
bringing about durable peace and improving the lives of Central Africans. I strongly
urge all signatories, including the transitional authorities, to recommit t o the
cessation-of-hostilities agreement signed in Brazzaville on 23 July and to take
concrete steps, with the international community’s support, to ensure the protection
of civilians and create the conditions for displaced populations to return, safely a nd
voluntarily, to their homes.
68. There is an urgent need for a follow-on political process with inclusive
consultations at the national and local levels and for the successful and timely
completion of the transition. I urge all parties to renew their com mitment to the
political process within the agreed time frames and to engage actively in the Bangui
forum planned for January 2015. That forum should provide an opportunity to reach
a political agreement among a broad cross section of national stakeholders on the
reconstitution of the national armed forces and security sector reform, on the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of armed groups and on other key
political issues, including the rule of law, criminal and transitional justice,
governance, decentralization and the economic future of the country. It should also
contribute to and shape the long-term reconciliation process that is so badly needed
in the country. An inclusive preparatory process and a successful meeting will send
a strong signal that the people of the Central African Republic are ready for peace
and stability. My Special Representative in the Central African Republic and my
Special Representative for Central Africa stand ready to continue supporting the
work of the international mediator and other regional and international efforts in
support of the political process. Significant financial resources will also be needed
to support the implementation of the agreements reached at the Bangui forum, in
particular with regard to the process on disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, but also to underpin the restoration of State authority and the
preparation of the elections.
69. The timely holding of elections in order to complete the transition by August
2015 will be an important milestone for the country. The completion of the electoral
process will be extremely challenging and will require the significantly strengthened
commitment of the authorities of the Central African Republic, as well as the
political, operational and financial support of the international community.
Achieving a security and political environment that is conducive to the holding of
fair and credible elections in such a short time frame will require the strong
determination of all actors. I urge the transitional authorities and NEA to accelerate,
in a consensual manner, preparations for the planned constitutional referendum, as
well as for the legislative and presidential elections, with a view to ensuring a
transparent, inclusive and credible process. It will also be vital for the national
authorities to facilitate a transparent voter registration process that enables the full
participation of returning populations, as well as of those who remain displaced in
the country and the wider subregion. I call on international partners to provide
timely support to the process. In the meantime, I urge all the parties concerned to
prioritize the interests of the country and ensure that the transition of the Central
African Republic is managed in an inclusive and consen sual manner.

16/18

14-65265

S/2014/857

70. Tackling impunity remains imperative to efforts to improve the security
situation and support the political process. Their need to strengthen justice
institutions remains urgent, including through the rapid establishment of the
national special criminal court, the provision of support for the special investigative
cell and the establishment of effective policing, judicial and corrections institutions
in accordance with national and international standards. I urge the transitional
authorities of the Central African Republic, with the support of the international
forces, to take all possible steps to ensure the arrest, prosecution and safe, humane
and secure detention of perpetrators of crimes committed against civilians,
including violations of international human rights and humanitarian law. I also wish
to recall that individuals and entities that undermine peace, stability and security are
subject to the targeted measures set out in Security Council resolutions 2127 (2013)
and 2134 (2014).
71. The restoration of security must go hand in hand with State -building and
economic recovery. Addressing the root causes of the conflict in the Central African
Republic requires mutual accountability, including the international community’s
sustained commitment and support to Central African authorities to implement early
recovery plans and revitalize the economy. I encourage the transitional authorities to
ensure an environment in which the international community can continue to
provide budget support in 2015, while strengthening efforts to build national
capacities and improve national public financial management and accountabil ity.
72. In beginning to tackle longer-term economic recovery, the urgent humanitarian
requirements, which remain daunting, must be addressed. I wish to reiterate the
need for timely and sustained support for humanitarian operations given the dire
living conditions and extreme vulnerability of the population.
73. As I stressed in my previous report, there will be no solution to the crisis in
the Central African Republic without the continued active engagement of the
country’s neighbours and the region. I welcome the continued engagement of
ECCAS, in particular that of the current Chair, the President of Chad, Idriss Déby
Itno, and of the international mediator and President of the Congo, Denis Sassou
Nguesso, as well as the engagement of key bilateral partners of the Central African
Republic in the region, including Angola, Cameroon, Chad and the Congo. I
commend their tireless efforts to assist in finding solutions to the crisis. I am also
encouraged by the good cooperation between the African Union and the United
Nations following the successful transfer of authority from MISCA to MINUSCA.
74. MINUSCA faces high expectations as it continues to scale-up to its authorized
strength of 10,000 military personnel and 1,800 police personnel. I cannot
overemphasize the tremendous logistical and operational challenges involved in
deploying and sustaining a large, multidimensional peacekeeping operation in a
landlocked country with extremely poor infrastructure. I remain optimistic that, with
the continued support of contributing countries, MINUSCA will reach its full
authorized strength and full operational capability by the end of the period of the
current mandate. The violence that took place in Bangui in October has highlighted
the pressing need for the full military and police strength of the Mission to be
deployed at the earliest opportunity, as well as the need for a temporary increase in
the military presence in Bangui. On a separate note, and given developments since
my last report, it is already clear that an increase in the currently authorized strength
of 20 corrections officers will be essential to allow MINUSCA to fulfil its mandate

14-65265

17/18

S/2014/857

in that area, including as it relates to the implementation of urgent temporary
measures mandated by Security Council resolution 2149 (2014). Given the
extremely tight timeline considered for the end of the transition and the risks
inherent to many of the processes underpinning it, I intend to revert to the Council
before the current mandate ends on 30 April 2015 with recommendations regarding
adjustments that need to be made to the mission concept, including with regard to
troop and police personnel levels and deployment, and mandated tasks.
75. I am grateful to my Special Representative in the Central African Republic and
Head of MINUSCA, Babacar Gaye, for his tireless efforts. I am deeply appreciative
of the work being done by the personnel of MINUSCA, t he United Nations country
team and the humanitarian country team in a dangerous and unpredictable
environment. I would like to express my deepest condolences to the countries and
families of the two United Nations peacekeepers who lost their lives in the l ine of
duty in the Central African Republic. I am also grateful to my Special
Representative for Central Africa, Abdoulaye Bathily, for his international
mediation role in the Central African Republic. I also thank the African Union,
MISCA troop-contributing countries, ECCAS, the European Union, donor countries
and multilateral and non-governmental organizations for their continued efforts in
support of peace in the Central African Republic.

18/18

14-65265
