A /71/PV.46

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-first session

46th plenary meeting

Wednesday, 16 November 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Thomson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Fiji)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Zamora Rivas
(El Salvador), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda items 13, 117, 123 and 124

recall that the Assembly held the high-level plenary
meeting on addressing large movements of refugees and
migrants at its 3rd to 7th plenary meetings, and adopted
resolution 71/1, entitled “New York Declaration for
Refugees and Migrants”, at its 3rd plenary meeting, on
19 September 2016.

Reports of the Secretary-General (A/71/345 and
A/71/534)

Under agenda item 13, the Assembly has before
it a note by the Secretary-General, entitled “Literacy
for life: shaping future agendas and education for
democracy” and circulated in document A/71/177, and
a note by the Secretary-General, entitled “Technology
Bank for the Least Developed Countries” and circulated
in document A/71/363.

Notes by the Secretary-General (A/71/177 and
A/71/363)

I now give the floor to the representative of
Mongolia to introduce draft resolution A/71/L.10.

Draft resolution (A/71/L.10)

Mr. Sukhee (Mongolia): I have the honour of
introducing draft resolution A/71/L.10, entitled
“Education for Democracy”, on behalf of the sponsors,
which represent various regions, as well as my own
country, Mongolia.

Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields

Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/71/345
and A/71/534)
Strengthening of the United Nations system
(a) Strengthening of the United Nations system
(b) Central role of the United Nations system in
global governance
Report of the Secretary-General (A/71/378)
United Nations reform: measures and proposals
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): In
connection with agenda items 13 and 117, Members will

The text, which has been fully agreed upon by all of
the delegations that attended the negotiation meetings,
covers the meaningful advancements in efforts to
promote education for democracy. According to the
report of the Director-General of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
on literacy for life (see A/71/177), the links between
human rights, democracy and development have been
well established and have been made even more explicit
in the context of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. We recall that the Sustainable

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-38784 (E)

*1638784*

A/71/PV.46

Development Goals and targets are integrated and
indivisible, balance the three dimensions of sustainable
development and acknowledge the importance of
taking measures to ensure inclusive and equitable
high-quality education and to promote lifelong learning
opportunities for all.
We recognize that education is the main driver of
development and that it is essential for peace, tolerance,
human fulfilment and sustainable development, as well
as being key to achieving full employment and poverty
eradication. The text underscores the important forums
and initiatives that are vital for promoting education
for democracy and the related knowledge and skills.
Among them, the draft resolution takes note, first, of the
Secretary-General’s Global Education First Initiative,
launched in 2012; secondly, the Incheon Declaration:
Education 2030: Towards inclusive and equitable quality
education and lifelong learning for all, adopted at the
World Education Forum 2015; and, thirdly, the 2016
Global Education Monitoring Report, which monitors
the progress towards the education targets within
the new Sustainable Development Goals framework.
Moreover, the draft resolution acknowledges the
important contributions of civil society, academia, the
private sector and other stakeholders, including United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes, in support of
democracy and education for democracy.
Through the draft resolution, the General Assembly
strongly encourages Member States and national,
regional and local education authorities, where
appropriate, to continue integrating education for
democracy, along with civic education, human rights
education and education for sustainable development,
into their education standards, and to develop and
strengthen programmes and educational activities
aimed at the promotion and consolidation of democratic
values, democratic governance and human rights. I
wish to take this opportunity to extend our gratitude
to all of the delegations that actively participated in our
discussions on the draft text, as well as to all sponsors
for their support.
In conclusion, on behalf of all of the sponsors, I
want to express my sincere hope that the draft resolution
will receive the unanimous support of Member States.
Mr. Fachir (Indonesia): Let me begin my extending
our appreciation for the three reports by the SecretaryGeneral dealing with today’s agenda items (A/71/345,
A/71/534 and A/71/378).
2/6

16/11/2016

In 2015, three historic milestones were reached:
the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the Paris Agreement
on Climate Change. Every day must be devoted to
implementing those three agreements for people, the
planet, prosperity, partnerships and peace. I would
like to take this opportunity to add some observations
on the issue of the United Nations in global economic
governance.
The three agreements offer great opportunities for
peoples and countries. However, slow and low global
economic growth poses challenges. The world today is
still unpredictable in both the political and the economic
arenas. New challenges, such as cyberthreats and large
influxes of migrants, are emerging as growing crossborder concerns. That requires closer collaboration
and abundant innovation in our work, both within and
among countries. In that context, there are measures
that the United Nations could take to support the
objectives of the three agreements.
First, the United Nations should support national
development efforts by further promoting and enabling
the international environment, as well as by steadying
and accelerating economic development. There needs
to be coherent and mutually supporting world trade,
digital technology, monetary and financial systems
and strengthened and enhanced global economic
governance, as well as respect for each country’s policy
space.
Secondly, the United Nations needs to strengthen
partnerships, including within the regional framework,
so as to support various multi-stakeholder forums and
achieve our objectives.
Thirdly, reforms need to be implemented promptly
and consistently, and international regulatory
cooperation must be strengthened. In economic
governance, priorities should also be given to the
implementation of the International Monetary Fund
quota and governance reforms agreed in 2010.
Fourthly, the elements of the multilateral system,
including the United Nations system’s funds and
programmes, should coordinate closely with each
other and focus on their specific mandates and
comparative advantages, while avoiding duplication in
assisting countries to implement the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
16-38784

16/11/2016

Indonesia also welcomes the revitalization of
the General Assembly and resolution 70/305, which
builds on resolution 69/321, as well as other United
Nations restructuring processes, which will help
efforts to effectively implement the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) and other internationally
agreed agreements.
The implementation of the new, post-2015
development agenda requires massive resources indeed.
That, in turn, requires more extensive partnerships and
innovative sources of financing, in which the private
sector and civil society play tremendous complementary
roles in job creation and community empowerment.
Still, we believe that the financing mechanism
should be coupled with the sharing of best practices
and knowledge, technology transfers and wider access
to markets for countries in need. We also need to
focus on having better-quality data in order to develop
appropriate policies and strategies that can integrate
the three pillars of sustainable development.
We also believe that enhanced cooperation with
regional organizations and efforts to localize the SDGs
with local governance will serve as highly pertinent
elements in achieving the Goals and targets. The
Association of Southeast Asian Nations has already
made connectivity our priority area in order to increase
economic growth and prosperity.
As the largest archipelagic and fourth most populous
country in the world, with vast diversity in cultures and
geography, Indonesia successfully achieved 48 of the
67 indicators of the Millennium Development Goals
by the end of 2015, including halving extreme poverty.
Currently, Indonesia is capable of implementing nearly
100 of the 169 global targets set out in the 17 SDGs.
Government programmes such as the development
of remote islands and the establishment of a sea-toll
infrastructure will add to efforts to end poverty, as
called for in the SDGs. Our programme for developing
sustainable fisheries with local communities has
clearly improved the livelihood of our fisheries and will
contribute to the realization of SDG 14. New regulations
on the implementation of the SDGs will be issued this
year in order to strengthen institutional capacity and
coordination among the various stakeholders.
In short, we believe that by working together we
can accomplish more in order to leave no one behind.

A/71/PV.46

Mr. Matjila (South Africa): South Africa supports
the implementation of resolution 67/289, entitled “The
United Nations in global economic governance”,
adopted on 9 July 2013. We thank the Secretary-General
for his report (A/71/378) on that important matter.
Many countries, particularly developing countries,
continue to lag behind in development owing to, inter
alia, the current global economic governance and
trading system, which continues to fail to address the
needs of developing countries adequately. There is
therefore an urgent need to reform the global economic
governance and trading system.
We believe that the availability of adequate financing
is key to the development of countries. However, the
systemic fragilities and imbalances in the international
financial system have had negative consequences on
the flow of financing to developing countries. The
insufficiency of institutional arrangements for global
economic governance highlights the need to address
the inadequacy of the international monetary, financial
and trading systems.
It is critical to address systemic issues so that
Member States can better achieve their development
goals, including the Sustainable Development Goals.
The world financial and economic crises of 2008 and
2009 had a negative impact on the functioning of the
international financial system. The adverse impact
of the world financial and economic crises, including
on development, and the subsequent uneven, fragile
and slow recovery of the global economy persist, with
developing countries being the most affected.
In addition, the world financial and economic
crises have raised pertinent questions about the
suitability of the international financial system for
the contemporary international political economy,
including the governance structures of the international
financial institutions themselves. That requires
reforming the Bretton Woods institutions in the areas
of representation of and participation by developing
countries in decision-making processes.
South Africa believes that there should be enhanced
international commitment to assisting all countries to
achieve sustainable development in its three dimensions
in a balanced and integrated manner. South Africa
has consistently advocated for a fundamental reform
of the international financial institutions, relating to
their mandates, representation, scope, governance,
responsibility, responsiveness and development

16-387843/6

A/71/PV.46

orientation, in order to ensure that they are democratic,
responsive and accountable, reflecting the realities of
the twenty-first century.
We welcome the 7International Monetary Fund
(IMF) quota reforms of 2010, including the inclusion of
the Chinese yuan in the basket of currencies for special
drawing rights. However, South Africa continues to call
for the improved representation of Africa on the IMF
Board of Governors, as well as additional measures
required outside the quota-formula discussions.
Furthermore, South Africa believes that the
appointment of the heads of the IMF and the World
Bank should be based on merit, without regard to
nationality. Also, the Bretton Woods institutions
should further strengthen the diversity of their staff
in all its dimensions, including nationality, gender and
developing-country experience.
We would like to reaffirm that international trade
is an important engine for inclusive growth and poverty
eradication. The international community needs to
recommit to combating protectionism in all its forms.
It is our firm view that World Trade Organization
(WTO) members need to redouble their efforts to
promptly conclude the negotiations on the Doha
Development Agenda. Development concerns form an
integral part of the Doha Development Agenda, which
places the needs and interests of developing countries at
the heart of the Doha Work Programme. Furthermore,
we urge WTO members to accelerate the accession of
all developing countries engaged in negotiations for
WTO membership.
South Africa recognizes the significant potential of
regional economic integration to promote inclusive and
sustainable development. With regard to Africa, the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development reinforces
the continent’s development blueprint and Agenda 2063
and its First Ten-Year Implementation Plan.
The realization of an equitable and democratic
global economic governance structure cannot be further
delayed. South Africa therefore urges the international
community to view issues relating to global economic
governance in a spirit of inclusiveness and to commit
to advancing that priority with a sense of vigour and
great determination.
Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his reports entitled “Supporting
4/6

16/11/2016

the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of
the Third International Conference on Financing for
Development” (A/71/534) and “The United Nations in
global economic governance” (A/71/378).
It would have been desirable to have been notified
sooner of this important debate, so that more delegations
would have been able to participate.
We agree with what was expressed in the report
on supporting the implementation of the 2030 Agenda
and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, which points
out, very sensibly, that we must promote synergies
in the Organization and encourage interdependence
among the three pillars of the United Nations, namely,
development, peace and security, and human rights.
The United Nations attaining its seventieth
anniversary has been accompanied by a paradigm
shift. The adoption of the 2030 Agenda has placed
development at the centre of the United Nations agenda,
and of its pillars as well. Likewise, the adoption of the
Addis Ababa Action Agenda and the adoption of the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change have become
milestones that force us to reform and restructure
so that we conduct ourselves in a more consistent,
effective and efficient manner. Today more than ever,
the development organs and agencies of the United
Nations system must adapt to the 2030 Agenda rather
than to pretend that that Agenda mustadapt to the
existing bureaucratic structures and inert practices of
the Organization.
We need profound change and restructuring. The
arrival of a new Secretary-General should be the
moment for that. Today we have the urgent need and
responsibility to promote structural change in the
Organization and in its Secretariat so as to broaden the
vision of development to one that is sustainable, and
with that to remember peace — also sustainable; another
paradigm shift — in order to promote well-being and to
ensure the viability of human rights. All of that should
be carried out comprehensively through a cross-cutting
approach, which will ensure the convergence of the
efforts of all of the players at the global, regional and
national levels.
The integrated and indivisible nature of the 2030
Agenda requires us to act in a different way. One of
the instruments that should help promote such changes
is the quadrennial comprehensive policy review, which
we initiated a few days ago. That review should seek to
16-38784

16/11/2016

put an end to useless duplications, break down silos, put
an end to obsolete mandates that unfortunately seem to
characterize the Organization, and strengthen alliances
with regional commissions and other mechanisms that
complement the work of the United Nations in order
to increase the efficiency of cooperation. SecretaryGeneral-elect Guterres, who has a profound knowledge
of the Organization, should have the possibility to
restructure the whole of the United Nations development
system. The quadrennial comprehensive policyreview
now being negotiated should leave that capacity for the
Secretary-General.
Based on those principles, my delegation will
participate constructively in the consideration of
requests for resources for the implementation of the
2030 Agenda and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda in
the Fifth Committee in the coming weeks.
Mr. Castañeda Solares (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): Guatemala recognizes that the adoption of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development represents a
new, universal and transformative vision of sustainable
development centred on people, the planet, prosperity,
peace and alliances. However, there still remain many
questions about the means of implementation of the
2030 Agenda, particularly with respect to countries in
certain situations and the restructuring of the system of
development of the United Nations.
Today more than ever, there is a collective awareness
of the interdependence among the three pillars of the
Organization, that is, peace and security, development,
and human rights. We highlight that those three pillars
and the synergies between the 2030 Agenda and the
“sustaining peace” proposals set out in the report
of the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of
the Peacebuilding Architecture (see A/69/968) and
welcomed by the Security Council in resolution 2282
(2016), as well asw the link between humanitarian
activities, development and peacebuilding, constitute
a solid foundation upon which we can work in an
integrated way.
Guatemala therefore welcomes the reports of the
Secretary-General (A/71/345, A/71/534 and A/71/378).
We agree that, in order to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals and their targets, the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda must be implemented in its entirety so
that both Agendas serve as the foundation for measures
to be adopted with the participation of a broad range of
stakeholders and under the leadership of Governments

A/71/PV.46

at the national level. That leads us to believe that the
Organization can be seen essentially as a service
provider — whether through support for our gatherings,
development cooperation, humanitarian assistance, or
peacekeeping operations and special political missions.
Guatemala also welcomes the report of the
Director-General of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization — UNESCO — on
literacy (see A/71/177), which reflects progress in that
area and in the broader field of education. Achieving
more and better education is not only an end in itself
as a universal right, but also an essential means for
achieving inclusion in both social and economic terms.
As a Latin American country, Guatemala is aware
of the importance of improving the quality of education,
for that is the only way to break the barrier of poverty,
ensure better integration into the labour market and
thus to boost our economy. That is why we applaud the
initiative of the President of the General Assembly at
the seventy-first session, Ambassador Peter Thomson,
who has encouraged Heads of State and Government
to incorporate the 17 Sustainable Development Goals
into the curriculums of schools, institutes and colleges.
That will allow children to grow into the 2030 Agenda
and take over ownership of it with a view to achieving
sustainable development. We must bear in mind that
they are the engine of the future of our societies.
Investing in our children and our youth is investing
in the future of our peoples and their viability. That
is why it is important to work together to ensure the
participation of young people in all sectors and offer
them as much opportunity as possible, beginning with
their education.
The success of the Organization’s activities greatly
depends on our decisions, which, if based on a coherent
approach, can stimulate a change adapted to the current
challenges. The effective and efficient implementation
of the mandates to support the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda is necessary to add coherence to our decisions.
It is in precisely in that area that we acknowledge the
importance of the regional economic commissions, in
that they provide coherent and integrated support in
the implementation of the new Agendas, bringing a
regional perspective to a universal framework.
In order to achieve better coordination, we need
agreements and arrangements among the Member
States to mitigate the existing gaps, so as to reduce

16-387845/6

A/71/PV.46

fragmentation and overlap in the system. We trust that
now, during the quadrennial comprehensive policy
review of the operational activities for the United
Nations development system, we will be able to adopt
a better direction in the system and provide a renewed
impetus to the implementation of the two Agendas and
the commitments that we have taken on.
In conclusion, I would like to state that this
session affords us an opportunity to pause and reflect
on whether we are fulfilling the universal purposes
of the Organization with regard to preserving future
generations from the scourge of war and promoting
social progress and peaceful coexistence as good
neighbours. We need to combine our efforts, so that
globally we can transform our world and make sure that
no one is left behind.
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Chile welcomes the reports of the Secretary-General
on the closely interlinked items before us today
(A/71/345, A/71/534 and A/71/378). We value the fact
that the role of the United Nations in global economic
governance is analysed from the point of view of the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda on
financing for development. The proposals put forward
by the Secretary-General in those reports, particularly
those in the report on the United Nations in global
governance (A/71/378), will be an important input for
the debates that we will hold next spring with a view
to adopting a draft resolution on the matter during the
Assembly’s current session.
As it did in 2013, Chile will introduce a draft
resolution on the United Nations in global economic
governance, under agenda item 123, sub-item (b),
entitled “Central role of the United Nations system in
global governance”. Our intention is to be begin that
process during the second quarterof 2017 with a view to
adopting a draft resolution before the summer.

6/6

16/11/2016

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We have
heard the last speaker in the debate on the items. We
will now take action on draft resolution A/71/L.10.
I call on the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of draft resolution A/71/L.10,
and in addition to the delegations listed on that
document, the following countries have also become
sponsors of draft resolution A/71/L.10: Argentina,
Austria, Belgium, Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia, the
Czech Republic, Finland, Greece, Hungary, India,
Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Mali, Mexico, Monaco,
Montenegro, Morocco, Paraguay, the Philippines, the
Republic of Korea, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden and Turkey.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/71/L.10, entitled “Education for Democracy”. May
I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt draft
resolution A/71/L.10?
Draft resolution A/71/L.10 was adopted (resolution
71/8).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has thus concluded the present stage of
its consideration of agenda items 13, 117, 123 and its
sub-items (a) and (b) and 124.
Programme of work
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to make the following announcement
concerning the work of the plenary. The consideration
of agenda item 130, entitled “Investigation into the
conditions and circumstances resulting in the tragic
death of Dag Hammarskjöld and of the members of
the party accompanying him”, originally scheduled
on Wednesday, 23 November, will now take place on
Tuesday, 6 December, as the second item.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m.

16-38784
