100

General AHembly-Twenty-fifth See,ion

in the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples,

Aware of the special circumstances of the geographical location and economic conditions of these TerritorieS,
1. Approves the chapters of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to these Territories;
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
these Territories to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries ~d
Peoples, contained in General Assembly resolution

1514 (XV);
3. Calls upon the administering Powers to implement with respect to these Territories, and without
further delay, resolution 1514 (XV) and other relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly;
4. Expresses its conviction that the questions of territorial size, geographical isolation and limited resources
should in no way delay the implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples with respect to these
Territories;
5. Reiterates its declaration that any attempt aimed
at the partial or total disruption of the national unity
and the territorial integrity of colonial Territories and
the establishment of military bases and installations in
these Territories is incompatible with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
resolution 1514 (XV);
6. Strongly urges the administering Powers to reconsider their attitude towards the receiving of visiting
missions to the above-mentioned Territories and to
permit access by such visiting missions to Territories
under their administration;
1. Decides that the United Nations should render all
help to the peoples of these Territories in their efforts
freely to decide their future status;
8. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
pay special attention to these Territories and to report
to the General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session on
the implementation of the present resolution.
1929th plenary meeting,
14 December 1970.

2710 (XXV). Question of Antigua, Dominica,
Grenada, St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia
and St. Vincent

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
all other relevant resolutions,
Recalling also its resolution 2593 (XXIV) of 16
December 1969 concerning Antigua, Dominica,
Grenada, St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia and St.
Vincent,
Having examined the relevant chapter of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard

to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,a1
1. Takes note of the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situa~on with regard ~o the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Grantmg of
Independence to Colonial Countries and P~oples ~elating to Antigua, Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts-NevisAnguilla, St. Lucia and St. Vincent;
2. Requests the Special Committee to give urgent
consideration to all aspects of this question in accordance with General Assembly resolution 2593 (XXIV)
and to report thereon to the Assembly at its twentysixth session.
1929th plenary meeting,
14 December 1970.
2711 (XXV). Question of Spanish Sahara

The General Assembly,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territory of Spanish Sahara,82
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling also the relevant provisions of its resolution 2621 (XXV) of ·12 October 1970 containing the
programme of action for the full implementation of
the Declaration,
Taking into consideration the resolutions adopted,
respectively by the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity at
its seventh ordinary session, held at Addis Ababa from
1 to 3 September 1970, and by the Third Conference
of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at Lusaka from 8 to 10 September
1970,
Reaffirming its resolutions 2072 (XX) of 16 December 1965 2229 (XXI) of 20 December 1966, 2354
(XXII) ~f 19 December 1967, 2428 (XXIII) of 18
December 1968 and 2591 (XXIV) of 16 December
1969,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the Sahara to self-determination in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territory of Spanish Sahara;
3. Expresses its regret that it has not yet been possible for the consultations to take place which the administering Power was to conduct with the Governments concerned in connexion with the holding of a
referendum in the Territory;
4. Declares that the continued existence of a
colonial situation in the Territory retards stability and
harmony in north-west Africa;
5. Regrets the incidents of bloodshed which occurred in the Territory in June 1970 and calls upon
3t Ibid., chapter XVII.
s2 Ibid., chapter IX

Re1olution1 adopted on the reporta of the Fourth Committee

1. Invites all States to refrain from making investments in the Territory in order to speed the achievement of self-determination by the people of the Sahara;
8. Reaffirms that it recognizes the legitimacy of the
struggle being waged by the colonial peoples for the
exercise of their right to self-determination and to freedon: of choice, and calls upon all States to provide
them with all necessary assistance;
9. Urges the administering Power to respect and
to implement scrupulously the provisions of the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly relating to the
free consultation of peoples under United Nations
auspices and guarantees and in conformity with the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations which
define the conditions for the free consultation of peoples
with a view to their self-determination;
10. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the administering Power and the Special Committee, to appoint immediately the special mission provided for in paragraph 5 of General Assembly resolution 2229 (XXI) and to expedite its dispatch to the
Sahara in order to recommend practical steps for the
full implementation of the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly, in particular to confirm United
Nations participation in the preparation and supervision of the referendum and to submit a report to the
Secretary-General for transmission to the Assembly at
its twenty-sixth session;
11. Requests the Special Committee to continue its
consideration of the situation in the Territory and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its twentysixth session.
1929th plenary meeting,
14 December 1970.

the Spanish Government, in conformity with its obligations and its responsibility as administering Power, to
take effective measures to create the atmosphere of
detente required for the orderly holding of the referendum as defined by the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly;
6. Repeats its invitation to the administering Power
to determine at the earliest possible date, in conformity
with the aspirations of the indigenous people of the
Territory and in consultation with the Governments of
Mauritania and Morocco and any other interested
party, the procedures for the holding of a referendum
under United Nations auspices with a view to enabling
the indigenous population of the Sahara to exercise
freely its right to self-determination and, to this end:
(a) To create a favourable climate for the referendum to be conducted on an entirely free, democratic
and impartial basis by permitting, inter alia, the return
of all exiles to the Territory;
( b) To take all the necessary steps to ensure that
only the indigenous people of the Territory participate
in the referendum;

(c) To comply with the resolutions of the General
Assembly on the activities of foreign economic, financial and other interests operating in colonial countries
and territories and to refrain from any action likely to
delay the process of decolonization of the Territory;
( d) To receive a United Nations mission and to
provide it with all the necessary facilities so that it may
be able to participate actively in the organization and
holding of the referendum, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 2591 (XXIV);

•

•

•

Other decisions
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples

(Item 23)

At its 1929th plenary meeting, on 14 December 1970, the General Assembly,
on the recommendation of the Fourth Committee,88 decided to defer until its
twenty-sixth session consideration of the questions of Gibraltar, French Somaliland
and the Falkland Islands (Malvinas).
Question of Fiji

(Item 65)

At its 1863rd plenary meeting, on 13 October 1970, the General Assembly
took note of the letter dated 8 October 1970 from the Chairman of the Fourth
Committee34 and thus concluded its consideration of this question. 35
Twenty-fifth Session, Annexes, agenda item 23, document A/8248, para. 20.
agenda item 65, document A/8105.
85 See resolution 2622 (XXV).
83 Ibid.,

8 4 Jbid.,

101
