TWENTY-SIXTH

YEAR

MEETING: 14/l 5 DECEMBER
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1614) . , . . . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . ,

Page
1

Adoption of the agenda . . . , , , . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the India/ Pakistan subcontinent

1

...... ...,.....,.,...

S/PV.1614 and Add.1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information

about it is given.

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SIXTEEN

HUNDRED

AND FOURTEENTH

MEETING

Held in New-York on Tuesday, 14 December 1971, at 3 p.m.
and resumed on Wednesday, 15 December 1971, at 12.10 p.m.
President: Mr. I. B. TAYLOR-KAMARA
Present:

(Sierra Leone).

5. Mr. KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET
(France) (interpretation
f?orn French): I consider that the observations just made by
the representative of Somalia are relevant. This is the same
question that we have been discussing for a number of
meetings of the Council. Of course, new documents come
in as the debate proceeds, but I believe it would be a good
thing to have a general title such as that suggested by the
representative of Somalia. Of course we could consider
whether some other title would be better, but I think the
idea is an excellent one and should be accepted.

The

% Repub%c,. Uii%- of Sovie,tSociahst
United
-..- . ..__-. &blics,’
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America.
.-f&&-L
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 614)
1. Adoption
2.

of the agenda.

6. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (translation from Chinese): I
agree with the suggestion made by the representative of
Somalia, supported by the representative of France; and if
we are to use a title in our agenda my proposal is that it
should be “The situation in the subcontinent of India and
Pakistan”.

Letter dated 12 December 1971 from the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/ 10444).

7. The PRESIDENT: May I ask the representative of
Somalia whether he has any particular suggestion as regards
the title or qualification of the agenda?

Adoption of the agenda
1. The PRESIDENT:
The provisional agenda for the
present meeting is before the Council in document S/
Agenda/l614.
If I hear no objection I shall take it that the
agenda is adopted.

8. Mr. FARAH
(Somalia): I would suggest that the
question be entitled: “The situation in the India/Pakistan
subcontinent”.

2. I CaII upon the representative of Somalia on a point of
order.

9. The PRESIDENT: As there is no further suggestion or
comment on this, I shall regard the present suggestion as
accepted.’

3. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): I raise a point of order in
connexion with the question under debate. So far, although
we have been debating the situation on the Indian
subcontinent-or
the India-Pakistan subcontinent-this has
not been reflected in the agenda. For instance, on
4 December (1606th meeting], we had the item inscribed
as “Letter
dated 4 December 1971 from the Permanent
Representatives
of Argentina, Belgium, Burundi . . .” and so
on [S/lO41l].
On 5 December (1607th meeting] we had
that same letter on the agenda, together with the report of
the Secretary-General [S/10410 and Add.11, and another
report
by the Secretary-General [S/10412].
On 12
December
(1611th meeting] we had the item again, but
this time it was related to a letter dated 12 December from
the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America
to the President of the Security Council
[S/1 04441.

7Yheagenda, as amended, was adopted.
The situation in the India/Pakistan subcontinent
10. The PRESIDENT: The Council will now resume its
consideration of the item on the agenda.
11. I now call on the representative
Kingdom on a point of order.

of the United

12. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): Before we deal
with the formal procedure might I make a suggestion. As all
members of the Council will know, we have before US a
draft resolution by the Italian and Japanese delegations
[S/104.51], but there is also a draft resolution which is
being worked on by my French colleague and myself.
Intensive consultations are going on at the present time and
I do not see that they will necessarily be completed by this
evening. So, might I suggest that we adjourn until tomor-

4. I think it would be convenient for our debate if we
could now try to reach agreement on a title for this
question;
and since every one of us has referred to “the
situation
in the Indian subcontinent” or “the situation in
&re B&a-Pakistan
subcontinent” we should now give this
title to our debate.

1 The amended provisional
symbol S/Agenda/l614/Rev.l.

1

agenda was circulated under the

consultations, to continue efforts to reach a solution OT
question. I wanted to say that my delegation is aho en@
in drafting a text for submission to the Council
WC
have broached consultations With other delegations. Iri the
circumstances we belleve that the proposal made by eB@
representative of the United Kingdom would
help $2
advance these consultations and perhaps enable US to c@rt~
to our next meeting with texts that cw
be discusz&
advisedly.

row so that we can pursue our consultations and we do not,
therefore, as it were, waste the time Of the Council in
purely formal matters.
13. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (tmd7tiOn
from Chinfd:
In principle I agree that consultations should go on.
However, the time of the resumption of the Security
Council must be as early as possible. Therefore, I do not
agree that we should defer our meeting Until tomorrow+
1
suggest that after we have some results from our consultations we should resume our meeting. If we have to fix a
time then make it tonight at 7 p.m.-not later than that
time.

19. Mr. KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET
(France) (irtterpr~lmk~~
from French): I wanted to speak a moment ago. perhapr ::
is not so appropriate right now, but I wanted to say thy 1
fully share fie concern expressed by our colleague fro””
China. TO be sure we are all very anxious to move uhe&
swiftly and all delegations here are working
very hard 2:
this present time, but a premature meeting might not ykJ$
the expected results. I therefore think we should ~WZa
flexible as possible. We could suspend the present rneetii~
I do not think we could reasonably meet before &zr.
evening, perhaps not even before tomorrow.
However, $<
after our consultations it seemed feasible to have a rncyrts~~
this evening, then the President could immediately COIIY~~~
the Council. Thus I do not think it is necessary now ;:
schedule a time either for this evening or tomorrow,
%s
could say that we are suspending the meeting and then lip>?
President could convene the Council again as soon 01
possible, as suggested by the representative
of China. I:
could be this evening or at the latest tomorrow
morning,

14. We must consider the gravity of the situation in that
subcontinent. We must bear in mind that many cities are
now under the devastation of gunfire. Masses of people are
being slaughtered, are being sacrificed, and therefore we
must keep that in mind. We have to have a conception of
time: We have also to bear the responsibility that we have
towards them, towards the people of the world, and we
have to proceed with our consultations in a serious way.
The meeting must be resumed as soon as possible.
15. The PRESIDENT: May I know from the representative of China what he means when he talks about the
resumption-we have resumed the meeting-but is it his
suggestion that we should rise now for a while, go for
further consultations and then come back again? I have the
impression that the representative of China is asking us to
resume the meeting. We have already resumed our meeting.
Is he suggesting that we should have a short adjournment
within which we can hold further consultations, because
when we are meeting it becomes difficult to hold further
consultations? Is he asking for an adjournment for a
specific period to hold further consultations and then for a
resumption of the meeting?

20. Mr. ORTIZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (DI&~~I~~~~B~~~
from Spanish): My delegation fully shares the corto&:?
expressed by the representative of China. We believe thy
the Council must act, and act very soon, to try to rewhz
the tragic crisis in the Asian subcontinent. NevertheIcs;s. ,L:
the present stage of our work it is necessary to purse
consultations, not only among all members of the Coun;;.
but also between the two parties most directly corlcenwd 2;
this clash, India and Pakistan. I think we need time &-,T
these consultations to yield fruitful results. Experience trpi
shown that when the Council adjourns its meeting for a &?*
hours, guided by the very noble desire to conclude its *r-oar
as soon as possible, the results are not always the
E
because an exhaustive consideration of the matter C;LI)E,*
take place in a very short period of time; moreover, n &oo~
interval does not make it possible to receive instrurtisra~
Z
would therefore appeal to the representative of China XT,:
tell him that I share his views, but I appeal to him 11oltI:
oppose the suggestion made by the representative
of &+
United Kingdom. I think we can make very good use of E&
few remaining hours of today then perhaps at a meeitti;
tomorrow we might be able to reach the solution which “1
required. The hours which remain today-and
they arc: I”+::
so many, I might say parenthetically-will
have t* &
devoted to the intensified consultations that are wcew~
For this reason my delegation does not beIievc that ++Q:
should have a debate on this matter here and rs~ti
Therefore, I support the suggestion made by tire represergti.
tive of the United Kingdom that we should have a nteenir:;
tomorrow morning and that we devote the rest of to&y !,$I
these very necessary consultations.

16. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (trunslation from Chinese):
If I remember correctly, the representative of the United
Kingdom made a statement that consultations are being
held at the present time and he also proposed that the
meeting should be resumed tomorrow-that
is his proposal.
I wonder whether that understanding is correct? Can the
representative of the United Kingdom clarify this point
for us?
17. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): Yes, I did
propose an adjournment until tomorrow because, with
great respect, our consultations are being continued very
urgently but I really very much doubt that they will be able
to be completed this evening because there are a number of
extremely difficult points at issue. Representatives will have
to get instructions from their home Governments and I
believe it is very important that as far as the next resolution
that this Council tries to pass is concerned, we should be
able to achieve unanimity, or be able to pass a resolution,
and therefore it is very important that we should do our
work; an extra delay of an hour or two, or even eight hours,
would be worth while, to avoid further disagreement.
18. Mr. MICAGA (Poland) (interpretation from French):
1 should like to say that we are all aware of the situation,
but we are all also aware of the need to continue

21. Mr. TOMRH (Syrian Arab Republic): 1 should IIke fr:,
support the very pertinent suggestion, or proposal,
thnf # ~5

2

put forward by the representative of France. It seems to be
a very practical one because it would not close the door to
the possibility of having a meeting tonight, should the
consultations now being conducted reach a result which
would warrant a meeting of the Council tonight. In case
such a result is not reached, then a meeting of the Council
would be held tomorrow. The important thing is that this
proposal does not close the door to a possible meeting
tonight. Thus it is a very happy compromise between the
proposals that have been put before the Council, I therefore
formally support the proposal of the representative of
France,

Pakistan be invited to take the floor in case they have
somethingto impart to us?
26. Mr. NAKAGAWA (Japan): My delegation sharesthe
anxiety expressedby the Chinesedelegation and alsosome
other delegations about the urgency of the problem.
Although we understand the need for time to engagein
consultations, I think we can tentatively schedulea meeting
for, say, 9 o’clock this evening in view of the urgency of
this matter, with the delegationsdoing their best to arrive
at some understanding by that time. Of course,if there is
no prospect of an early Solution of the matter when we
meet, then we can adjourn againuntil tomorrow morning.
But anyway, I think the Council should try as hard as
possibleto meet in view of the urgency of the matter.

22. Mr. BENNETT (United States of America): I should
merely like to speak of the urgency of the situation. You
will recall that this Council decided last evening, after
considerable debate, to adjourn until 3 o’clock this afternoon to enable consultations to take place. My delegation is
grateful for the fact that those consultations are going on
and a great deal of dedicated work is being put into the
question of finding a solution and a draft resolution on
which we can all agree. However, while we are consulting,
let me remind the Council, if I may use an American
phrase, that there is “a war going on”. People are dying,
there is shooting and bombing and innocent women and
children are being killed along’with the soldiers and other
civilians while we consult. My delegation is prepared to sit
hem now or to rise to enable further consultations and to
meet again as soon as possible, whether it is this evening or
tomorrow,
but we feel that there is urgency in the situation
and we would be prepared to come as soon as others can:
after the consultations. We would hope that that could be
as early as this evening.

27. Mr. VINCI (Italy): I do not think I have to reiterate
the senseof urgency with which our delegationhasalways
viewed this very seriousproblem. Wehave been acting on
that basisall the time and, therefore, we sharecompletely
the feelings of anxiety which have been expressedby so
many speakers,beginningwith the representativeof China.
28. My feeling is that we should not now establishany
hour when we meet. I think the bestthing is that we go on
with our consultations which, as far as my delegation is
concerned, have been very seriousand important negotiations. We are deeply involved in those negotiations, and I
am sure that the delegationsof the United Kingdom and
France are equally involved in very seriousnegotiations. If
we can succeedin a few hours, all the better. I think the
best proposal wasmade by the representativeof France; it
leaves you free, Mr, President, to convene the meeting at
the earliest possiblemoment. If it can be in two hours, all
the better. We could meet at any time provided that we
know you are empoweredto convenethe meeting as soon
asyou know there is somethingwe can do.

23. Mr. VAN USSEL (Belgium) (interpretation from
F~enclz): We share, as we have often said, the concern and
the impatience once again expressed here by the representative of China and by other representatives. We also feel that
we should set about our work without delay in order to
fuld a solution to the problem which is of concern to US. I
also propose with the representative of France that we
sllould continue our consultations and perhapsmeet this
evening, if we canreach concrete results.

29. The PRESIDENT: A proposalwas put forward that
this meeting of the Council be adjourned and that the
Council reconvene either at short notice or, at the latest,
tomorrow morning, the time in between being utilized for
further consultations. We haveheardshort statementsfrom
members of the Council. Unlessthere are further statements to be made, I propose to adjourn the meeting for
three hours, to meet againat 8 o’clock tonight.

24. Mr.
FARAH (Somalia): The representative of
Argentina remarkedthat there are only a few hoursleft of
our working day in New York, but a few hours for those
poor victims of aerial bombardment and shelling is a
lifetime of misery. For this reason,my delegation,naturally, is not entirely happy about having to postponethis
problem day after day without any kind of constructive
proposal coming out to justify suchpostponements.

30. Mr. MALIK

(translation

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

from Russfa?z): We are all showing concern

about the matter under consideration, we all realize the
urgency of the question and there appearsto be complete
agreementamongus.
31. The second point on which, in my opinion, there is
unanimity is the necessityand the desirability of continuing
consultations. Here again there would seem to be no
opposition. We all agreewith this.

25. If the representatives of France and the United
Kingdom-who,
after all, have still to make plain their
position or whatever proposal they may have-can indicate
to us that they sharea senseof optimismabout comingto
tire Council tomorrow with a formula, the Councilcertainly
would be justified in agreeingto the adjournment, but if
tliey cannot promise us any prospect of a settlement or
solution
and we find tomorrow that we go on with the
sale old procedure of postponing againfor 24 hours, we
would be abdicating our responsibilities.If we do adjourn,
tight
I suggestthat perhapsthe representatives
of India or

32. The third point on which a generalapproachseemsto
be crystallizing concerns the interrelationship between
consultations and the time of conveninga Council meeting.
If we succeedin reachingpositive resultsin the processof
consultations in an hour, the meetingcould be convenedin
an hour’s time; if we do so in three hours, the meeting
3

could be convened in three hours’ time. That is to say that
since we all recognize the interrelationship and interdependence between consultations and their consequences,
between their results and the time at which the meeting
should be convened, bearing in mind the proposal expressed
by our distinguished French colleague and supported by
our Italian colleague and a number of others, including the
representative of Argentina, 1 think it would be most useful
to agree on the following formula: appreciating the urgency
and the importance of the question, manifesting our
concern, recognizing the necessity and the desirability of
continuing consultations and bearing in mind the interrelationship between consultations, their outcome and the time
of the meeting, consultations should be continued; if we
succeed in producing positive results from these consultations, the meeting should be convened at any time today. If
we do not succeed in three hours, we might do so in four or
five hours, by 9 o’clock, 10 o’clock, or 11. If we do not
succeed today, the meeting should be convened not later
than tomorrow morning.
33. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): My delegation will agree
reluctantly to another adjournment of this Council. But
before adjourning, I should like to make sure that neither
of the parties to the conflict wishes to take the floor. That
might be ascertained before we adjourn. If they wish to
take the floor, we should allow it. If not, we can adjourn.
34. Mr. MALIK

37. Mr. KUEAGA (Poland) (interpretation from l+ench):
Mr. President, I should like to put a veIy simple question
with regard to this matter: Do the representatives of India
and Pakistan want to speak at this afternoon’s meeting? If
they have not requested the floor I think it would be
natural to conclude that they do not intend to speak this
afternoon. If you do not have the names of India and
Pakistan on your list of speakers, and if the representatives
of those countries do not ask for the floor, I think it would
be logical to conclude that they do not intend to take the
floor at this particular meeting.
38. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): I do not know,
Mr. President, whether you want to answer the Polish
representative’s question as to whetber or not they are
inscribed. Have they been?
39. The PRESIDENT:

They have not yet been inscribed,

40. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): In that case,
Mr. President, under rule 33 of our provisional rules of
procedure, may I put forward a formal motion to suspend
the meeting until such time as you are satisfied that
consultations have proceeded to such a degree that we are
able to reach agreement and can have a fruitful meeting.

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translation from Russian): The Soviet delegation is always

actively in favour of inviting to a meeting of the Council
parties, delegations and even individual representatives
whose statements may be of use, so that the Council may
hear them. We have absolutely no objections to the
proposal by the distinguished representative of Somalia that
an invitation should be issued forthwith to the representative of India and the representative of Pakistan and that
they should be given an opportunity to express their views.
But this may have an effect on the time available for our
consultations. If each of them speaks for an hour, that will
take two hours. It is not impossible that after their
statements someone will require to speak in exercise of the
right of reply, and we shall in practical terms commence a
meeting. In such a way our understanding on the continuation of consultations will be rendered invalid. Would that
really be desirable?

41. The PRESIDENT:
I have considered the various
proposals made, and I am of the opinion that the meeting
should be adjourned and that the Council should reconvene tonight. If there is no objection to this suggestion I
shall adjourn the meeting and allow reasonable time to
re-convene the Council. But if I hear further objection, then
I shall put the proposal for suspension to the vote, as
suggested by the representative of the United Kingdom. I
make this suggestion to allow for compromise, because
some are asking for adjournment until tomorrow morning,
while others are asking for suspension until tonight. I would
prefer to have some flexibility and to notify representatives
when it is time for a meeting tonight.

35. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (translation from CYzinese): I
support the proposal made by the representative of Somalia
to invite the representatives of Pakistan and India to
participate in our discussion. As for the consultation,
perhaps, Mr. President, you could set a time limit on
statements by the representatives of Pakistan and India.
:

President, you were to rule one way or the other. My
delegation does not like to discussprocedural matters and it
is willing to go along with any ruling, as long as it is the
ruling of the Council. In summary, then, Mr. President, we
would be extremely grateful if you were to rule on the
alternatives that have been proposed.

42. Mr. ORTIZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (interpretatiorz
from Spanish): What would happen if this evening we were
to fmd that the consultations-which are very difficult
because positions are still very far apart-had not achieved
positive results? I do not think there is much point in
tentatively scheduling a meeting for this evening. With all
due respect, Mr. President, I would say that it seems to be,
if not the unanimous opinion, at least the majority view in
the Council, that we should not set a time for the next
meeting, that we should leave things up to the consultations. If the consultations yield positive results, then, of
course, all members of the Council will be most anxious to
meet. But let us not set a time for an evening meeting,
because we do not yet know whether the consultations will
yield fruitful results between now and then. If unfortunately this evening the consultations yield nothing concrete,
then it is obvious that we shall have to meet tomorrow

36. Mr.

TERENCE
(Burundi) (interpretation from
My delegation believes that silence can also
contribute to expediting proceedings. Therefore, in view of
the extreme gravity of the situation, we decided to remain
silent, in the hope that a settlement would be reached as
soon as possible. It now appears that matters are not
proceeding as we would have desired, and so, in the light of
the various proposals which have been put forward, I do
not think we can say that there is any unanimity. Hence it
might be useful, Sir, if in exercising your authority as
French):

4

,

morning. Therefore, although my delegation would in
principle prefer to meet tomorrow morning at 10.30, we
believe that the French proposal is the most appropriate.

Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ire-land, United States of America,
Against: None.

43. The PRESIDENT: There appears to be some misunderstanding of what I have stated. I had earlier proposed to
suspend the meeting for three hours, but after hearing
statements from members my proposal now is that the
meeting be adjourned, to be re-convened tonight, without
our setting any time, it being understood that, in the
interim, if this proposal is agreed to, we would continue
consultations and that, sooner or later, we would know
when to re-convene the meeting.

Abstentions:
The motion
4 abstentions.

Burundi, China, Sierra Leone, Somalia.
was adopted by 11 votes to none, with

The meeting was suspended at 4.55 p.m.; it was resumed
on Wednesday, 15 December, at 12.10 p.m,

50. The PRESIDENT: The resumed 1614th meeting of
the Security Council is called to order. This meeting of the
Security Council was suspended yesterday afternoon for
the purpose of consultations following the adoption of a
motion to that effect made by the representative of the
United Kingdom.

44. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): I did not see any justification
for the representative of the United Kingdom to move for a
suspension of this meeting for the purpose of proceeding
with consultations. If members are going to hold consultations, naturally they are going to consult with the two main
parties to the conflict. Now, if either of those two parties
wishes to take the floor at this stage, of course, such
consultations would be of no avail. What I am asking you,
Mr. President, is to ascertain from those two parties
whether they wish to speak. If not, then let us adjourn.
But, surely, this very elementary right cannot be abrogated
or refused for the purpose of consultation.

51. Members of the Council will recall that the agenda for
this meeting was modified before its adoption yesterday
afternoon, and the formulation of the agenda now under
consideration is to be found in document S/Agenda/
1614/Rev.l.
52. The Council will now resume its consideration of the
item on its agenda.

45. The PRESIDENT: Under rule 33 of the provisional
rules of procedure I cannot prevent the representative of
the United Kingdom from invoking that procedure, but I
might again appeal to all members, for the purposes of
compromise, that we agree to suspend the meeting and
re-convene tonight as soon as notice is given by me. I
promise that I shall be taking part in the consultations and
that, sooner or later, we will know at what specific time we
are to re-convene. If it becomes apparent that no agreement
has been reached, I will still re-convene the meeting with a
view to adjourning until tomorrow morning, if that is
agreeable.

53. Members of the Council will recall that at a previous
meeting 11606th meeting] the Council had decided to
invite the representatives of India and Pakistan to participate, without the right to vote, in the debate on the
problem currently under discussion in the Council. In
accordance with that decision, and with the consent of the
Council, I would invite the representatives of India and
Pakistan to take their seatsat the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Swaran Singh
(India) and Mr. Z. A. Bhutto (Pakistan) took places at the
Council table.

46. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): I made a formal
proposal under rule 33. Perhaps the easiest thing would be
for the Council to vote on it straight away; it should be
decided without debate.

54. The PRESIDENT: The Council had also decided at a
previous meeting [1607th meeting] to extend invitations to
the representatives of Tunisia and Saudi Arabia to partici-.
pate in the debate, without the right to vote. Accordingly,
and with the consent of the Council, I invite those
representatives to take the places reserved for them in the
Council chamber, with the understanding that they will be
invited to take places at the Council table when it is their
turn to address the Council,

47. The PRESIDENT: I would request the representative
of the United Kingdom formally to repeat his proposal so
that I may take it as a motion under rule 33.
48. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): Mr. President, I
propose that the meeting be suspended for the purpose of
consultations, to be reconvened by you at such time as you
are satisfied that sufficient progress has been made in the
process of consultations so that agreement is likely to be
reached.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. R Dr&s (Tunisia)
and Mr. % M, Baroody (Saudi Arabia) took the places
reserved for them in the Council chamber.

55. The PRESIDENT: We are meeting again this morning
to resume our discussion of the item relating to the
deteriorating situation on the India-Pakistan subcontinent.
The Council has already held some seven meetings on this
question, during the course of which it has considered a
dozen draft resolutions. Some of those drafts were not
pressed to the vote, but others, which were pressed to the
vote, failed to be adopted. Only one draft resolution was

49. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council will now vote
on the motion made by the representative of the United
Kingdom.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour: Argentina, Belgium, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Syrian Arab Republic, Union of Soviet
5

millions are dying, and it would have come to 56 million if
the Council had kept on filibustering and discussing
whether it should meet today or tomorrow or the day after
tomorrow-whether
the lines of communication between
New York and Moscow and Peking and other capitals
would permit the members to obtain new instructions.
Thus we could have gone on and on. That is why I
requested you, Mr. President, to convene a meeting of the
Security Council immediately, and I am thankful to you for
having convened this meeting, because precious time is
being lost. My countrymen, my people, are dying, So I
think I can facilitate your efforts if I speak now. Perhaps
this will be my last speech in the Security Council, So
please bear with me, because I have some home truths to
tell the Security Council. The world must know. My people
must know. I have not come here to accept abject
surrender. If the Security Council wants me to be a party to
the legalization of abject surrender, then I say that under
no circumstances shall I be. Yesterday my 1 l-year-old son
telephoned me from Karachi and said to me, “DO not come
back with a document of surrender. We do not want to see
you back in Pakistan if you come like that.” I will not take
back a document of surrender from the Security Council, I
will not be a party to the legalization of aggression.

adopted (resolution 303(1971)]: it was a procedural draft
transmitting the matter to the General Assembly, and the
General Assembly thereupon, on. 7 December, adopted
resolution 2793 (XXVI). In response to that resolution we
have received replies from Pakistan and India. Pakistan’s
reply is contained in document S/10440; India’s reply is
contained in document S/10445.
56. Meanwhile, the situation on the subcontinent is
deteriorating, and innocent lives are being lost. I would
therefore appeal to the Security Council, which under the
Charter has the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security, to come to a decision.
It has already taken considerable time, while the situation
demands urgent action by the Council. I would, therefore,
reiterate my appeal for a positive decision by the Council as
soon as possible-I would hope at this meeting.
57. I call now on the Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign
Minister of Pakistan, who wishes to make an urgent
statement. At this time he is the only speaker whose name
is inscribed on my list.
58. Mr. BHUTTO (Pakistan): We have met here today at a
grave moment in the history of my country, and I would
request the Council kindly to forbear with me and to hear
the truth, the bitter truth. I know the United Nations. I
know the Security Council. I have participated here in the
past. The time has come when, as far as Pakistan is
concerned, we shall have to speak the truth, whether
members of the Council like it or not. We were hoping that
the Security Council, mindful of its responsibilities for the
maintenance of world peace and justice, would have acted
according to principle and brought an end to a naked,
brutal aggression against my people. For this reason I left
my country. I was needed by the people of Pakistan, and
when I was leaving Pakistan I was in a divided mind
whether to go to the Security Council to represent the
cause of my country, to represent the cause of a people
that had been subjected to aggression, or to remain with my
people, by their side, while they were being subjected to
attack and violence. However, I felt that it was imperative
for me to come here and to seek justice from the Security
Council. But I must say, whether the members like it or
not, that the Security Council has denied my country that
justice. From the moment I arrived we have been caught by
dilatory tactics.

61. The Security Council has failed miserably, shamefully,
“The Charter of the United Nations”, “the San Francisco
Conference”, “international peace and justice”-these
are
the words we heard in our youth, and we were inspired by
the concept of the United Nations, maintaining international peace and justice and security. President Woodrow
Wilson said that he fought the First World War to end wars
for all time. The League of Nations came into being, and
then the United Nations after it. What has the United
Nations done? I know of the farce and the fraud of the
United Nations. They come here and say, “Excellence,
Excellence, comment allez-vous? ” and al1 that. “A very
good speech-you have spoken very well, trh bien.” We
have heard all these things. The United Nations resembles
fashion houses in trying to hide ugly realities and draping
ungainly figures in alluring apparel. The concealment of
realities is common to both, the ugly realities cannot be
hidden. You do not need a Secretary-General. You need a
chief executioner.
62. Let us face the stark truth. I have got no stakes left for
the moment. That is why I am speaking the truth from my
heart. For four days we have been deliberating here. For
four days the Security Council has procrastinated. Why?
Because the object was for Dacca to fall. That was the
object. It was quite clear to me from the beginning. So
what if Dacca falls? Cities and countries have fallen before.
They have come under foreign occupation. China was under
foreign occupation for years. Other countries have been
under foreign occupation. Frarlce was under foreign
occupation. Western Europe was under foreign occupation.
So what if Dacca falls? So what if the whole of East
Pakistan falls? So what if the whole of West Pakistan falls?
So what if our State is obliterated? We will build a new
Pakistan. We will build a better Pakistan. We will build a
greater Pakistan.

59. It will be recalled that when the Indian Foreign
Minister spoke and I spoke after him I said that filibustering
was taking place. That was my immediate observation. The
Security Council, I am afraid, has excelled in the art of
filibustering, not only on substance but also on procedural
matters. With some cynicism I watched yesterday a full
hour of the Security Council’s, time wasted on whether the
members of the Council would be ready to meet at
9.30 a.m. or whether bed and breakfast required that they
should meet at 11 a.m.
60. The representative of Somalia referred to the population of East Pakistan as 56 million, but later on he
corrected himself to say that the population of Bengal-of
Muslim Bengal-was 76 million. If he had waited for a few
more days he need not have corrected himself because

63. The Security Council has acted short-sightedly by
acquiescing in these dilatory tactics. You have reached a
6

point when we shall say, “Do what you like.” If this point
had not been reached we could have made a commitment.
We could have said, “All right, we are prepared to do some
thhg~.” NOW why should we? You want us to be silenced
by guns. Why should we say that we shall agree to
anything? NOW YOU decide what you like. Your decision
will not be binding on us. You can decide what you like. If
you had left us a margin of hope, we might have been a
party to some settlement.
64. But the Indians are so short-sighted. Mr. President,
you referred to the “distinguished” Foreign Minister of
India. If he can be the Foreign Minister of India I could
have been the Prime Minister of united India. But I would
much rather be a janitor in a free country. I am proud to
belong to a free country, even if it is sought to obliterate it.
How‘ is he distinguished, when his hands are full of blood,
when his heart is full of venom? But you know they did
not have vision. The partition of India took place because
they did not have vision. Now also they are lacking in
vision. They talk about their ancient civilization and the
mystique of India and all that. But they do not have vision
at all. If I had been in his place, I should have acted
differently.
I extended a hand of friendship to him the
other day. He should have seen what I meant. I am not
talking as a puppet. I am talking as the authentic leader of
the people of West Pakistan, who elected me at the polls in
a more impressive victory than the victory that Mujibur
Rahman received in East Pakistan, and he should have
taken cognizance of that. But he did not take cognizance of
it. We could have opened a new page, a new chapter in our
relations.

one State-then we shall say, “Carthage must be destroyed.” We shall tell our children and they will tell their
children that Carthage must be destroyed.
67. So please, Mr. President and members of the Security
Council, realize the implications. The Pakistan nation is a
brave nation. One of the greatest British generals said that
the best infantry fighters in the world are the Pakistanis. We
will fight. We will fight for a thousand years, if it comes to
that. So do not go by momentary military victories.
Stalingrad was overwhelmed. Leningrad was besieged for a
thousand days. People who want to be free and who want
to maintain their personaiity will fight and will continue to
fight for principles.

65. As I said, if the French and the Germans can come to
terms, why cannot India and Pakistan come to terms? If
the Turks and the Greeks can still talk sensibly as civilized
people over Cyprus, why cannot India and Pakistan do
likewise?
If the Soviet Union and the United States can
open a new page in their history, if China and the United
States can open a new page in their history, why can we not
usher in a new era in our relations? We could have done so.
But as was said about the 1967 Arab-Israeli war, the
military victory of Israel made it more difficult for Israel
and the Arabs to reach a settlement. If you want to
subjugate Pakistan militarily, you will find it more difficult
to bring peace. I say that the choice for us is either to
accept living in the same subcontinent co-operating for
peace and progress, or to be implacable enemies of each
other for ever.

68. We were told about the realities, to accept the
realities. What are the realities? Realities keep changing,
Mr. Permanent Representative of the Soviet Union. The
reality was that the Nazi forces were outside the gates of
MOSCOW.But you fought valiantly, you fought bravely and
the world saluted the Soviet Union for having resisted the
realities which it was sought to impose on it. The reality
was that China was under the occupation of Japan,that
Manchuria was taken-half of China. That was the reality.
Sincethe Opium War, Chinahasseenreality. The reality for
France was that it was under occupation. But there were
greatmen like Presidentde Gaullewho left Franceandthey
fought acrossthe seas.Ethiopia wasunder Fascistdomination. But the Ethiopians fought. The Emperor of
Ethiopia left his country and sought asylum in Britain.
Ethiopia is free today. The realities that matter are those
that are not a temporary phenomenon,which arerooted in
historic principles. The principle is that Pakistan is an
independent sovereign State, which came into being
becauseof the volition of its people. That is the basic
reality which hasexisted for 24 years. Pakistanwould not
have been dismemberedlike this if it had not beenattacked
by another country. This is not an internal movement.We
have been subjected to attack by a militarily powerful
neighbour. Who saysthat the new reality aroseout of free
will? Had there been the exerciseof free will, India would
not have attacked Pakistan;India would not have invaded
my country to impose its will backed by a handful of
secessionists.
If India talks about the will of the peopleof
East Pakistan and claims that it had to attack Pakistanin
order to impose the will of the people of East Pakistan,
then what has it done about Kashmir? East Pakistanis an
integral part of Pakistan. Kashmiris a disputed territory.
Why doesIndia then not permit it to exerciseits will?

66. The Permanent Representative of the Soviet Union
does not like my reference to the Roman Empire. I do not
know
what objection he has to it, unless he sees some
similarity between his empire and the Roman Empire. I do
not really see why he had any objection to that. But I shall
again refer to the Roman Empire, and I hope that the
Permanent Representative of the Soviet Union will have no
objection
to it, because we want to have good relations
with the Soviet Union and we want to open a new chapter
with the Soviet Union because we are neighbours. I go back
to the Roman Empire and I say what Cato said to the
“Cat,hage
must be destroyed.” If India thinks
Romans,
that it is g&g
to subjugate Pakistan, Eastern Pakistan as
well as Western Pakistan-because we are one people, we are

69. But yesterday I saw how the Security Council was
panderingto India. Even the great Powersare panderingto
India, saying to us “Do not misunderstand”,“Would YOU
please let us know”, “Would you please answer the
following questions”, “I am not insisting on those questions, but if you do not mind”. India is intoxicated today
with its military successes.In 1967 I told the present
PermanentRepresentativeof India that we wantedto have
good relations, I am not speakingfrom a position of
weakness.I told him in 1967that we wanted goodrelations
between the two countries-but basedon principles,based
on justice, basedon equity, not basedon exploitation and
domination, becauserelations on the basisof exploitation
and domination cannot be a lastingsolution. What we want
7

government. Which Government does not make mistakes?
But if some Government has made a mistake, does it follow
that the country itself must be dismembered, obhterated?
Is that going to be the conclusion of the Security Council,
if it legalizes Indian aggression on the soil of Pakistan?

is a lasting, a permanent solution. I did not say this just
today; I said that in 1967 to their Permanent Representative, who was then the High Commissioner of India to
Pakistan, I told that to the Foreign Minister of India when
we were negotiating on Kashmir: “Let us settle this
problem on the basis of equity and justice, so that we can
live as good neighbours.” And I add today: we can still live
as good neighbours, as friends. Do not wipe out that
possibility by military conquest and military power.

74. So you will see now: this is not the end of the road;
this is the beginning of the road; this is not the end of the
chapter; a new chapter has begun, a new page has been
written in international relations. This is gunboat diplomacy in its worst form. It makes the Hitlerite aggression
pale into insignificance, because Hitlerite aggression was not
accepted by the world. If the world is going to endorse this
aggression, it will mean a new and most unfortunate
chapter in international relations. A new chapter may have
begun in India and Pakistan, but please do not start a new,
dreadful, chapter in international relations. For us, it is a
hand-to-hand, day-to-day, minute-to-minute fight. But do
not do that to the rest of the world. Please do not permit
this kind of naked, shameful, barbaric aggression to hold
sway.

70. This has been the worst form of aggression, of naked
aggression. Even Poland was not invaded by Germany in
this fashion. Even in that case there were some pretences,
some excuses that were made. Here the excuse was, “We
have refugees, so we must invade another country.” We
said, “We are prepared to take those refugees back.” If we
had said, “We are not prepared to take them back”, then
you could have said, “Well, you will be sunk.”
71. India’s population rises by 13 million a year. The
number of refugees was alleged to be 9 million, 10 million;
according to our estimate, there were 5 million. But that is
not important, figures are not important. The point is that
we were prepared to take them back. If India’s population
can expand by 13 million a year, then with all the aid and
assistance that India was getting for the refugees, it could
have held on for a short period until the civilian Government came into Pakistan to negotiate the return of the
refugees. I told the United States Ambassador in Pakistan
that once a civilian government came into being in Pakistan,
I was prepared to go to the refugee camps myself to talk to
them. But they pre-empted it all, because the refugee
problem was used as a pretext to dismember my country.
The refugee problem was used as a pretext, an ugly, crude
pretext, a shameful pretext to invade my country, to invade
East Pakistan.

75. In the old days great warriors swept over the world
-Genghis Khan, Subutai Khan, Alexander, Caesar, coming
down to the great Napoleon. But this is worse, this is much
worse than all that was done by the great conquerors of the
world in the past. If the United Nations becomes a party to
this kind of conquest, it will be much worse than aI that
has been done in the past. You will be turning the
medium-sized and the small countries into the harlots of
the world. You cannot do that. It is against civilized
concepts, it is against all the rules of civilization and of
international morality and justice.
76. The United States Government was criticized for
supporting the position of Pakistan. What crime has the
United States Government committed? It has taken the
position identical to that of the whole world on the
India-Pakistan conflict. That position was supported by 105
countries-it was 104 officially, but it was really 105
because one representative did not know how to press the
right button. That was the voice of the world. It was an
international referendum. You talk about the election of
1970. Well, I am proud of the election of 1970 because my
party emerged as the strongest party in West Pakistan. But
here was an international election, and India flouted it,
With such an attitude towards international opinion, how
can India pretend to be sensitive to a national election in
another country? The same India that refuses to hold a
referendum in Kashmir?

72. The great Powers will forgive me. I have addressed
them in this moment of anguish, and they should understand. The great Powers, or the super-Powers-the
super-duperPowers, the razzling-dazzling Powers-the
super-Powers have imposed their super-will for the moment.
But I am thankful to the people and the Government of the
United States, among the super-Powers, for the position it
has taken. The people of the United States to some extent
have been misled by massive Indian propaganda. While we
had no paraphernalia of popular administration and government in Pakistan, there wasa political vacuum. The Indians
took advantage of that political vacuum and they spread
out fast to project their point of view. As a result,
American public opinion, and public opinion in Great
Britain and France and other countries, was influenced,
Unfortunately, nothing wassaid of the massacresthat took
place between 1 March and 25 March.

77. The Permanent Representative of the Soviet Union
talked about realities. Mr. Permanent Representative of the
Soviet Union, look at this reality. I know that you are the
leader of a great country. You behave like one. The way
you throw out your chest, the way you thump the table,
you do not talk like Comrade Malik; you talk like Tsar
Malik. I am glad you are smiling, because I am not; my
heart is bleeding. We want to be friends, but this is not the
way to be friends when my country is decimated, it is
sought to destroy it, to wipe it out.

73. NO doubt there were mistakes on our side. I said
yesterday that mistakes were made, and that the Permanent
Representative of the Soviet Union said that I had admitted
mistakes. Well, that is not a sign of weakness,is it? Do we
not all make mistakes? Are India and the Soviet Union the
only two countries that have never made mistakes? I have
made mistakes personally. But mistakes do not mean that
my country must be destroyed, that my country must be
dismembered. That is not the consequence of mistakes of

78. And why should China and the United States be
criticized when the whole world is for Pakistan? You
8

know that we have won a great political victory, We might
have suffered a military defeat, but a political victory is
more important than a military defeat because political
victory is permanent, while military defeat is temporary.
The United States Government has acted according to its
great traditions by supporting Pakistan, and I will go before
the people of the United States before I return home and
tell them the truth. The United States has stood by the
traditions of Jefferson, Madison, Hamilton, right down to
Roosevelt and Wilson, by supporting Pakistan as an
independent State, its national integrity and its nationaI
unity. What wrong and crime has the United States
committed? Why is the Indian delegation so annoyed with
the United States? The Indian delegation is annoyed with
it-can YOU imagine that? If it had not been for the massive
food assistance that the United States gave to India, India
would have had starvation; its millions would have died.
What hope will India give to the people of East Pakistan?
What picture of hope is it going to give when its own people
in West Bengal sleep in the streets, where there is terrible
poverty, where there is terrible injustice and exploitation,
when the parliamentary rule in West Bengal has been
superseded by presidential rule? Is India going to do better
for East Pakistan, Muslim Bengal, than it has done for West
Bengal? The people of West Bengal sleep in the streets of
Calcutta. The people of West Bengal are the poorest. India
goes hat in hand to the United States for 6 million tons of
food. If they are going to impose presidential rule in West
Bengal, in their Bengal, how can they do any better in my
Bengal? They will not. And time will show that they will
IlOt..

79. SO the United States has taken a correct and moral
position. Thomas Jefferson once said: “I have sworn eternal
hostility
against any form of tyranny practised over the
mind of man.” This is a vast form of tyranny practised over
the mind of man and over the body of man. So the United
States has adhered to its tradition. And if some misguided
Senators were here, some young, misguided Senators who
have been overtaken by Indian propaganda-and if the
Permanent Representative of the United States were not
from Texas-I would have told those young Senators that I
am setting up the headquarters for a republic of Texas and
making the former President of the United States, Lyndon
Johnson, the chjef of that republic, in order to spread the
cult of Bangla Desh everywhere. Why can Texas not be
free? Let there be a republic of Texas. I did not buy Bengal
as Alaska was bought by the United States. We did not pay
money to get our territory. We did not pay dollars to
acquire territory. The people of the United States should
appreciate the position taken by their Government. Muslim
Bengal was a part of Pakistan of its free will, not through
money. We did not buy it as Alaska waspurchased. Why do
the people of the United States not see that?

impotence and incapacity of the Security Council and the
General Assembly. As you sow, so shall you reap. Remember that Biblical saying. Today it is Pakistan. We are the
guinea pigs today. But there will be other guinea pigs and
you will see what happens. You will see how the chain of
events unfolds itself. You want us to lick the dust. We are
not going to lick the dust.
82. Britain and France have abstained in order to play a
role. I said the other day, with all due respect to those two
great Powers, that they have really exhausted their position
in trying to play a role, because now the only role they can
play is to accept a shameless fait accompli. Britain and
France abstained, and that abstention has cost us dearly,
Gallic logic and Anglo-Saxon experience, whatever it
is, have cost us dearly. If Britain and France had put their
powerful weight behind the international community rather
than sitting on the fence, the issue might have been
different. There is no such animal as a neutral animal. You
take positions. In that respect we admire the Soviet Union;
it took a position, a wrong position, but it took a position.
YOU have to take a position on these matters. You have to
either be on the side of justice or on the side of injustice;
you have to be either on the side of the aggressor or of the
victim. There is no third road, It is a black and white
situation in these matters; there is no grey involved. You
are either for right or you are for wrong; you are either for
justice or for injustice; you are either for aggression or for
the victim. If the United Kingdom and France had earlier
on put their full weight behind the verdict of the
international community, I think that we would not have
reached this position. But Great Britain and France want to
come back into the subcontinent, as Clive and Dupleix, in a
different role, the role of peacemaker. They want a foot
here and they want a foot there. I know that British
interests in East Pakistan required this kind of opportunistic role because in East Pakistan they have their tea estates.
They want the jute of East Pakistan. So that is why they sat
on the fence. And I am most sorrowful for France because
with France we had developed very good relations,
extremely good relations. But they took this position. And
now, today, neither Britain nor France can play a role
because their resolution has been overtaken by events.
There is a lot of goodwill for France in Pakistan, and they
will not get the same goodwill in East Pakistan because in
East Pakistan already the clock is now moving in another
direction. Every day that the Indian army of occupation
stays there it will be a grim reminder for Muslim Bengal
that they are under Hindu occupation, and you will see the
result of it. You will see how it will turn out.
83. Let them stay-why not? Let them stay, let them
swagger around, If they want to take East Pakistan, let
them stay as an army of occupation. They are an army of
occupation; how can they be called liberators? They will
stay, and they will see how the clock is going to move in a
different direction.

80. We are beholden and thankful to the great People’s
Republic
of China. We shall always remain thankful for the
position
it has taken. It has taken a position based on
principles of justice. And I thank the third world for having
supported a just cause, a right cause.

84. Finally, I am not a rat. I have never ratted in my life. I
have faced assassination attempts, I have faced imprisonments, I have always confronted a crisis. Today I am not
ratting, but I am leaving your Security Council. I find it
disgraceful to my person and to my country to remain here
a moment longer than is necessary. I am not boycotting.

8 1, ~~~ h he Security Council we have been frustrated
by a .,oto. Let ,US build a monument to the veto, a big
monument
to the veto. Let us build a monument to the

9

Impose any decision, have a treaty worse than the Treaty of
Versailles, leg&e aggression, legalize occupation, legalize
everything that has been illegal up to 15 December 1971. I
will not be a party to it. We will fight, we will go back and
fight. My country beckons me. Why should I wastemy time
here in the Security Council? I will not be a party to the
ignominious surrender of part of my country. You can take
your Security Council. Here you are. I am going.
8.5. The PRESIDENT:
I invite the representative of
Tunisia to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
86. Mr. DRISS (Tunisia) (interpretation from French):
This is certainly a very moving moment. On a number of
occasions, ever since 5 December, I have taken the floor
both in the Security Council and in the General Assembly.
On behalf of my Government I have stressedthe gravity of
the situation in the Indo-Pakistan subcontinent. Like other
delegates, I have issued urgent appeals for decisions to be
adopted to put an end to hostilities, to human suffering,
and I have appealed for a start on the process of withdrawal
of occupying forces on both sides. Peace and respect for the
territorial integrity of the countries involved are the
necessary conditions for the settlement of disputes and
regrettable situations arising from the complexity of problems and from the errors of men.
87. We have the greatest respect for the leaders of India;
we recognize and appreciate the support given to us by
India and Pakistan during the difficult hours of our fight
for independence. Our great desire is to seethem, countries
which are friends and brothers, settling their disputes and
reaching the necessary modus vivendi for those two
countries.

leaders did not deal suitably with the problem of East
Pakistan, which unfortunately has engendered a secessionist
movement. In the same statement the Minister of Tunisia
appealed to our friends, to the Soviets, the Chinese, the
Americans, the French and the British, the permanent
members of the Security Council, to assume their respon.
sibilities.
91. The Tunisian position is in accordance with the
Charter and in accordance with the General Assembly
resolution of 7 December [2793 (XXV.)]. While we support Pakistan in the legitimate defence of its territory and
sovereignty, we are not unaware of the fact that there is a
regrettable situation which for India, which is a friend of
ours and with whom we have always had the best of
relations, caused great concern because of the infIux of
millions of refugees from East Pakistan. But this should
never have given rise to military action which is contrary to
the spirit and the letter of the Charter. Before using
military force, even if one were convinced of being right,
would it not have been better to use United Nations
machinery to settle the disputes?
92. Unfortunately, we forget. We have now forgotten the
fate of the refugees, human misery, suffering and frustration, mourning and desolation. War only increases mourning and destruction. How many victims and how many
horrors have been committed in the name of liberation
imposed by armed force? Who would therefore wish to
recognize a Government that sets itself up under the
bombing of occupation forces, which can be maintained
only by the tanks of the occupier? Can we speak of
democracy when the very right to life and peace is being
contested?
93. My delegation, at the very beginning of our debate, on
Sunday, 5 December [I 607th meeting/, in accordance with
Article 40 of the Charter, proposed that the Council take a
transitional decision, that is, that it order a cease-fire, and
continue its discussions to reach a decision on the substance
of the problem. When there is a conflict, when there is
fighting, when there is war, the first duty of the international community is to order a cease-fire.

88. We are sorry to see both of them making mistakes
which have very serious consequences, and in particular the
mistake of wishing to impose by force a settlement to a
problem which is, in the final analysis, an internal one.
Would India agree to have an army from any country
occupy the state of Kerala or Assam if for political
reasons, or reasons of security, the central Government
of India were to decide to replace an elected government
with an appointed government? Has this already happened? In any case, my Government is opposed to any
intervention by a third party in the internal affairs of a
State. This is contrary to the Charter.

94. This proposal subsequently appeared in a draft resolution put forward by a number of Powers [S/10425] and
then withdrawn. As no decision was reached on the first
day, the situation worsened. I do not, however, seek to fii
responsibility. The General Assembly voted by a majority
of 104 votes in favour of a draft resolution, complete or
partial implementation
of which could have Ied to a
cessation of hostilities and the beginning of the process of
eyacuation and of the peaceful settlement of the dispute. I
wonder whether or not the proposal adopted by the
General Assembly has since been communicated to the
Security Council.

89. Here I should like to read a communique which was
published a few days ago by the Tunisian Government,
after the meeting of the Council of Ministers:
“The Tunisian Council of Ministers has decided to
support Pakistan in the legitimate defence of its territory
and sovereignty. The Council deplores any foreign interference in the internal affairs of Pakistan, The Council
hopes that a settlement of the conflict will be found as
soon as possible in accordance with justice and the ideals
of the international community.”

95. Now what are we waiting for? For all of East Pakistan
to be occupied? For Bangla Desh to be proclaimed a new
and independent State? For the Charter to be completely
violated? And for a State Member of the United Nations to
be dismembered? I seriously doubt that the Indian leaders
really aim at this objective. I seriously doubt that the
international community would like to be associated with

90. On this occasion I wish to quote a statement just made
by the Foreign Minister of Tunisia, endorsing the support
of my country for Pakistan and regretting that Pakistani
10

such an undertaking. I doubt whether the Members of the
United Nations, great and small, wish to create precedents
which will have very serious consequences. There may be
indefinite discussions on this matter. To force the United
Nations to reach a decision on this is to force it to condemn
itself. That is impossible. Even if the problem were solved
in the field, it would still remain pending for many years
before our Organization which, whatever the circumstances,
must refuse suicide. But is this really our problem, the one
which requires the most urgent examination? Should we
not rather study the deterioration of the situation between
India and Pakistan? Must not the necessary steps be taken
to put into effect the resolution which the General
Assembly adopted, demonstrating its faithfulness to the
principles of the Charter, by an overwhelming majority?
96. On behalf of a small country worried about the serious
consequences the worsening situation in the Indo-Pakistan
subcontinent may have for the peace of the world, I should
like to plead a lost cause, but a just one, the causeof peace,
the cause of the Charter, the cause of the United Nations
itself. I reiterate my appeal to one and all to heed the voice
of reason. In my statement on 5 December I said that India
and Pakistan are brothers, that we must help resolve their
difficulties. Only in peace and mutual respect will they find
the path of dialogue and understanding. May the voice of
reason be heeded. This is but the expression of a wish. The
facts are sad indeed. For 10 days now many meetings have
taken place. There have been declared or hidden vetoes of
the major Powers, obstructing the system. The nonpermanent members of the Council are powerless. The
Members of the Organization are perhaps irritated and
frustrated, waiting for what is impossible while the irreparable is actually taking place in the field. Pakistan resists.
India is getting bogged down in an adventure which will be
added to its great concerns. The population of East

Pakistan, no matter what its views may be, is the victim of a
fratricidal, implacable struggle and East Pakistan, part of a
Member State of the United Nations, may become a
powerless island. How much longer will it be able to ensure
its stability? How will it be able to solve its problems? Will
it sever the ties which linked it to West Pakistan ever since
the creation of that two-winged State based on common
ideals, and could its leaders refuse a helping hand which
would inevitably be extended by a civilian regime that
would be set up in West Pakistan?
97. We understand, of course, that the population of East
Pakistan is anxious to have a regime which will ensure its
freedom and prosperity and, if it is determined to exercise
its democratic rights, no force can prevent it from doing so.
But it must exercise its rights within the over-all framework
of Pakistan which can, if it finds it necessary one day,
accept widely varied formulae on State organization. Before
the problem is settled between the Pakistanis themselves, it
is inadmissible that foreign interference of any kind should
lead us here in the United Nations to recognize de facto
situations. Tunisia believes in the ideals of the Charter, in
human rights, in the right of peoples to self-determination,
and we will not fail to study the situation in accordance
with these criteria, in the hope that Pakistan will be able to
collect itself in order to settle these problems, and that
India, demonstrating deep understanding of the interests of
both the parties, will make its task easier by transcending
the errors of the past. But more than ever before our
primary duty, the duty of the Security Council, the duty of
the United Nations, is to put an end to hostilities and the
occupation, and to establish the necessary climate of peace
for the settlement of complicated problems which exist in
that area.
The meeting roseon Wednesday,15 December,at I.20 pm.

11

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publication8
may
be obtained
throughout
the world.
Consult
your bookstore
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

from bookstores
or write to: United

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
depositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire
a : Nations
Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
ICAK,

IIOJIYVMTb

Hs~~a~as

N3AAHMR

OPl’AHN3Al&HH

Nations,

et les agences
ou adressez-vous

OB’bEASfHEHHbIX

HAII(EIH

BarneM
Hanun,
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
e&in
buidoras
en todas partes
de1 mundo.
Cons&e
Unidas, Section de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

in United

UNIES

Oprannsaquu
06%eminermbrx
HaquR
MO)~(HO xynnrb
a HHWXH~~X M&I‘&w a.remcmax
BO ncex paRoxax
unpa. Hasonure
cnpamtn
06 asAannax
n
KHUXCKHOM M~PB.~HH~ am mswwe
no aqmcy : Oprauasaqua
06%enwsiemibrx
Cesunn no nponaxce nsAamfR,
HISO-F~O~K
wnw SICeHem.

BNMLU

Litho

and distributor8
Nations,
Sales

New York

Price:

$U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

NACIONES

UNIDAS

en venta en librerfas
y casaa distria su librero
o dirfjase
a: Naciones

in other

currencies)

82245-October

1974-2,050
