Reaolutiom adopted Oil the Npol'II of the ftfth C.0-mittee

19

cial year ended 31 December 1954 and the certificate of
the Board of Auditors;•
2. Takes note of the observations of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
as set forth in paragraphs 224 to 226 of its first report8
to the General Assembly at its tenth session.
539th ple,uwy meeting_,
3 N OfJember 1955.

Arlicl, IV, paragraplt 3 (amended text)
A participant who is entitled under this article to a benefit
which is leu than $180 per annum may, prior to the date on
which the first payment of his retirement benefit becomes due
and with the consent of the Joint Staff Pension Board receive
the whole benefit payable to him in the form of a lump sum
which is the actuarial equivalent of his benefit. In the case of a
participant who is married at the date of retirement, he may also
receive the actuarial equivalent of the prospective benefit which
would be payable on his death under article Vil, 2(o).

953 (X). Annual report of the United Natlom
Joint Staff Pension Board

Articl, VII, paragraph 2(a) (amended text)
If a married man who is a recipient of a retirement benefit u
provided under article IV dies, his widow, provided she wu his
wife at the time of the ccsaation of his service with the member
organization, shall be entitled, except as provided in paracraph
3 below, to a widow's benefit half as large as the benefit which
was being paid to the deceased at the time of bis death. However, if the deceased at the time of his retirement had received
a lump sum as provided in article IV in lieu of part or the
whole of the retirement benefit to which he was entitled, the
widow's benefit shall be half of the total retirement benefit to
which the staff member was entitled at the cesaation of hia
service, except that in the case where a married man received
the actuarial equivalent of a prospective widow's benefit, no
widow's benefit shall be payable. This benefit shall cease on the
widow's remarriage.

The General Assembly
Takes note with satisfaction of the annual report' of
the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board.
539th plenory meetin.9.,
3 November 1955.

954 (X). Report of the United Natlom Joint Staff
Pension Board on the third actuarial valuation of the United Natiom Joint Stal' Pendon
Fund as of 30 September 1954
The General Assembly
1. Takes note of the report• of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Board on the third actuarial valuation of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund
as of 30 September 1954;

2. Takes note of the observations thereon of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions as set forth in its third report• to the General
Assembly at its tenth session.
539th plenory mettit&Jl,
3 November 1955.

955 (X). Amendments to the Regulatlom of the
United. Nationa Joint Stal' Pemlon Fund
The General Assembly
Adopts the texts annexed to the present resolution as
amendments to the Regulations of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Fund. These amendments shall become effective from the date of their adoption.
539th plenory meeting_,
3 November 1953.
ANNEX
Article I, paragraph 4 (amended text)
"Final average remuneration" means the average annual pensionable remuneration of the participant during the last five
years of his contributory service. Where the participant has less
than five years of contributory service, the final average remuneration shall mean the average annual pensionable remuneration during the actual period of contributory service.
Article 11, paragraph 2 (amended text)
The foregoing provision shall apply to the Registrar and
every full-time officer of the Registry of the International
Court of Justice except that the occupant of the position of
Registrar as at 16 December 1954 shall become a participant
notwithstanding that he was over sixty years of age at the time
of his appointment.
1 Ibid., Te•lh Sessio•, Suppl,mml No. 6D (A/2900).
• Ibid., Supplement No. 1 (A/2921).
1 I~., Supplemenl No. 8 (A/2914).
• Ibid., Supplement No. 8A (A/2916).
• Ibid., Tenth Session, Anr1es1s, agenda item 44, document

Af/986.•

Article VII, paragraplt 5 (amended text)
Upon the death of a participant who does not leave a widow
entitled to a widow's benefit, there shall be paid to his desipated
·recipient a sum equal to:
(a) His O}Vn contributions to the Pension Fund, with compound interest at 2¾ per cent per annum, plus
(b) Such amount as may have been tran ■ferred on his account to the Pension Fund from the Provident Fund of a member organization at 11'& time of his entry into the Pension Fund,
without interest, pi\&.
(c) If he has validated a period of prior non-pensionable
service under article Ill such amount, not exceeding S per ceDt
of bis pensionable remuneration for that period, a, he may have
received from the Provident Fund of a member organization
in excess of his own contributions thereto and have refunded
to that member organization.
If a designated recipient doe■ not survive a participant or if a
participant has not made, or has revoked, a designation, ■uch
sum shall be paid to the participant's estate.
Arlicl, IX, pa,agroplt 2 (amended text)
On the basis of the medical examinations referred to in the
preceding paragraph, the Joint Staff Pension Board shall decide whether the participant concerned shall be covered by the
provi ■ions of articles V and VII, 1, immediately, or shall not
be covered by those provisions until he ha■ completed five years
of contributory service or, in the case of a re-entrant, until he
has· completed five years of contributory service subsequent to
his re-ehtrance. However, no participant ■hall be excluded from
the benefits provided under articles V and VII, 1, if the disability or death is the direct result of accident or damage to
health ari■ing from service in an unhealthy area, nor shall hU
widow be excluded from the provision of article VII, 1, if be
has attained age sixty.

Article X, parograplt l(o) (amended text)
If the participant has less than five years of contributory
service, he shall be paid a sum equal to :
(i) Hi■ own contributions to the Pension Fund, with compound interest at 2¾ per cent per annum, plus
(ii) Such amount as may have been transferred on hia account to the Pension Fund from the Provident Fund of
a member organization at the time of his entry into the
Pen ■ion Fund, without interest, pl111
