Resolutions adopted on the reportl of the Third Commit.tee

~n providing international protection for refugees and
m promoting permanent solutions for their problems,
Noting with appreciation the effective manner in
which the Office of the High Commissioner has been
dealing with special emergencies,
Noting the recommendation adopted by the Economic
and Social Council in its resolution 650 B (XXIV) of
24 July 1957,
1. Decides to continue the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees for a period
of five years from 1 January 1959 on the basis of the
Statute of the Office ;11
2. Decides that the election of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, for a period of five
years from 1 January 1959, shall take place at the
thirteenth session of the General Assembly;
3. Decides to review, not later than at its seventeenth session, the arrangements for the Office of the
High Commissioner with a view to determining
whether the Office should be further continued beyond
31 December 1936.
723rd plenary meeting,
26 November 1957.

1166 (Xll). International assistance to refugees
within the mandate of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees
The General Assembly,
_H~ving considered the problem of those refugees
withm the mandate of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees who are the concern of the
United Nations Refugee Fund (UNREF),
Noting with approval that the United Nations
Refugee Fund programme, if it receives the necessary
funds, will, by 31 December 1958, have reduced the
number of non-settled refugees under the programme
to the point where most countries of asylum should be
abl~ to support these refugees without international
assistance,
Recognizing that, after 31 December 1958 there will
be a residual need for international aid in ce~tain countrie~, and particularly among certain groups and categories of these refugees,
. B~aring iti mind ~hat new refugee situations requirtng mternattonal assistance have arisen to augment the
problem since the establishment of the Fund, and that
?ther s~ch situa~ions may arise in the future wherein
mternat10nal assistance may be appropriate,
Bearing in mind that, under the Statute of his Office 5
the High Commissioner is charged with the duty df
seeking solutions for the problems of refugees through
voluntary repatriation, resettlement and integration,
Rec~lling ~ts resolution 538 B (VI) of 2 February
1952, m which the General Assembly authorized the
High Commissioner to issue an appeal for funds for
the purpose of enabling emergency aid to be given to
the most needy groups among refugees within his
mandate,
. Rec_alli1;g its res_olution 832 (IX) of 21 October 1954,
m which 1t authorized the High Commissioner to undertake a . programme to be deyoted principally to the
promot10n of permanent solut10ns for certain refugees
• Ibid., Fifth Session, Supplement No. 20, resolution 428 (V),

annex.

19

coming within his mandate and also to permit emergency assistance to the most needy cases among these
refugees, and to appeal for voluntary contributions
towards a fund set up for the purpose of this programme and incorporating the fund authorized by the
General Assembly in resolution 538 B (VI),
F1trther recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 565 (XIX) of 31 March 1955, by which the
Council reconstituted the High Commissioner's Advisory Committee on Refugees as an Executive Committee,
Having considered Economic and Social Council resolution 650 (XXIV) of 24 July 1957,
1. Approves the recommendations contained in Economic and Social Council resolution 650 (XXIV) of
24 July 1957, and accordingly:
(a) Requests the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to intensify the United Nations
Refugee Fund programme to the fullest extent possible
in order to achieve permanent solutions for the maximum number of refugees remaining in camps, without
losing sight of the need to continue to seek solutions for
the problems of refugees outside camps;
( b) Authorizes the High Commissioner to appeal
to States Members of the United Nations or members
of the specialized agencies for the purpose of raising
the additional funds needed for closing the refugee
camps;
2. Reaffirms the basic principle laid down in paragraph 1 of the Statute of the High Commissioner's
Office regarding forms of permanent solution of the
problems of refugees, by actions designed to "facilitate
the voluntary repatriation of such refugees, or their
assimilation within new national communities";
3. Decides that the operations under the United Nations Refugee Fund shall not be continued after 31
December 1958 except as provided for in paragraph 4
below;
4. Requests the High Commissioner to supervise the
orderly completion of projects financed from the United
Nations Refugee Fund which were started but not
completed before 31 December 1958, and to carry out
the liquidation of the Fund in accordance with paragraph 5 (a) below ;
5. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
establish, not later than at its twenty-sixth session, an
Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's
Programme to consist of representatives of from twenty
to twenty-five States Members of the United Nations
or members of any of the specialized agencies, to be
elected by the Council on the widest possible geographical basis from those States with a demonstrated interest in, and devotion to, the solution of the refugee
problem, this Committee to take the place of the
UNREF Executive Committee and to be entrusted with
the terms of reference set forth below:
(a) To give directives to the High Commissioner
for the liquidation of tJ,e United Nations Refugee
Fund;
( b) To advise the High Commissioner, at his request, in the exercise of his functions under the Statute
of his Office ;
( c) To advise the High Commissioner as to whether
it is appropriate for international assistance to be provided through his Office in order to help solve specific
refugee problems remaining unsolved after 31 December 1958 or arising after that date;

20

General Assembly-Twelfth Session

(d) To authorize the High Commissioner to make
appeals for funds to enable him to solve the refugee
problems referred to in sub-paragraph ( c) above;
(e) To approve projects for assistance to refugees
coming within the scope of sub-paragraph (c) above;
(f) To give directives to the High Commissioner
for the use of the emergency fund to be established
under the terms of paragraph 7 below;
6. Authorizes the High Commissioner, under conditions approved by the Executive Committee of the High
Commissioner's Programme, to make appeals for the
funds needed to provide supplemental temporary care
and maintenance to, and participate in the financing
of permanent solutions for, refugees coming within
his mandate and otherwise not provided for ;
7. Further authorizes the High Commissioner to establish an emergency fund not to exceed $500,000, to
be utilized under general directives of the Executive
Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme,
and to maintain this fund from the repayments of the
principal and interest of loans made by the United
Nations Refugee Fund and from voluntary contributions made for this purpose;
8. Decides that appropriate financial rules for the
use of all funds received by the High Commissioner
under the terms of the present resolution shall be
established, in consultation with the Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme, and in
accordance with the Statute of the Office of the High
Commissioner and the Financial Regulations of the
United Nations;
9. Requests the UNREF Executive Committee to
exercise in 1958 such functions incumbent upon the
Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme in conformity with paragraph 5 above as it
deems necessary, with a view to assuring the continuity of international assistance to refugees falling
within the scope of paragraph 5 ( c) above;
10. Requests the High Commissioner to include in
his annual report a statement on the measures which
he has taken under the terms of the present resolution.
723rd plenary nieeting,
26 November 1957.

2. Authorizes the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to use his good offices to encourage
arrangements for contributions.

723rd plenary meeting,
26 November 1957.
1188 (XII). Recommendations concerning international respect for the right of peoples and
nations to self-determination

The General Assembly,
Recalling that one of the purposes and principles of
the United Nations is to develop friendly relations
among nations based on respect for the principle of
equal rights and self-determination of peoples,
Recalling further its resolution 545 (VI) of 5 February 1952 in which it decided to include in the International Covenants on Human Rights an article which
should provide : "All peoples shall have the right of
self-determination",
Reaffirming the principles embodied in the abovementioned resolution that all States, including those
having responsibility for the administration of NonSelf-Governing Territories, should promote the realization of that right, in conformity with the purposes and
principles of the United Nations,
Considering that disregard for the right to self-determination not only undermines the basis of friendly
relations among nations as defined in the Charter of
the United Nations but also creates conditions which
may prevent further realization of the right itself,
Believing that such a situation is contrary to the
purposes and principles of the United Nations,
1. Reaffirms that it is of international importance
that, in accordance with the purposes and principlts of
the Charter of the United Nations:
(a) Member States shall, in their relations with one
another, give due respect to the right of self-determination;
( b) Member States having responsibility for the
administration of Non-Self-Governing Territories shall
promote the realization and facilitate the exercise of
this right by the peoples of such Territories;

2. Decides to consider further at its thirteenth ses.. sion the item "Recommendations concerning internaThe General Assembly,
tional respect for the right of peoples and nations to
Having considered the problem of the Chinese refuself-determination", including the proposals contained
gees in Hong Kong, in accordance with the resolution
in Economic and Social Council resolution 586 D (XX)
adopted by the Executive Committee of the United
of 29 July 1955.
727th plenary meetinq,
Nations Refugee Fund at its fourth session, 6
11 December 1957.
Acknowledging the heavy burden placed upon the
Government of Hong Kong in dealing with this prob1189 (XII). Freedom of information
lem, and the efforts made to alleviate it,
A
Recognizing however that the problem is such as to
be of concern to the international community,
The General Assembly,
Taking into account the need for emergency and
Considering the need to bring the text of the draft
long-term assistance,
Convention on Freedom of Information 1 to the attention of the increased membership of the United Nations,
1. Appeals to States Members of the United Nations
and members of the specialized agencies and to nonRequests the Secretary-General:
governmental organizations to give all possible assist(a) To circulate to Member States the text of the
ance with a view to alleviating the distress of the
preamble and nineteen articles of the draft Convention
Chinese refugees in Hong Kong;
1167 (XII). Chinese refugees in Hong Kong

• Ibid., Twelfth Session, Supp!ement No. 11 (A/3585/Rev.1),
annex I, para. 10,'.

• Ibid., Seventh Session, Annexes, agenda item 29, document
A/AC.42/7 and Corr.I, annex.
