S/PV.8115

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8115

th meeting
Tuesday, 28 November 2017, 11.05 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lambertini . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Italy)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Awad
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Skau
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Allen
Mrs. Haley
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-40033 (E)
*1740033*

S/PV.8115

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 11.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Ms. Keita.
Ms. Keita: I am grateful for the opportunity to
brief the Security Council on the Secretary-General’s
30-day report and on the situation in South Sudan.
I am pleased to report that the deployment of the
Regional Protection Force is making good progress,
with the main body of the Rwandan infantry battalion
expected to complete its deployment by the end of
the year. The deployment of the Ethiopian battalion
advance party was completed on 22 October and the
transportation has commenced for the contingent-owned
equipment of the main body of the Ethiopian infantry
battalion, passing through Kenya on its road move from
Addis Ababa to Juba. While there has been tangible
progress in the deployment of the Regional Protection
Force and the technical discussions are ongoing with
the Government on its concept of operations, I also
have to report that certain operations of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) continue
to be impeded by the national authorities.
The security situation in South Sudan remains
precarious. I am particularly concerned by the real
risk of an escalation in violence with the onset of the
dry season, as well as the Government’s push to assert
military dominance across the country, notably when
faced with continued resistance from armed opposition
groups. New military offensives would seriously
undermine the political process and cause further
civilian casualties and displacements.
During the past month, the security situation in
the Equatorias has remained volatile, with reports of
continued clashes between the Sudan People’s Liberation
Army (SPLA) and the pro-Machar forces of the Sudan
2/16

28/11/2017

People’s Liberation Army in Opposition (SPLA-IO).
Between 9 and 13 November, the two forces clashed
in Kariba on the Maridi-Mundri road, south-west of
Mundri town, Western Equatoria. The subsequent
SPLA clearing operations on the road reportedly led
to the killing of six civilians, the burning of houses
and additional civilian displacement. Armed elements
allied to different opposition coalitions also fought one
another. Clashes were reported between the SPLAIO and elements of Thomas Cirillo Swaka’s National
Salvation Front around Kajo Keji on 31 October.
In Greater Upper Nile, fighting continued between
the SPLA and pro-Machar SPLA-IO forces in Guit,
Koch, Rubkona and Mayendit Counties in central
Unity. The fighting has led to the curtailment of
humanitarian operations in the area. On 26 October,
UNMISS extracted five humanitarian workers from
Kuerguini caught in the fighting between SPLA and
pro-Machar SPLA-IO forces in Nimni, Guit county.
On 27 October, UNMISS facilitated the further
extraction of an additional 13 humanitarian staff
members and two children, from Nimni west to
Nyathol. One national staff member of an international
non-governmental organization was killed during the
clashes. On 22 November, 21 humanitarian personnel
were evacuated from Leer to Rumbek, following an
exchange of artillery and heavy machine gun fire
between the SPLA and pro-Machar SPLA-IO forces.
Meanwhile, the increasing insecurity around
the UNMISS protection-of-civilians site in Bentiu is
very worrying. On 4 November, during an exchange
of fire between armed groups in proximity to the site,
shots were directly fired at UNMISS troops, who
subsequently returned fire, repelling the attackers, and
apprehending one individual attempting to breach the
perimeter of the site.
Finally, on security, I am pleased to report that
the tensions arising following President Salva Kiir’s
issuance of a republican decree on 30 October, ordering
the arrest and disarmament of the bodyguards of the
former SPLA Chief of General Staff, Paul Malong,
were handled without violence in Juba. However, while
the dispute surrounding General Malong’s house arrest
may have been resolved, these tensions point out to the
risk of fragmentation within the security apparatus,
which could further threaten the stability of the
country. This trend will need to be closely monitored.
17-40033

28/11/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

As transmitted to the Security Council on
16 November, despite repeated assurances from the
highest levels of Government, UNMISS uniformed
personnel patrols and human rights officers continue
to face frequent restrictions on their freedom of
movement. On 15 November, a dynamic air patrol on
its way to Aburoc, Upper Nile, through Kodok, had to
return to Malakal from Kodok as a National Security
Service Officer objected that the patrol did not have
an SPLA Liaison Officer on board, warned the team
against proceeding and threatened the air crew.
The patrol was allowed to proceed a week later. On
22 November, an integrated UNMISS patrol from Yei
to Lasu, Central Equatoria, was stopped at an SPLA
checkpoint on the Yei-Lasu road, officially due to
insecurity in the area. The patrol team then observed
large movement of SPLA forces on the Yei-Lasu road.
These obstructions de facto prevent the Mission from
fully implementing its protection-of-civilians mandate.
I would like to request the Security Council to impress
on the Government to uphold its obligations under the
status of forces agreement and cease such obstruction.
The humanitarian situation in South Sudan
continues to be dire, compounded by widespread armed
conflict, intercommunal violence, large displacements
of the civilian population and access restrictions,
which prevent the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
I am encouraged that the President issued a new order
dated 9 November calling for unhindered humanitarian
access. This must now be backed by a genuine and
concerted effort to ensure that that order takes effect
at all levels, down to the lowest levels on the ground,
where obstructions frequently occur, to facilitate
meaningful improvement in the humanitarian operating
environment. The catastrophic consequences of the
humanitarian crisis are borne out by shocking statistics.
Four million South Sudanese are either internally
displaced or have sought refuge in neighbouring
countries; an estimated six million people, half of
the population, are severely food insecure, including
1.7 million on the brink of famine.
Against this backdrop, the increasing number of
incidents targeting humanitarian actors is cause for
serious concern. Reported monthly access incidents,
which include issues of criminality, armed conflict,
targeted violence or bureaucratic impediments, totalled
101 in September and 116 in October, of which 44 and
57 per cent were attributed to State actors, respectively.
Two more aid workers were killed in November,

S/PV. 8115

bringing the total number of humanitarians killed in
2017 to 19. Clashes between armed groups and other
sources of insecurity also continued to negatively
impact the timely delivery of humanitarian assistance.
In September, for example, at least 89 aid workers were
forced to relocate, hindering humanitarian operations.
Let me proceed with a few remarks on the political
process. On the national dialogue, subnational
consultations continued in the Government-controlled
areas of Central Equatoria, Northern Bahr El Ghazal
and Upper Nile, with plans to continue consultations
in other parts of the country in the upcoming weeks.
Consultations are also being carried out for South
Sudanese living in refugee camps in Uganda. I must
reiterate that it is of utmost importance that the national
dialogue be complementary to the implementation
of the peace agreement, transparent and genuinely
inclusive of all political viewpoints, including those of
other key political actors and parties to the conflict.
Provided that it adheres to these principles, the national
dialogue could serve as a useful forum for addressing
the underlying conflict drivers of intercommunal
violence and root causes of other grievances.
Meanwhile, political forces also started to organize
themselves ahead of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) high-level revitalization
forum. On 16 November, the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement (SPLM) in Government and the SPLM
former detainees issued the Cairo declaration, in
which they committed once again to take all possible
measures to end the war and support the peace
process. On 18 October, six political movements,
parties and fronts from the opposition also issued the
Nyahururu declaration, following their deliberations in
Kenya, which formally established an alliance. These
opposition forces also agreed to participate in the
IGAD high-level revitalization process through a joint
delegation evincing a common position.
The forum itself is now entering its final phase
of preparations. Based on initial statements issued
by IGAD on the progress of the consultations, all
groups consulted to date appear to have stated their
full and unconditional support to the IGAD initiative
and affirmed their readiness to engage in principle in
the high-level revitalization process. It is also clear,
however, that they have raised a number of procedural
and substantive questions to influence its outcome in
their respective favours and we should be ready for a
very difficult and arduous discussions. The summary

17-400333/16

S/PV.8115

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

of findings that the IGAD task force has been working
on has now been submitted to the IGAD Council of
Ministers, which as we speak is meeting informally in
Abidjan and will formally discuss its recommendations
during a formal Council of Ministers meeting on
11 and 12 December. The forum is expected to begin
soon afterwards.
Let me conclude by underlining the importance of
having unified and unconditional international support
for this process. As has been mentioned so many times
in the past, there can only be a political solution to end
the conflict in South Sudan. It will be crucial for the
Government and all political parties to constructively
engage in the peace agreement revitalization process and
start by immediately ceasing all hostilities and taking
a defensive military position. I would thus encourage
the Council to unanimously express its support for the
urgent revitalization of the peace process, so that the
suffering of all South Sudanese civilians can come to
an end.
The President: I thank Ms. Keita for her
comprehensive and very detailed briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank
Ms. Keita for her briefing.
Every member of the Council is familiar with the
horrifying statistics being produced by the violence in
South Sudan. Millions of South Sudanese are facing
famine and have been driven from their homes. Tens
of thousands are dead, and thousands of children have
been forced into conflict as child soldiers. I, too, knew
these statistics before I travelled to South Sudan in
October, but that knowledge did not prepare me for the
suffering that I saw there. I saw a civilian population
that is deeply traumatized by the violence that it has
experienced and a population that is unacceptably
vulnerable to further violence.
I saw families living under tarps on mud floors. I
lost count of the number of women who told me they
had been raped, often repeatedly. I heard more stories
of husbands being shot and babies being taken and
killed than anyone should ever hear.
But maybe the most disturbing thing I saw was the
seed of hate being planted in future generations. In the
refugee camps, children roam around, malnourished
and uneducated. Young boys are traumatized and bored,
4/16

28/11/2017

but soon they will be adults and will be uneducated,
untrained and resentful of the conditions they have
been living in. If we do not do something about the way
in which South Sudanese kids are being raised, we will
be dealing with them as adults on the battlefield.
I took pictures of these children and showed them
to President Kiir when we met. I told him that he could
not deny what the pictures represented. To his credit,
he did not try to deny it. But that is not enough. It was
not then, and it is not now. Simply acknowledging the
problem is not enough; President Kiir must act.
It is the Government that bears the primary
responsibility for the killing, raping and torturing in
South Sudan, and it is the Government that bears the
primary responsibility for ending the violence, easing
the suffering and saving future generations of South
Sudanese. President Kiir said all the right things in our
meeting; he made promises that he has made before.
But now things are different, and I told him so. Going
forward, the United States will judge President Kiir
and his Government by their actions, not their words,
and the actions needed are clear.
There is a way to end the violence in South Sudan.
As a first step, President Kiir needs to adhere to the
ceasefires he has declared many times. No more
promises; we need action.
There is a way to reinvigorate the peace process in
South Sudan. The country’s leaders, both Government
and opposition, must take responsibility and seize
the opportunity presented by the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development. No more pointing fingers;
the process must be inclusive. The parties must be
willing to reconsider the parts of the 2015 Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
that are not working, and the leaders must now lead.
And there is a way to provide for and protect
innocent civilians in South Sudan. It is not complicated;
it is actually very simple. President Kiir and his
Government must end the violence and allow the
United Nations peacekeeping mission in South Sudan
to do its job.
Every month we continue to receive a report that
shows restrictions being placed on the peacekeeping
force. Government security forces stop peacekeeping
patrols at checkpoints, ask for documents that are not
required and deny personnel of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) entry into South
17-40033

28/11/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Sudan, in violation of the status-of-forces agreement.
Every month we see reports detailing how peacekeeping
personnel are being deliberately and repeatedly
harassed, threatened and even physically assaulted by
Government forces.
The Government has stooped so low as to impede
peacekeepers from providing water to their own
personnel and the people they are supposed to protect.
It is petty, it is cruel and it must end. Words are no
longer sufficient. The United States is prepared to
pursue additional measures against the Government
or any party, for that matter, if they do not act to end
the violence and ease the suffering in South Sudan.
That means putting down their weapons, coming to the
negotiating table through the high-level revitalization
forum and ending the harassment and obstruction of
UNMISS and other organizations that are trying to
help the South Sudanese people.
President Kiir’s recent order requiring free and
unhindered access for humanitarian groups in South
Sudan was a good sign, and a welcome sign. We
encourage him to follow through on his commitment,
and, to help encourage him, we make this commitment
in return: we will be watching. We are not interested
in one-time concessions or a stop-and-go approach to
allowing humanitarian access in South Sudan. The
South Sudanese need sustained access to food, water
and basic supplies.
We are encouraged by the Government’s promise
to provide sustained humanitarian access. Again, only
actions will prove whether this intent is genuine.
In the midst of all the suffering I saw, I was struck
by the hope and the dignity of the people of South
Sudan. They want nothing more than to live normal
lives. They want to be productive and self-sufficient. In
every camp we visited, we asked the children, if there
was one wish they could have come true, what would
it be? In each and every case, they said they wanted to
go to school. Most amazing of all were the mothers.
With all the physical and emotional hardship they have
suffered and the constant fear of being raped, they did
what mothers do. They were still more worried about
their children than they were about themselves. They
see the promise of their young country slipping away.
More importantly, they see their children’s futures
being lost to chaos and hate. These mothers’ desire for
their children to have a better life should motivate us
to act. It should make us intolerant of more promises

S/PV. 8115

and impatient for results, because these mothers know
better than any of us ever could that time is running out
for the children of South Sudan.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank Assistant
Secretary-General Bintou Keita for her briefing.
By mere coincidence, as the Assistant SecretaryGeneral said, even as we are discussing South Sudan,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) Council of Ministers is also meeting in
Abidjan and discussing the same matter, focusing on
the progress made in the implementation of the highlevel revitalization forum.
The overall situation in South Sudan continues to
be of serious concern. The security situation remains
fragile, and the conflict continues unabated. The
economic and financial problems in the country are
worrying. The humanitarian situation has not been
mitigated and continues to cause concern. That is what
makes the cessation of all hostilities an absolute priority.
As stated in the latest report of the Joint Monitoring
and Evaluation Commission,
“Unless hostilities cease, the economic and
humanitarian situation will continue to worsen.
More lives will be lost and responses will be
further complicated.”
We welcome President Salva Kiir’s decree ordering
the free, unimpeded and unhindered movement of
humanitarian organizations in the country, and in
particular his pledge to hold accountable those who
intentionally obstruct the delivery of humanitarian aid
and services or impose taxes on humanitarian convoys.
We believe that the effective implementation of the
decree will facilitate the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to people in need.
We really appreciate the visit by Ambassador
Nikki Haley to the region, including South Sudan.
We have no doubt that her visit has made a significant
difference, and we thank her for her commitment. We
must stress that the 2015 Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan remains
the only viable way to bring an end to the conflict and
restore peace and stability in South Sudan.
Although the Council of Ministers of South Sudan
recently approved the Transitional Constitution of
the Republic of South Sudan amendment deal, which
is a step in the right direction, a lot remains to be

17-400335/16

S/PV.8115

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

done in order to ensure meaningful progress in the
implementation of the 2015 peace agreement. IGAD
has presented the parties with an opportunity in the
form of the high-level revitalization forum to restore
the permanent ceasefire and fully implement the
peace agreement.
My Prime Minister met with President Kiir
yesterday in Nairobi and reaffirmed Ethiopia’s
commitment to supporting those efforts, both as a
neighbouring country of South Sudan and as Chair
of IGAD. We remain hopeful that President Kiir will
continue his cooperation with IGAD. We would have
liked to have received a briefing from Special Envoy
Ismail Wais himself on the substantive progress that
IGAD has made towards the convening of the highlevel forum. Unfortunately, he had to attend the IGAD
meeting in Abidjan on the same matter and could not
make it to this meeting.
In any case, Ethiopia understands that we all have
access, one way or another, to the information on the
extensive consultations that the IGAD Council of
Ministers and the Special Envoy held with the South
Sudanese stakeholders and the tireless efforts made
to consolidate the views and positions expressed in
those consultations and the upcoming IGAD Council
of Ministers meeting. We also all expect that the
meeting will provide guidance with regard to the
actual convening of the forum and the way forward.
That is indeed very meaningful progress and, exactly
because of that, we believe that the stage has now been
more or less set for the actual convening of the forum.
However, we have to realize that the process is bound
to be complex and, given the nature of our region, one
would not be surprised if developments were to occur
occasionally that might complicate matters even more,
rather than helping lessen existing complications.
As I said at an earlier meeting (see S/PV.8071),
IGAD does not have a magic wand to create miracles
in South Sudan. The support of the international
community, particularly that of the Security Council,
is absolutely critical. We are extremely grateful for the
support provided by the United Nations and the African
Union (AU) in the process leading to the convening of
the IGAD forum, as part of maintaining the unity of
purpose among the United Nations, the AU and IGAD
in the search for lasting peace, security and stability in
South Sudan.
6/16

28/11/2017

Once again, we encourage the United Nations,
the AU and IGAD to redouble their efforts and
further strengthen that positive trend. No doubt, more
and frequent consultations are imperative, as the
preparations for the forum are approaching the final
phase. Once again, no matter what we in the region and
the rest of the international community might do, we
understand that the success of the revitalization process,
as well as success in addressing the enormous challenge
that South Sudan is facing, will depend greatly upon the
willingness of all parties. We still remain hopeful that
all parties will seize the opportunity provided to them
and work towards the achievement of the purposes of
the revitalization agenda.
Finally, as the Assistant Secretary-General already
stressed, we recognize the progress made with regard
to the deployment of the Regional Protection Force
(RPF). We are pleased to witness improved cooperation
from the Government in that regard. The successful
deployment of the Ethiopian battalion advance party
and the recruited contingent to South Sudan was
possible because of that improved cooperation. We
reiterate our commitment to the deployment, as well
as the rationale of the RPF. In that regard, we would
like to inform the Council that the main body of the
Ethiopian battalion has concluded its preparations and
remains ready to be deployed in South Sudan as early
as 18 December.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, Ms. Bintou
Keita, for updating us on the situation in South Sudan.
We are deeply concerned by certain information
that we have seen in recent weeks. From October to
December, 4.8 million people — around 45 per cent of
the population of South Sudan — have been reported
as severely food insecure. That represents 1.4 million
more people than during the same period last year. The
number of South Sudanese forced to flee their country
could approach the 3 million mark — one in every four
citizens of the country — by the end of 2018, unless
security improves. That represents almost 1 million
more people than the current number. Additionally,
the number of internally displaced persons remains
at 1.86 million, while 210,000 reside in protection-ofcivilian sites. The people of South Sudan deserve
better. They deserve peace.
I thank Ambassador Nikki Haley for adding real
and vivid images just now to those statistics in her
17-40033

28/11/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

recounting of recent experiences in that country.
Innocent people, many of them women and children,
are suffering. The primary responsibility for protecting
civilians lies with the Government. The Government
must take further concrete action to alleviate their
suffering, including food insecurity and displacement.
Regrettably, the Secretary-General has continued
to report persistent violations of the status-offorces agreement. On 9 November, President
Salva Kiir ordered that humanitarian convoys and
non-governmental organizations should be granted
free, unimpeded and unhindered movement in South
Sudan. His entire Government has the responsibility
for fully implementing that order. The Council stands
with the people of South Sudan and will continue to
urge the Government, as well as the opposition, to allow
humanitarian access. A genuinely inclusive political
process, including the national dialogue, is the only way
to achieve a political solution. Parties must understand
that true peace will never come from fighting.
In that regard, Japan strongly supports the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
revitalization forum process. We are encouraged that
IGAD Ministers have approached the broad range of
parties of South Sudan and obtained their commitment
to, and cooperation with, that initiative, including a
commitment to the cessation of hostilities. The regional
forum will take place in the coming weeks. We urge all
the parties in South Sudan to fully engage and seriously
cooperate with IGAD in good faith. All parties involved
in that process must come to the table with a genuine
desire for peace, and leave behind political games.
At the same time, IGAD should continue to display
unified efforts and strong determination during the
preparation of options and recommendations for that
process. We look forward to concrete results, as a
result of those efforts, with a revised time frame on
the revitalization and implementation of the 2015
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in
the Republic of South Sudan, including elections,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
security sector reform.
Japan shares the view of the African Union
Peace and Security Council, in their communiqué of
20 September, that this process represents a unique
window of opportunity, but also a last chance for the
parties to really achieve peace and stability. The Council
should remain vigilant in ensuring that all parties are

S/PV. 8115

actively engaged in an inclusive political process, such
as the IGAD Forum, aimed at achieving lasting peace
in South Sudan. Japan will spare no effort to find the
best way forward to support the people of South Sudan
in their search for lasting peace and security.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): At the outset, I
would like to take this opportunity to thank Ms. Keita
for her briefing. Time and time again, we have voiced
our despair at the depth of the suffering of the people
of South Sudan. The scale of the numbers is deeply
shocking: one third of the population has been forced
to flee their homes and more than half the population
lacks enough food to feed themselves and their
families. Yet the parties to the conflict, including the
Government, continue to mount offensives against
innocent civilians. They are deaf to the misery of
their own people. It is more important than ever that
the international community show the people of South
Sudan that we will act together to work for peace, even
if South Sudan’s leaders will not.
Innocent civilians continue to pay the price for
the failures of the political elite. President Kiir’s longoverdue decree ordering safe passage for humanitarian
agencies is welcome. We hope that that will result in
real improvements in getting assistance to those who so
desperately need it, as physical restrictions — whether
resolved or not — represent just the tip of the iceberg
of the bureaucratic impediments, including the cost
of registration fees and delays in receiving permits,
which prevent humanitarians from reaching those most
in need.
Like others, we are extremely concerned that the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
continues to face significant restrictions of movement,
including restrictions imposed by Government forces.
We are particularly troubled by a disturbing trend of
harassment, threats and physical assault on United
Nations staff. That must stop immediately. Those
responsible will be judged by their actions, not
their words.
South Sudan is at a crossroads: its leaders are being
offered a last chance to commit to peace and demonstrate
that they care for their people and for their country,
which they have repeatedly failed to do. Too many times
ceasefires have been declared while gunshots continue
to ring out, but the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) revitalization forum offers hope
for the people of South Sudan. I would like to reiterate

17-400337/16

S/PV.8115

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the United Kingdom’s full support for that process and
to thank both IGAD and the African Union for their
hard work over recent months.
IGAD Foreign Ministers and the Special Envoy
have actively reached out to both the elites and civil
society across the region as part of their revitalization
process. The United Kingdom stands ready to support
the region’s work to bring an end to the conflict and
suffering in South Sudan, and we welcome the African
Union Peace and Security Council’s clearly worded
communiqué of 22 September.
The international community must use the full range
of options to ensure that all the parties meaningfully
and constructively engage. That cannot be an openended process that allows more delays, leading to more
suffering for the people of South Sudan. As the African
Union communiqué of 20 September states, it must
be clear that this is a final chance and that there will
be consequences for not engaging. As a Council, we
should commit to return to this issue early in the new
year in order to consider whether we have seen enough
progress and whether there are individuals or parties
that are blocking peace, and we should be ready to take
appropriate action if so.
Given the fragile situation in South Sudan, we are
concerned that the Government is considering holding
elections next year. There is no possibility that the
conditions for good elections will be in place next
year. Seeking to hold them when the conditions are not
right is likely to drive further conflict. As the African
Union and IGAD have stated, the timelines in the peace
agreement must be revised to allow for a conducive
environment for holding elections. The national
dialogue must be held in support of the revitalization
of the peace agreement — it cannot provide a solution
in itself.
I want to conclude by reiterating our plea to the
leaders of South Sudan to stop the violence and to
engage meaningfully in the revitalization process,
to stop blocking and impeding UNMISS and the
Regional Protection Force, to stop attacks against
United Nations and humanitarian workers and to stop
denying humanitarian aid from reaching their people,
whom they are starving to death. South Sudan is at a
crossroads, and we should do all that we can to support
the region’s efforts to ensure its leaders choose the
right path.
8/16

28/11/2017

Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation wishes
to thank the Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Ms. Bintou Keita, for the
informative briefing that she delivered to the Security
Council today.
Once again, we must voice our concern regarding
the precariousness of the situation in South Sudan. The
humanitarian, security and economic crises show no
signs of visible improvement to date and are driving
hundreds of South Sudanese to leave their homes on a
daily basis, thereby generating internal displacements
that only exacerbate the crisis.
On 23 March, the Council called for compliance
with the ceasefire declared by the Government
(see S/PV.7906); that has, however, been ignored to
date. Throughout all this time, confrontations have
persisted, meaning that the necessary conditions for
establishing a real dialogue never materialized. It is
therefore impossible to speak of real progress, if such
confrontations between the parties do not cease. We
believe that the lack of political determination and
leadership is still evident.
Bolivia reaffirms that a sustainable solution to
the conflict in South Sudan lies in a credible political
process and inclusive dialogue that will pave the
way for full compliance with the Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan of 2015. The efforts spearheaded by regional
organizations are vital and require the support of the
international community, as well as, first and foremost,
the commitment of the Government and all opposition
groups in South Sudan.
In that regard, my delegation believes that the
need to ensure support for the steps being taken by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
are be indisputable. The high-level revitalization forum
is the only existing concrete initiative, for which we
appreciate the efforts of and express our support to
both IGAD and the African Union. As mentioned by
the representative of Ethiopia, the fact that IGAD has
held consultations with all of the stakeholders is a good
sign. It is often said that, in order to advance the political
process in South Sudan, inclusivity must be one of its
pillars. IGAD has demonstrated its determination to
deliver on that principle.
We welcome the news of the participation and
support of the stakeholders in the process. We urge
17-40033

28/11/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

all parties to continue constructively engaging with
the forum. That represents a unique opportunity for
the South Sudanese people to establish a dialogue that
allows for the restoration of a permanent ceasefire,
the implementation of the peace agreement and
the development of a realistic timeline for holding
democratic elections at the end of the transition period.
All eyes will be on the upcoming extraordinary session
of the IGAD Council of Ministers so that we can learn
more about the forum and its modalities, structure
and organization.
With regard to the Regional Protection Force, we
welcome the progress made in the deployment of the
main body of its battalions. We note an improvement
in terms of Government cooperation, and we consider
it essential to work in partnership with the Government
in order to meet the deadlines for the deployment of
the regional protection force and to enable its proper
functioning. Its presence will allow the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) to extend its
presence to other areas of conflict where the protection
of civilians and humanitarian assistance are so urgently
required at this time.
In conclusion, we express our thanks to the United
Nations country team and to UNMISS for the work that
they have been carrying out in South Sudan. We call
on the parties to ensure unhindered and safe access for
UNMISS and the humanitarian personnel so that they
can provide the people affected by the conflict with the
necessary assistance.
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I express my appreciation for
the briefing delivered by Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, which
has provided us with a comprehensive overview of the
latest events in South Sudan.
I reiterate once again Uruguay’s profound concern
about the crisis affecting South Sudan, whose political
leaders are primarily responsible for the situation there.
We must never lose sight of the horrendous suffering
that the South Sudanese have had to undergo for far
too long. The personal ambitions of the country’s main
political leaders, who have put their ambitions to wield
or obtain positions of power before the needs of their
people, are at the root cause of that protracted crisis.
The Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission
conducted its most recent plenary meeting last Monday,
20 November. At that meeting, the Chairperson of the

S/PV. 8115

Commission, Mr. Festus Mogae, enumerated a list of
requirements essential to achieving the revitalization
of the Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan of August 2015.
Uruguay agrees in its entirety with Mr. Mogae’s
statement, and I take the liberty of presenting several
of those requirements, which must be implemented
without delay.
First, there is the need to establish a complete
and permanent cessation of hostilities, which must be
inclusive of all armed groups. Secondly, an inclusive,
transparent and political process with guarantees
that unites all South Sudanese parties is necessary.
Thirdly, a plan of action is needed to address the
serious humanitarian situation, which must provide
unrestricted access to humanitarian actors so that they
can help the people most in need.
We eagerly await the upcoming high-level
revitalization forum — aimed at revitalizing the
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan of August 2015 — under
the auspices of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), which represents a unique
opportunity to restart the political process in South
Sudan and pave the way for the holding of democratic
elections at the end of the transition period. We reiterate
that it will be fundamental for all stakeholders involved
to find a solution to the conflict, in particular the United
Nations and the African Union, and to support that
initiative and speak with a single voice, while, at the
same time, expressing a firm and unequivocal message
to the parties with regard to the importance that this
opportunity represents in terms of making progress in
finding a solution to the conflict and restore longed-for
peace to the country’s people.
Lastly, we regret to learn that the 30-day report
of the Secretary-General presented by Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to the Security Council (see S/PV.8071)
once again gives an account of all kinds of restrictions
imposed on the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) by the Government, at a time when the
Regional Protection Force, which was approved by the
Council more than a year ago, remains far from being
100 per cent operational, despite the recent progress
that Ms. Keita just mentioned.
To reiterate what we have said previously, States
cannot unilaterally prevent the normal functioning of

17-400339/16

S/PV.8115

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

a mission. Moreover, it is incumbent upon the Security
Council to demand and obtain from host States full
respect and fulfilment of the terms of status-of-forces
agreements, which provide guarantees for protecting
personnel that countries voluntarily contribute to
peacekeeping operations. In that regard, we underscore
the informative forum recently organized by UNMISS
for members of the Legislative Assembly of South
Sudan, which presented information on the importance
of respect for the status-of-forces agreement between
the United Nations and the Government of the Republic
of South Sudan concerning the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan. We hope that that event helped to raise
awareness among political actors of South Sudan.
At this juncture, it is clear that getting the two
political parties to abandon speculation aimed at
maintaining power, which seems to be their primary
concern, will be key to achieving the peace and stability
that the country needs.
Mr. Skau (Sweden): Let me begin by thanking
Assistant
Secretary-General
for
Peacekeeping
Operations Keita for her informative briefing to the
Security Council today.
As we just heard, the situation in South Sudan
remains gravely worrying, not least for civilians
caught up in a seemingly endless nightmare of
conflict, displacement and hunger. We remain deeply
concerned about reports of continued fighting, as
well as preparations for renewed offensive operations,
which point to a lack of commitment by the parties to
finding a solution to the conflict through dialogue. Let
me reiterate that an immediate cessation of hostilities
by all parties — the Government and the armed groups
alike — is a sine qua non, not only to alleviate suffering
but also to allow for a meaningful political process.
All parties must recognize that only a political
solution can resolve the conflict. In that regard, we
strongly commend the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) for preparing the high-level
revitalization forum as a means of reinvigorating the
peace process. The forum represents a unique window
of opportunity that merits our full and active support.
It is imperative that the forum take place without
delay. The legitimacy and success of the forum will be
strengthened by ensuring that the process is transparent
and inclusive, with the effective participation of
women and civil society. Building on the communiqué
of the African Union Peace and Security Council of
10/16

28/11/2017

20 September, the Council must now stand unified and
speak with one voice to provide the forum with the best
possible prospects for taking a genuine step forward.
We note, in that regard, the support also voiced by
the European Union in its statement of 7 November.
A national dialogue could be one part of the way
forward, but only if it is genuinely inclusive, impartial
and transparent. A national dialogue will not be
credible while violence continues and the freedom of
expression is restricted. Although a national dialogue
cannot replace the peace agreement, it could serve as a
complement as part of a national reconciliation process.
The humanitarian and human rights situation for
millions of people in South Sudan remains perilous.
We are extremely alarmed by accounts that the access
to food is being used to further military objectives.
Such serious reports should be actively followed up.
It is unacceptable that violations and abuses of human
rights and violations of international humanitarian
law continue. Restrictions on the access to health
care, attacks against medical facilities and transport,
and wide-spread looting of medical facilities by all
parties to the conflict are also unacceptable and cannot
be tolerated. That clearly shows that the work of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) is
crucial and that there is a need to make further progress
in connection with the deployment of the regional
protection force. The establishment of the Hybrid Court
will act as a further strong deterrent against atrocity
crimes. We welcome the steps taken thus far towards
its establishment.
Time is running out for millions of South Sudanese.
Every day that the conflict continues makes building
peace, recovery and reconciliation even more difficult.
We fully support the leadership being shown by IGAD
and the region. It is now essential that we exhaust every
avenue in the search for peace in South Sudan.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations Keita for her substantive
briefing. We regret the fact that we were unable to
hear the views of Mr. Ismail Wais, Special Envoy for
South Sudan of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), due to the fact that he is taking
part in a meeting of IGAD Ministers in Abidjan. The
sole way to stabilize the state of affairs in South Sudan
is through the launch of a genuinely inclusive process
of national reconciliation.
17-40033

28/11/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

We do not think it is fair to continue to lay all the
blame for the persistent violence on Juba alone. The
Government has worked to meet the opposition halfway,
and now it is up to the opposition to do the same and
take a more constructive position. Unfortunately, all
we are seeing from them is destructive action instead.
There is no other way to describe the attempts to
launch a counteroffensive on the eve of the December
negotiations in Addis Ababa. We affirm our position
that it is counterproductive to impose targeted sanctions
or an arms embargo. Such measures will worsen the
crisis rather than easing it.
We are pleased with the speed with which the
Regional Protection Force (RPF) is deploying in South
Sudan. It should continue its operations while respecting
the country’s sovereignty and the core principles of
peacekeeping. We are pleased that mutually acceptable
modalities for the operation are being worked out
with the South Sudan authorities, including the RPF’s
deployment in the area of the capital’s airport. It is
important that the advance unit is already patrolling
critical supply routes in the region of the capital and
that preparations for the arrival of the main part of the
force are on schedule. We urge South Sudan and the
troop-contributing countries to work together to ensure
that the RPF is fully operationalized.
We hope to see the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development’s high-level revitalization forum
succeed. We note the mediation efforts of Kampala and
Nairobi and should not omit to mention the attempt in
Cairo in mid-November to consolidate the opposition
parties. However, we should once again emphasize the
importance of coordinating all the negotiation tracks.
It is also very important to ensure that the approaches
of the regional Powers to the settlement in South Sudan
remain united. Any destructive competition or attempt
to advance narrow national agendas via the South
Sudan efforts could adversely affect the peace process.
While noting the balanced nature of the SecretaryGeneral’s latest monthly report, we should also point
out that much of the factual information in it has
already been presented to the Council in one form
or another. We believe that the overall situation with
the deployment of the Regional Protection Force
should enable us to think seriously about reducing the
frequency of the reports with a view to improving the
general effectiveness of our work.

S/PV. 8115

Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Bintou Keita
for her very informative briefing on the situation in
South Sudan, the work of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) and the importance of the
Security Council’s role and support.
The initiative undertaken in July to hold a
revitalization forum represents a significant step in
the efforts to relaunch the 2015 Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan and advance its implementation. The Agreement
is still the cornerstone of the political process and,
if fully implemented with the support of all relevant
stakeholders, could help to bring the stabilization that
South Sudan so badly needs. France therefore reiterates
its full support for the forum and for the efforts of the
Special Envoy of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD), the African Union High
Representative, the Special Envoy of the United Nations
Secretary-General and his Special Representative for
South Sudan to get the process moving. In that regard,
we welcome the consultations that have been held in the
past few weeks with the various parties with the aim
of putting an inclusive process in place. It is vital that
substantial progress be made quickly and before the
end of the year, at the latest. We hope that the special
regional envoys will be able to update the Council on
the status of the efforts at a future meeting.
As the Council, IGAD and the African Union
have stated repeatedly, the parties must engage in the
process in good faith. We therefore call on them to
fully participate and quickly identify the modalities for
implementing the peace agreement, or we will have to
consider imposing sanctions on the individuals trying
to impede the process.
The international community must continue its
efforts to provide the necessary support to the people
of South Sudan and make ending the suffering of
women and children a priority. The people of South
Sudan continues to endure insecurity, violence, threats
of violence, the spectre of famine and malnutrition and
horrendous humanitarian conditions. In that regard, we
condemn anyone obstructing the efforts of UNMISS
and the humanitarian workers supporting them.
Ms. Keita has rightly asked for the Council’s support
in this. Blocking UNMISS patrols and arresting and
intimidating its officers and humanitarian personnel
cannot be permitted. UNMISS must be able to fulfil
the mandate entrusted to it by the Council. We call on

17-4003311/16

S/PV.8115

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the Government of South Sudan to fully comply with
its commitments under the status of forces agreement,
as well as its own commitments on the deployment
of the Regional Protection Force. The international
community must be prepared to take every possible
measure that could help to reduce the violence. An
arms embargo would contribute to that.
Lasting peace also implies ensuring that crimes
and human rights violations do not go unpunished.
Establishing the Hybrid Court provided for in the peace
agreement, in which the African Union would play a
leading role, would help. UNMISS also contributes to
that through the investigations it conducts into such
acts in accordance with its mandate. We are particularly
concerned about the information gathered by the Panel of
Experts of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South
Sudan on abuses allegedly committed in Wau and parts
of Upper Nile, which should be fully clarified.
Mr. Awad (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, for her briefing
to the Security Council. The delegation of Egypt would
like to emphasize a number of points.
First, the three-year-long conflict in South
Sudan and its economic, political and humanitarian
consequences, as well as its repercussions throughout
the region, have shown that the only way to end the
crisis is through a comprehensive political settlement
that transcends political power-sharing and can
achieve comprehensive, complete and genuine national
reconciliation both for ordinary people and the political
elites, with the aim of resolving the issues and ensuring
lasting peace based on the 2015 Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. From that perspective, it is important to ensure
that international efforts stress support for the political
process, in order to enhance the capacity of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan to support that process
and help to prepare a comprehensive plan for rebuilding
the State after the transition period.
Secondly, the high-level revitalization forum for
the peace agreement represents an opportunity that
must be seized and taken seriously. We must also step
up international support for promoting and backing the
efforts of the African Union and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, in view of the fact that the
peace agreement’s transition period is coming to an
12/16

28/11/2017

end and their efforts represent a major opportunity of
avoiding further complications of the situation.
Thirdly, the current political situation and the
peace agreement require that every effort be made to
unify the factions of the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement in Opposition and bring together the various
opposition groups, with the goal of forging a united
political front that rejects violence and that is capable
of being a serious political partner representing every
sector of society and of the political spectrum, without
narrow tribal prejudices, and of acting as a peaceful
political opposition in the modern meaning of the
term. In that regard, we believe it is key to support
the ongoing efforts to unify the opposition through
the Arusha process in order to ensure that it can be a
partner capable of participating in a positive way in the
future political life of South Sudan.
Fourthly, in that context, the ongoing efforts
of Egypt and Uganda resulted in the signing on
16 November of the Cairo declaration between the
Government of South Sudan and a group of former
detainees. The efforts were based on the Arusha
Agreement, signed in 2015 and supported by the entire
international community. We would like to point out
that they support and are geared to the same result as
those that other regional and international actors have
made towards reaching a comprehensive settlement
of the conflict by ensuring agreement among all the
political forces and parties.
Fifthly, in parallel with the strengthening of political
and diplomatic efforts, we would like to emphasize
the importance of ensuring that the international
community and all international and regional partners
are working to build up every component of the South
Sudanese State, help it to rebuild its institutional and
development structures and protect and promote them
in the future through a comprehensive reconstruction
plan. The Council’s experience with other conflicts
has made it abundantly aware that a vacuum left by
the collapse of such institutions will be filled only
by chaos.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would
first of all like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Ms. Bintou Keita for the important updates that she has
given us. We also want to commend the efforts of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS),
which, despite the difficulties it encounters, continues
to operate in a hostile environment, thanks to the
17-40033

28/11/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

multiple obstacles that it still faces in carrying out
its daily activities. Senegal welcomes the practical
progress seen in the deployment of the Regional
Protection Force and encourages UNMISS, the South
Sudanese authorities and all the troop-contributing
countries, whose dedication we salute, to take all
necessary measures in that regard.
In a humanitarian context that remains fragile, I
would also like to emphasize that we are concerned
about the obstacles facing humanitarian workers,
including the increasing attacks on them, which we
condemn. In that regard, we call on all parties to allow
free and unhindered access for humanitarian actors
to the affected civilian populations, and we urge the
Transitional Government of National Unity to assume
its full responsibility for ensuring the protection of
civilian populations and the security of humanitarian
workers. And as the countries of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) have already done,
we also condemn the ongoing human rights violations
by both the Government and the opposition.
We all agree that settling the conflict in South
Sudan requires more than a negotiated political
solution. In that regard, we welcome the increasingly
active leadership being shown in the region and
encourage the initiatives that its countries have
announced to revitalize the political process. The fact
is that regional actors have a key role to play in the
quest for lasting stability and peace in South Sudan.
My delegation would therefore like to reiterate its
support for the high-level revitalization forum in
bringing together the two parties to the 2015 peace
agreement and other influential stakeholders outside
the current arrangement in order to make progress in
its implementation. We also welcome IGAD’s decision
to provide an update as soon as possible on the progress
made with regard to the initiative of the forum, in order
to enable the Council to take appropriate measures in
support of its decisions.
The efforts of the African Union are also
important. They include the decision taken by its Peace
and Security Council at its 720th meeting, held on
20 September, on the report of the Chairperson of the
Commission on South Sudan, according to which the
African Union Commission and the Government of
South Sudan should urgently conclude a memorandum
of understanding on the establishment of the Hybrid
Court in December, in accordance with the time lines
agreed. In that context, the Peace and Security Council

S/PV. 8115

called on the Transitional Government to ensure that
the memorandum is integrated into national legislation
through the Transitional Legislative Assembly.
In conclusion, my delegation believes that it is also
imperative to tackle the worrying economic situation
in South Sudan, since, in addition to the country’s
insecurity and humanitarian crisis, it is one of the causes
of the displacement of the population. On top of that, it
is contributing to the weakening of the South Sudanese
State, particularly its ability to manage its entire chain
of command and implement all its commitments in a
timely way.
Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Keita
for her briefing. In recent weeks the Government of
South Sudan has shown its commitment to maintaining
national stability and promoting socioeconomic
development, which China commends. However, the
situation on the political, security and humanitarian
fronts remains challenging. The international
community should make moving South Sudan’s
political process forward an urgent priority.
The Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) has recently been actively preparing for its
high-level revitalization forum by conducting broad
consultations with stakeholders in South Sudan and
with other countries in the region. Much has been
done to improve mutual understanding among the
parties and make the political dialogue more inclusive.
China welcomes the efforts of IGAD and Ethiopia
in that regard.The parties in South Sudan have
demonstrated to varying degrees their readiness to
engage in dialogue.
We hope that IGAD will continue to promote
communication and coordination between the South
Sudanese Government and various stakeholders in
the interest of smooth preparations for the high-level
revitalization forum. We also call on the international
community to continue to provide support for IGAD and
other regional and subregional organizations, respect
their leadership in the mediation process as they work
in close coordination with each other, and speak with
one voice to send out a consistent message to all parties
in South Sudan, thereby forming a synergy that favours
a political settlement. In addition, the international
community should respect the Government of South
Sudan in exercising its ownership and leadership

17-4003313/16

S/PV.8115

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

vis-à-vis the political process so as to motivate it to
that end.
In addition to the revitalization forum-related
efforts led by IGAD, we should actively encourage all
parties to participate in national dialogue and other
domestic reconciliation processes. At the same time,
necessary humanitarian and economic assistance
should continue to be provided with a view to helping
the country rebuild.
The United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) has been playing an important role in
safeguarding South Sudan’s peace and stability and
moving the political process forward. China commends
the efforts of UNMISS and will continue to support
the Mission in fulfilling its mandate. We hope that the
Secretariat and UNMISS will step up their engagement
with the Government of South Sudan and the troopcontributing countries concerned so as to properly
settle any issues that may arise in the course of the
deployment of the Regional Protection Force, as well as
to further boost the Mission’s capacity and effectiveness
in implementing its mandate.
As the main troop-contributing country in
UNMISS and an important partner of South Sudan,
China has been a consistent supporter of South Sudan’s
peace process. We have been committed to peace and
development in South Sudan through bilateral and
multilateral channels. China is ready to continue its
constructive role in South Sudan’s quest for lasting
peace and stability and sustainable development.
Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): I join previous
speakers in thanking Assistant Secretary-General
Keita for her comprehensive briefing on the situation
on the ground in South Sudan.
Like others, we are gravely concerned at the
persistent clashes between parties in South Sudan,
which are causing food insecurity in the country to
escalate and the number of refugees, internally displaced
persons and humanitarian-access incidents to increase.
We are worried that the humanitarian situation will get
even worse in the upcoming dry season as the economic
situation continues to deteriorate. We express hope that
the recent presidential decree calling for free movement
for humanitarian organizations in the country will be
instrumental in improving humanitarian access.
My country is concerned about the slow
implementation of the peace agreement in South
14/16

28/11/2017

Sudan, since the agreement remains the only viable
option for achieving sustainable peace. We appreciate
the efforts of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development aimed at organizing the much-awaited
high-level revitalization forum, which is now
planned to be convened alongside the meeting of the
organization’s Council of Ministers in mid-December.
At the same time, we need to ensure that the political
negotiations to resolve the conflict in South Sudan are
accompanied by efforts to address the complex causes
of conflict and implement comprehensive strategies for
the provision of international assistance in numerous
areas, such as, inter alia, sustainable economic
growth, education, health care, social services and
the protection of the agriculture and rural livelihood
sectors, including livestock.
Most of all, intercommunal reconciliation is
absolutely necessary. It can be fostered through joint
livelihood projects that build trust and confidence
among local populations. There can be no real progress
unless women and young people are fully engaged and
assume leadership in efforts to sustain peace at all
levels, from the highest echelons to grass-roots levels.
Lastly, Kazakhstan will work with others in
the regional and international community to foster
constructive understanding among the various parties
to the conflict, with a view to achieving the common
goal of peace and security in South Sudan.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I would like to
thank Assistant Secretary-General Keita for her
valuable briefing.
Ukraine, like others, strongly condemns last week’s
armed clashes between Government and opposition
forces in the south of South Sudan, resulting in many
civilians and soldiers from both sides being killed.
We are also outraged by the instance of shooting at
personnel from the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS).
We took note of President Kiir’s order to South
Sudan’s security organs to tighten the current level of
security in Juba and throughout the country. We hope
that the order will help to ensure the safety of the South
Sudanese citizens during the winter holidays.
There is a risk that the onset of the dry season in
South Sudan may lead to renewed fighting between
the Government and rebels. It is therefore vital that
the unilateral ceasefire declared by President Kiir is
17-40033

28/11/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

upheld. For its part, the Sudan People’s Liberation
Army in Opposition must also cease all hostilities and
engage in political dialogue.
The recent armed clashes all but underline the
urgency for parties to engage in the political process,
which is the only way to achieve lasting peace in
South Sudan. In this context, we welcome the approval
by the South Sudanese cabinet of the constitutional
amendment bill, which would pave the way to
establishing institutions and mechanisms provided for
in the 2015 agreement. Ukraine looks forward to swift
certification of those amendments by the Transitional
National Legislative Assembly.
All efforts on the national level must go hand in
hand with those of the region, which Ukraine fully
supports. In this regard, we took note of the five-point
approach proposed by the Chair of the Joint Monitoring
and Evaluation Commission, President Festus Mogae,
aimed at ending the conflict in South Sudan, and
Ukraine looks forward to the outcome of the meeting
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
currently under way in Abidjan.
While Ukraine welcomes the recent tangible
progress in the deployment of the Regional Protection
Force, we are concerned by ongoing obstructions faced
by UNMISS and humanitarian organizations. This
situation requires redress as soon as possible, given
that the Mission and humanitarian actors need to have
unhindered access throughout the country, especially
in the areas affected by renewed armed clashes.
Finally, I would like to reiterate Ukraine’s strong
readiness and commitment to contributing to peace and
reconciliation in South Sudan, including through our
participation in UNMISS.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Italy.
At the outset, like others, I would like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Keita for her briefing. We
reiterate our position in support of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) and its leadership
in efforts aimed at increasing the protection civilians
and contributing to restoring peace and stability
in South Sudan. I will focus my statement on three
aspects, namely, the humanitarian situation, UNMISS
and the Regional Protection Force (RPF) and the
political process.

S/PV. 8115

As the fighting continues, the humanitarian
situation remains tragic. The people of South Sudan are
paying the highest price for four years of an inconclusive
man-made conflict. Every day, displacement and
hunger are condemning young people in South Sudan
to seeing their hopes wane and disappear. Instead of
being allowed to study or work to improve their country,
forward-looking men and women of South Sudan are
doomed to die or escape the country, which was not the
promise the newborn South Sudan made to them just
six years ago. It is completely the opposite.
We continue to receive multiple reports of attacks
on humanitarian workers in violation of the Status of
Forces Agreement between South Sudan and UNMISS.
We have also learned that President Kiir has ordered
to remove all obstructions to humanitarian access.
We urge all parties, especially the Government, to be
consistent with this order and fulfil their international
commitments as well.
UNMISS must be allowed to enforce its presence
where civilians need it most, namely, Unity state,
Upper Nile, Bahr el-Ghazal, and Equatoria. In this
regard, the full deployment of the Regional Protection
Force (RPF) cannot be postponed indefinitely. Despite
some recent progress, one year after its establishment,
the RPF has yet to be allowed to fully operate in Juba.
With regard to the political process, we have fully
supported the efforts made by the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) to revitalize the
peace agreement. Indeed, the crisis in South Sudan
needs to be seen within the context of the region. Only
with regional guidance can it be genuinely solved.
The outcome of the IGAD preliminary consultations
is a promising starting point for the upcoming highlevel forum. The exercise has so far been inconclusive
as to whether all stakeholders have agreed to participate
in the forum. We commend the regional actors for
their efforts. We also encourage the South Sudanese
stakeholders to invest in the IGAD process in the most
serious manner.
We appreciate the Transitional Government of
National Unity of South Sudan’s recent endorsement
of the bill to incorporate the draft Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan into the 2011 Transitional Constitution. We hope
that the Transitional National Legislative Assembly
will responsibly approve the bill by mid-December,
as expected. The Peace and Security Council of the

17-4003315/16

S/PV.8115

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

African Union made clear the potential further course
of action, should the IGAD exercise fail or be postponed
owing to the unwillingness to find peaceful solutions
to a situation that gravely affects regional stability. As
one of the Chairs of the IGAD Partners Forum, Italy
will continue to do its part for the success of the highlevel forum and help restore peace in the country.

16/16

28/11/2017

I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I note that all Council members have spoken in the
Chamber, so, with the consent of the members, I intend
to adjourn the meeting without proceeding to informal
consultations. There being no objection, the meeting
is adjourned.
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.

17-40033
