UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1994/64
4 November 1994
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3451st meeting of the Security Council, held on 4 November 1994, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "Agreed
Framework of 21 October 1994 between the United States of America and the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea", the President of the Security Council
made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council recalls the statements made by the President of
the Council on 8 April 1993 (S/25562), 31 March 1994 (S/PRST/1994/13) and
30 May 1994 (S/PRST/1994/28) and its relevant resolution.
"The Security Council reaffirms the critical importance of
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) safeguards in the implementation
of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (the Treaty) and
the contribution which progress in non-proliferation makes to the
maintenance of international peace and security.
"The Security Council notes with satisfaction the ’Agreed Framework
between the United States of America and the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea (DPRK)’ (Agreed Framework) of 21 October 1994 as a positive step
in the direction of denuclearizing the Korean Peninsula and maintaining
peace and security in the region.
"The Security Council notes that the parties to the Agreed Framework
decided to (1) cooperate in replacing the DPRK’s graphite-moderated
reactors and related facilities with light-water reactor power plants,
(2) move towards full normalization of political and economic relations,
(3) work together for peace and security on a nuclear-free Korean
Peninsula, and (4) work together to strengthen the international nuclear
non-proliferation regime.
"The Security Council takes note of the decision of the DPRK in the
Agreed Framework to remain a party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons. It notes also the DPRK’s decision to come into full
compliance with the IAEA-DPRK Safeguards Agreement (INFCIRC/403) under the
Treaty.

94-43386 (E)

041194

/...

S/PRST/1994/64
English
Page 2

"The Security Council underlines that the Safeguards Agreement remains
binding and in force and looks to the DPRK to act thereon. The Council
requests the IAEA to take all steps it may deem necessary, following
consultations between the IAEA and DPRK with regard to verifying the
accuracy and completeness of the DPRK’s initial report on all nuclear
material in the DPRK, to verify full DPRK compliance with the IAEA-DPRK
Safeguards Agreement.
"The Security Council notes with approval the DPRK decision in the
Agreed Framework to freeze its graphite-moderated reactors and related
facilities, which is a voluntary measure beyond what is required by the
Treaty and the IAEA-DPRK Safeguards Agreement.
"The Security Council, having received an oral report from the
Director General of the IAEA, notes further that IAEA monitoring activities
with respect to such a voluntary measure are within the scope of
verification activities under the IAEA-DPRK Safeguards Agreement.
"The Security Council requests the IAEA to take all steps it may deem
necessary as a consequence of the Agreed Framework to monitor the freeze.
"The Security Council also requests the IAEA to continue to report to
it on implementation of the Safeguards Agreement until the DPRK has come
into full compliance with the Agreement and to report to the Council on its
activities related to monitoring the freeze of the specified facilities.
"The Security Council reaffirms the importance of the Joint
Declaration by the DPRK and the Republic of Korea on the Denuclearization
of the Korean Peninsula, and welcomes the decision of the DPRK to take
steps consistently to implement that Declaration and to engage in dialogue
with the Republic of Korea, as the Agreed Framework will help create an
atmosphere that promotes such dialogue.
"The Security Council will remain seized of the matter."

-----
