S/PV.8278

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8278th meeting

Wednesday, 6 June 2018, 10.35 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nebenzia/Mr. Kuzmin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Li Yongsheng
Mr. Djédjé
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Ms. Guadey
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Temenov
Mr. Almunayekh
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Radomski
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni
Mrs. Dickson
Mr. Simonoff

Agenda
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals
Letter dated 13 April 2018 from the President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2018/347)
Letter dated 17 May 2018 from the President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2018/471)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-17275 (E)
*1817275*

S/PV.8278

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

The meeting was called to order at 10.35 a.m.

Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals over the past
six months, and a great pleasure to do so under the
presidency of the Russian Federation.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals
Letter dated 13 April 2018 from the President
of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2018/347)
Letter dated 17 May 2018 from the President
of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2018/471)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Rwanda, Serbia and Croatia to participate
in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Her Excellency
Ms. Nela Kuburović, Minister of Justice of Serbia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Judge Theodor
Meron, President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, and Mr. Serge
Brammertz, Prosecutor of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to documents S/2018/347, which contains the text
of letter dated 13 April 2018 from the President of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals addressed to the President of the Security
Council, and document S/2018/471, which contains
the text of a letter dated 17 May 2018 from the
President of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals addressed to the President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to Judge Meron.
Judge Meron: It is a privilege to appear once again
before the Security Council to provide a briefing on
the progress of the work of the International Residual
2/25

06/06/2018

I would like to take this opportunity to express
my appreciation for the considerable attention and
efforts devoted to the Mechanism by the members of
the Council’s Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals, in particular in the context of the recent
review of the Mechanism’s progress in completing its
mandate. I am grateful to the members of the Working
Group for their sustained support. I wish to express
my gratitude to the delegation of Peru for its adept
leadership of the Group.
The Office of Legal Affairs continued to provide
vital assistance to the Mechanism during the reporting
period. I would like to convey my deep appreciation
to the Under-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs and
United Nations Legal Counsel, Mr. Miguel de Serpa
Soares, and to the Assistant Secretary-General for Legal
Affairs, Mr. Stephen Mathias, and their colleagues for
their important contributions to our work.
The Mechanism has undergone a number of
key changes since I appeared before the Council in
December of last year (see S/PV.8120). Upon the
historic closure of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), at the end of 2017, for
the first time since its founding, the Mechanism has
begun to stand on its own without the support of its two
predecessor tribunals and has taken on the full ambit of
the residual functions entrusted to it. For the first time,
the Mechanism also assumed full responsibility for a
wide array of administrative services essential to the
conduct of its mandate. It also continued to carry out a
retrial and to conduct a wide range of other proceedings,
both inside and outside the courtroom, during a period
of heightened judicial activity.
Significantly, the Mechanism has done all of that
while facing unprecedented and unexpected challenges
with regard to resource constraints and as a result of
the rapid implementation of expenditure reductions,
the deployment of staff-downsizing measures and the
deterioration in staff morale.
The reporting period was therefore an arduous one
for the Mechanism in many respects. Yet it also saw the
Mechanism and its remarkable staff show resilience and
creativity, including addressing new operational risks
with resourcefulness and ingenuity and continuing
to seek novel ways to enhance the conduct of the
18-17275

06/06/2018

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

Mechanism’s mandate. In that context, I wish to express
my particular gratitude to Registrar of the Mechanism,
Mr. Olufemi Elias, and his team for their perseverance in
the handling of the Mechanism’s unprecedented budget
situation and its myriad implications for the institution.
I would like to acknowledge my fellow judges
for their work leading to another significant
development — the adoption in April of a revision to
the Code of Professional Conduct for the Judges of
the Mechanism, which introduces a new procedure by
which judges made themselves accountable for adhering
to the principles set forth in the Code. That important
advancement once again demonstrates the Mechanism’s
commitment to best practice and to serving as a model
for accountability in all areas. That is but one example
of an important milestone reached during the reporting
period. I will keep my remaining remarks brief and
touch upon only a few of the matters discussed more
extensively in my written report submitted on 17 May
(see S/2018/471).
The Mechanism continued to make important
strides during the reporting period in the conduct and
completion of its judicial work. The appeal hearing in
the case Prosecutor v. Vojislav Šešelj was conducted
on 13 December 2017, with the judgement delivered on
11 April 2018. An appeal hearing in the case Prosecutor
v. Radovan Karadžić was conducted on 23 and 24 April,
ahead of the projections made last November. The aim
is to complete the case in December, considerably
earlier that previously predicted.
In the meantime, the retrial of the case Prosecutor
v. Jovica Stanišić and Franko Simatović is proceeding
apace, with the prosecution’s presentation of its
case ongoing. Appeal proceedings are under way in
the case Prosecutor v. Ratko Mladić, with both the
prosecution and Mr. Mladić having filed notices of
appeal and briefings in progress. Review proceedings
in the case Prosecutor v. Augustin Ngirabatware are
likewise continuing, following the withdrawal and
replacement of his counsel. A hearing in that case,
originally scheduled for February, is now expected to
be conducted in the latter half of this year.
A host of additional ad hoc judicial matters are also
pending before the Mechanism, involving everything
from motions concerning allegations of contempt of
court to applications to vary the protective measures
granted to vulnerable witnesses. As indicated in my
written report, the filing of such ad hoc judicial requests

S/PV. 8278

before the Mechanism can be expected to continue for
some time to come.
Good progress is being to made on a number of
other fronts as well. With regard to the enforcement
of sentences, for instance, during the reporting period
the Mechanism transferred eight convicted persons
from the United Nations detention facility in Arusha
to enforcement States, including four individuals
to Senegal and four to Benin. The Mechanism is
continuing in its efforts to address enforcement needs
for the remaining convicted persons at both branches.
It is our aim, subject to the cooperation of States, to
complete the transfer of all finally convicted persons
currently held at either the United Nations detention
facility in Arusha or the United Nations detention
unit in The Hague before the end of this year. If this
is achieved, it will represent a major step forward
towards the completion of our mandate in this area.
The Mechanism expresses its appreciation to Member
States currently enforcing sentences or considering
doing so for their vital support.
Important milestones were reached during the
current reporting period in the area of archives
management as well, with the handover of the final and
substantial tranche of physical and digital records from
the ICTY to the Mechanism and the relocation of the
physical records of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda into the custom-built archives facility in
Arusha. The Mechanism has continued its efforts
aimed at increasing and enhancing the accessibility of
records in its custody throughout the reporting period,
including by expanding the availability of judicial
records on publicly searchable databases and providing
technical support and advice to important external
projects, such as the new Sarajevo information centre
on the ICTY, launched just days ago.
Subject to resource constraints, the Mechanism
looks forward to providing support for initiatives to
further develop such information and documentation
centres in the former Yugoslavia in the months to come,
in keeping with the Security Council’s guidance in
resolution 1966 (2010), and to the continued exploration
of ways in which the Mechanism’s cooperation with the
Government of Rwanda can be enhanced, in line with
resolution 2256 (2015). In the meantime, the Mechanism
continues to carry out other key residual functions
entrusted to it, from the provision of assistance in support
of accountability efforts in national jurisdictions to the
ongoing monitoring of cases referred to national courts

18-172753/25

S/PV.8278

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

to the delivery of essential witness-protection services.
In doing all of this, the Mechanism strives to adhere
to the highest standards and to seek out ever-greater
efficiencies by deploying innovation and creativity at
every turn.
In this context, I wish to underscore the Mechanism’s
appreciation of the work of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services (OIOS), which, in addition to its
regular audits of specific aspects of the Mechanism’s
operations, completed a broader evaluation of the
Mechanism’s implementation of its mandate during the
2016-2017 period. We welcome all confirmations by
OIOS of the Mechanism’s achievements in everything
from ensuring trial readiness to increasing costefficiency and streamlining workflows in key areas.
But we are also just as grateful for the feedback and
recommendations from OIOS on ways in which
the Mechanism can improve its methods and work,
such as by enhancing cross-branch coordination to
strengthen the Mechanism’s one-institution approach,
restructuring the provision of administrative services to
better address the needs at both branches and deploying
human-resource tools to monitory gender parity.
If international justice and the fight to create
a global culture of accountability are to succeed in
the long run, it will be possible only if we remain
open to such improvement, innovation and creative
problem-solving, whether it is my colleagues and I at
the Mechanism or, as suggested by the valuable open
debate conducted recently in this Chamber under the
Polish presidency (see S/PV.8264), the members of
the Council themselves. It will be possible only if we
continue to work together, maintaining an unerring
focus on the core principles underlying not just the
Mechanism’s establishment, but the work of the United
Nations more generally for this ongoing commitment
and for this sustained and sustaining support that the
members of the Security Council continue to provide
to the Mechanism, and to broader efforts aimed at
ensuring principled accountability for serious violations
of international law.
The President: I thank President Meron for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Brammertz.
Mr. Brammertz: I thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to once again address the Security
Council on the activities of the Office of the Prosecutor.
My written report provides details about our activities
4/25

06/06/2018

and results during the reporting period in relation to
our usual three priorities (S/2018/471, annex II).
With regard to the branch in The Hague, we worked
to expeditiously complete our last judicial activities,
with only three cases now remaining. With regard to
the branch in Arusha, my Office undertook intense
efforts to locate and arrest the remaining eight fugitives
indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR). And at both branches, we continued to
provide full support to national authorities in relation
to the prosecution of serious international crimes
committed in Rwanda and in the former Yugoslavia.
As part of the review of the work of the Mechanism,
the Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS)
evaluated my Office’s work and methods. OIOS
concluded that my Office operated with a small staff and
tight resources as the Security Council had mandated. It
noted that we were effective in planning, restructuring
and refining our operational methods. It also identified
a number of cost efficiencies that we successfully
implemented, including our one-Office policy. At the
same, OIOS identified that the high workload, together
with organizational downsizing, had an impact on staff
morale, particularly at the branch in The Hague. My
Office will work to address that issue.
The review process established by the Council
is an important exercise. My Office is also very
grateful to all participants for their time, attention
and constructive engagement. Our common goal is
achieving our mandate through efficient and effective
management. As a temporary institution, my Office
regularly develops projections for the completion of
our functions. Looking forward, I would like to briefly
outline anticipated developments for the next few years.
At The Hague branch, we will continue finalizing
our judicial activities. My Office will progressively
reduce our staff and resources as these last cases are
completed. With the appeal judgement in the Šešelj case
issued two months ago, and the scheduled completion
of the Karadžić appeal before the end of the year, there
will only be two remaining cases. The President has
reported that the Stanišić and Simatović trial and the
Mladić appeal are expected to be completed by the end
of 2020. That would then only leave appeal proceedings,
if any, in the Stanišić and Simatović case.
Accordingly, we will be increasingly focused in
The Hague on our remaining continuous functions,
the most significant of which will be responding to
18-17275

06/06/2018

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

requests for assistance from national jurisdictions in
relation to our quite extensive evidence collection.
As set out in our review report, we anticipate that the
number and complexity of requests for assistance will
further increase in the coming few years. Countries of
the former Yugoslavia have indeed established national
war crimes strategies to intensify prosecutions, and
have requested our support. We also anticipate that
more cases will move forward once challenges in
regional judicial cooperation are overcome. Sufficient
staff and resources will still be needed temporarily for
my Office to address this workload.
At the same time that judicial activities are winding
down in The Hague, my Office anticipates that an
increase in judicial activities at the Arusha branch will
take place. In fact, that process has already begun. That
expectation is informed by three main factors.
First, as we outlined in our progress report, at the
Arusha branch there has been an increase in review
and related litigation initiated by the defence. We
expect that there will continue to be a greater workload
in that regard than during the first four years of the
Mechanism’s operations.
Secondly, as I have previously reported to the
Council, my Office is significantly increasing our
efforts to locate and arrest the remaining eight fugitives
indicted by the ICTR and ensure those cases are ready
for trial. We restructured our tracking team, and
adopted a more proactive approach to our work. Those
reforms have been matched by a temporary increase
in resources on the clear understanding that we have
a limited amount of time to demonstrate a successful
track record.

S/PV. 8278

with the Prosecutor General’s Office. We are also
initiating a project to improve access to our evidence.
My Office is committed to managing all developments
consistent with the Council’s mandate for a lean and
cost-effective organization.
The final topic I would like to address today is the
search for missing persons in the former Yugoslavia.
Over the past six months, many stakeholders have taken
the initiative to raise that issue with my Office and seek
our assistance, including the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC), the Presidents of Croatia
and Serbia and missing persons authorities in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Efforts are urgently needed to strengthen the search
for missing persons. There are 10,000 families — from
all sides of the conflict — that still do not know the fate
of their loved ones. The ICRC is launching a five-year
strategy to further support local mechanisms, which
are also improving their methods and cooperation. My
Office is committed to providing all possible assistance
as requested.
Yet Governments have made many commitments
to support that work that remain only on paper. Longstanding recommendations have still not yet been
implemented years later. Financial support from
national budgets is limited and insufficient. Political
will is also needed to create the conditions for witnesses
to come forward with information. Glorifying war
criminals surely has the opposite effect. The search for
missing persons is a humanitarian imperative. It is time
for political authorities to be held accountable for their
commitments, and to show the courage to put aside all
other considerations.

While the challenges in tracking fugitives are too
significant to guarantee a positive outcome, my Office
can confirm that we will spare no effort. The victims
of the genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda deserve
nothing less. In that regard, I call upon all States to
provide full cooperation to my Office. This is an
opportunity, not only an obligation. By successfully
arresting a fugitive in coordination with my Office,
States can clearly demonstrate their commitment to
multilateralism and the rule of law.

My Office is firmly focused on carrying out our
remaining responsibilities efficiently and effectively.
We also remain committed to providing our full support
to national prosecutors and missing persons authorities
in the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda.

Finally, my Office anticipates that over the next
few years, there will be an increase in the volume
of requests for assistance in relation to our ICTR
evidence collection. My Office is strengthening our
cooperation with Rwandan authorities, in particular

Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank Judge Theodor Meron, President
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, and Mr. Serge Brammertz, Prosecutor of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal

The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Brammertz for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.

18-172755/25

S/PV.8278

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

Tribunals, for their briefings. I would also like to
convey my gratitude for the twelfth report that has been
submitted under resolution 1966 (2010) (see S/2018/471).
Peru, which is committed to multilateralism and
international law, is honoured to preside over the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals.
We took that Office in succession to Uruguay and its
representative, Ambassador Elbio Rosselli. It should be
recalled that the Informal Working Group deals with
issues related to the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals, as the repository of the
functions of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), and that the Mechanism is
currently in the process of being reviewed and renewed,
in accordance with the need to ensure accountability
and prevent impunity.
Peru believes that the development of international
criminal law, a process to which the Council has
contributed, is vital to ensuring that justice is
served, promoting reconciliation, deterring potential
perpetrators from committing atrocity crimes and,
ultimately, promoting sustainable peace. In that regard,
we also believe that the Security Council, which is
responsible for maintaining international peace and
security, should stand united in its support for the
Residual Mechanism.
We would like to commend the transparent,
expeditious, efficient and effective way in which the
Mechanism has carried out its mandates and the trials
with which it is currently seized. That is particularly
important given the closure of the ICTY last December.
We underscore the steps taken to implement the
recommendations contained in the report of the Office
of Internal Oversight Services (S/2018/206), and take
note of the amendments made to the Rules of Procedure
and Evidence, which call for balancing the different
approaches of the Romano-Germanic and the AngloSaxon legal systems. Moreover, we wish to welcome
the willingness of several African and European
Governments to allow convicted persons to serve their
sentences in their respective countries, and underscore
the need to bring the remaining fugitives to justice.
We stress, in that regard, that the success
of the Mechanism depends to a large extent on
the cooperation of States in complying with the
judgements, abiding by the orders and responding
to the Mechanism’s requests for assistance.
6/25

06/06/2018

We also note the concern raised about the early
release of persons convicted by the Special Tribunal
for Rwanda, some of whom have expressed no regrets
about their crimes. In that regard, we encourage the
Mechanism to assess options within the framework of
relevant procedures to address that concern.
I conclude by reiterating Peru’s commitment to the
promotion of justice, the rule of law and accountability,
as well as to the work of the Council’s Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals, and by thanking
the Office of Legal Affairs and the Security Council
secretariat for their continued support.
Mrs. Dickson (United Kingdom): I would like
to thank the President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, Judge Theodor
Meron, and the Prosecutor, Mr. Serge Brammertz, for
their briefings to the Council today and their recent
reports (see S/2018/347 and S/2018/471).
The Residual Mechanism has now entered an
important phase of its mandate. With the closure of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
and, at the end of last year, the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), it is now the
Mechanism’s sole responsibility to continue the work of
those Tribunals. Over the past decades, both Tribunals
shone a spotlight on some of the worst atrocities
witnessed in modern times. They showed that there
would be no impunity for those who have perpetrated
the most egregious of crimes. Resolution 1966 (2010),
which established the Mechanism, provides it with the
mandate it needs to ensure that the legacy of the ICTY
and ICTR is carried on. As members of the Security
Council, we need to continue to support the Mechanism
in its important work.
We note the Mechanism’s current case-load,
which reflects the significance of the work that lies
ahead — important appeals in the Karadžić and
Mladić cases, the retrial of Stanišić and Simatović, the
contempt of court hearing and the review of an appeal
sentence in the Ngirabatware case. We are pleased to
note that the Appeals Chamber delivered its judgement
in the case of Šešelj in April. The Tribunal had already
set out a time frame within which to hear those cases,
and it is noteworthy that cases are proceeding at pace,
and even ahead of their original schedule, such as the
case of Karadžić.
We commend the Mechanism’s efforts in
establishing itself as a lean and efficient tribunal. The
18-17275

06/06/2018

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

S/PV. 8278

recent Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS)
report has underlined that point, specifying that the
Mechanism has already achieved much of what the
Security Council envisaged in resolution 1966 (2010).
Its strategic approach to handling cases has undeniably
played a crucial role in achieving that goal. The
structure of the Mechanism has enabled it to manage
its case-load efficiently by employing, in addition to its
full-time President, a roster of independent judges who
perform judicial functions only when tasked to do so.
They can also work remotely, in addition to working at
one of the seats of the Mechanism, potentially saving
time and resources. It has proved to be a successful
way of working. Presidential oversight in ensuring the
expeditious nature of trials has resulted in substantially
reduced costs for the judicial activities of the Residual
Mechanism when compared to those of its predecessors.

culture. Better coordination between the two branches
has ensured harmonization of governance frameworks,
leading to the sharing of best practices. In the future,
we look forward to hearing from the Registry on further
progress, including on the new archives repository and
the work being done to create a unified information
technology system for The Hague and Arusha, ensuring
easier public access to information, as well as the steps
being taken to increase responsiveness to changes in
the Mechanism’s workload going forward.

Let me turn to the valuable work being carried out
by both the Prosecutor and the Registrar.

Mr. Djédjé (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation extends its warm congratulations to
your country, Mr. President, on its assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of June, and
assures you of its full cooperation in fulfilling your
mission. We also congratulate Poland, in particular
Ambassador Joanna Wronecka, on the outstanding
conduct of our work during the month of May.

With regard to the Prosecutor’s recent initiatives,
we take note of the OIOS comments that the Prosecutor
was effective in planning, restructuring and refining
his Office’s operational methods in response to the
need for a lean and cost-effective organization. It is
clear that embracing the one-office policy over recent
years and redefining his Office’s policy on tracking
fugitives last year enabled it to be innovative in its
operations in the post-ICTY and ICTR periods. Those
innovations are to be applauded, but the support of the
international community is still needed. We call upon
Member States to assist the Prosecutor’s Office in
fulfilling its mandate.
For example, locating and apprehending fugitives is
not a task that lies exclusively with the Prosecutor. We
therefore urge States and international organizations to
work constructively with the Office to bolster its efforts.
Similarly, we call upon relevant States to engage with
the Prosecutor in pursuing national prosecutions. The
increasing number of requests that the Prosecutor is
receiving from national judicial authorities for advice
and support is encouraging, and we are pleased that
such work will be done consistent with the lean and
effective organization mandate. At the same time, it is
an indication of the level of work that the Prosecutor
will have to undertake over the next few years.
The work of the Registry often goes unnoticed,
yet it is important that we note the changes made in
the Registry, which have encouraged a unified work

We are pleased that the Mechanism has welcomed
the OIOS recommendations and has started work on
their implementation. We are confident it will continue
to carry out appropriately the Residual functions with
which it is tasked, and the United Kingdom remains
fully committed to supporting the Mechanism until it
completes its mandate.

Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the convening of this debate
on the progress of the work of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, and thanks Judge
Theodor Meron and Mr. Serge Brammertz, in their
respective capacities as President and Prosecutor of the
Mechanism, for their briefings. Our congratulations
also go to Ambassador Gustavo Meza-Cuadra on his
work as Chairman of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals.
On 17 May, the Council held an open debate on
upholding international law within the context of the
maintenance of international peace and security (see
S/PV.8262). On that occasion, almost all delegations
stressed the need for States to pool their efforts to fight
impunity in cases of violations of international law.
The letters of the President and the Prosecutor of the
Mechanism (see S/2018/347 and S/2018/471) are in line
with that perspective.
The Mechanism — a small, temporary entity — has
made significant progress in implementing its mandate
in recent years. Indeed, the Mechanism has fulfilled its
mandate, in accordance with resolution 1966 (2010),
by ensuring the necessary continuity of the residual

18-172757/25

S/PV.8278

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

functions transferred to it by the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda and the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia, as evidenced by the increasing
volume of its judicial activities, enforcement of
sentences, the protection of victims and witnesses, and
archives management.
Мy delegation commends the remarkable progress
made by the Mechanism, as noted by the Office of
Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) in the report it
published in March. Those include matching the budget
to the size and activities of the Mechanism, as well
as staff reductions. We encourage the President and
the Prosecutor to pursue their efforts to achieve the
objectives set by the United Nations in resolution 1966
(2010). Côte d’Ivoire also reaffirms the importance of
the recommendations made by the OIOS in its review
of the Mechanism’s working methods and welcomes
the steps taken to implement them. In that regard, my
delegation supports the staff morale survey, the review
of the survey results and the development of strategies
on managing institutional change.
Despite the progress made, we note that many
major challenges remain, including the cooperation
of States with the Mechanism and the strengthening
of national judicial capacities. With respect to States’
cooperation with the Mechanism, my country is of the
view that it is key in the search for, arrest and transfer
of fugitives and the enforcement of sentences imposed.
In that regard, my delegation appreciates the initiatives
taken by the States that support the Mechanism
by receiving persons who have been convicted,
acquitted or have served their sentences when they
renounce their return to their countries of origin.
We also encourage States to redouble their efforts to
apprehend fugitives and make them available to the
Mechanism for trial.
With regard to strengthening the judicial capacities
of national institutions, it is an important link in the
promotion of the principle of complementarity and the
assumption of responsibility by national authorities
following a conflict. In that connection, my delegation
supports activities to bolster national judiciary
capacities, enabling State institutions of beneficiary
States to take in the experience gained and the best
practices with regard to the Mechanism in order to
prosecute perpetrators of mass crimes.
We welcome the advanced training provided in
February by the Mechanism’s Office of the Prosecutor
8/25

06/06/2018

in Dakar on investigation and prosecution for
international crimes in Central Africa and West Africa.
Thirty prosecutors and investigating judges from Côte
d’Ivoire, Guinea, Mali, the Niger, the Central African
Republic and Senegal participated in this high-level
training. Côte d’Ivoire strongly encourages the Office
of the Prosecutor to take all necessary measures to
effectively hold the follow-up session in Abidjan.
Despite its supposed residual functions, the
Mechanism plays an undeniable role in the respect for
international law and the fight against impunity in the
regions of ex-Yugoslavia and Rwanda. Perpetrators of
mass crimes are still at large. The Mechanism should
pursue them, apprehend them and judge them.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire invites the international
community and the Council to support the efforts of the
Mechanism and to provide it the necessary support and
cooperation to enable it to complete its tasks in order to
successfully discharge its mandate.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
President Meron and Prosecutor Brammertz for their
letters (see S/2018/347 and S/2018/471) and briefings.
Six months after the closure of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and more than two
years after the closure of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals has demonstrated
that it is fully independent and capable of effectively
implementing the mandate entrusted to it by the
Security Council in resolution 1966 (2010).
France welcomes the respect of the timetable for
legal proceedings, with its April 2018 decision on
the Šešelj case and an expected appeal judgement in
the Karadžić case in December 2018, well ahead of
schedule. France thanks the staff for their work and
reaffirms the temporary nature of the mechanism,
which must innovate, simplify and adapt its procedures
and working methods, giving due consideration to the
diversity of legal systems, and complete all the trials in
progress within the set time limits.
France also welcomes the transfer to Senegal
and Benin of persons convicted by the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda to serve their sentences
there. We recognize the importance of a commitment
by all Member States to assisting the Mechanism
in the implementation of its mandate, in particular
with regard to the enforcement of sentences. It is a
18-17275

06/06/2018

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

decisive contribution to the work of justice that we are
pursuing, which must be welcomed and encouraged.
France also recalls that States are required to cooperate
with the Mechanism, in particular in the pursuit and
apprehension of the eight fugitives indicted by the
ICTR, for which the Mechanism is responsible. Their
crimes cannot go unpunished.
During the period under review, the United Nations
Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) assessed
the working methods of the Mechanism and issued its
report on 8 March. In that regard, France welcomes
the Mechanism’s cooperation and the submission of
the progress report (see S/2018/471) on its work, in
accordance with presidential statement S/PRST/2018/6,
of 19 March.
We call on the Mechanism to implement the
recommendations of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services in order to continue to meet the austerity and
efficiency requirements, as identified by OIOS in its
report. In that regard, we welcome the adoption of a code
of conduct and a disciplinary mechanism for judges.
Our semi-annual debate is an opportunity to
recall the major work of the international community
in the service of the fight against impunity and
reconciliation, and the responsibility incumbent on the
States concerned to ensure that this work is ongoing
and on people’s minds by continuing their tireless
efforts to prosecute the perpetrators of crimes within
their jurisdiction. Those are the conditions for genuine
national and regional reconciliation.
France welcomes the assistance provided by
the Mechanism to national courts responsible for
prosecuting the perpetrators of international crimes
committed in former Yugoslavia and Rwanda. On the
other hand, the feeble cooperation among the Balkan
States in the prosecution of middle-level criminals,
noted by Prosecutor Brammertz, is worrying. For
France and the European Union, cooperation with the
Mechanism and regional cooperation remain a priority.
I would also like to echo the concern expressed by
Prosecutor Brammertz regarding certain persons,
convicted by international criminal tribunals, denying
their crimes and their responsibility as soon as they
are released.
We wish to reaffirm here that judicial decisions
on war crimes, genocide crimes and crimes against
humanity committed in the former Yugoslavia and
Rwanda are based on facts and responsibilities

S/PV. 8278

rigorously established through fair trials. Those
judicial decisions, like all judicial decisions, as well
as the duty to respect victims, are binding on all. We
encourage the Mechanism to continue its discussions
on the introduction of early release conditions.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the
Ambassador of Peru, Chair of the Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals, his entire team,
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, the Office of Legal Affairs and the Office
of Internal Oversight Services for their efforts to
implement resolution 1966 (2010).
The resolution that the Security Council will adopt
by the end of this month should allow this work, which
is obviously not yet complete, to continue. More than
ever, the fight against impunity and for an independent
and impartial judiciary must be at the heart of the
Council’s action, given that justice is a prerequisite for
lasting peace and security.
Mr. Li Yongsheng (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks President Maron and Prosecutor Brammertz for
their briefings on the work of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.
China knows that during the reporting period, the
Mechanism continued to make progress in its traditional
activities. An appeal judgements has been rendered on
the Šešelj case. The Stanišić and Simatović case, the
Karadžić case and the Mladić case continue to move
forward. Eight convicted persons have been transferred
to Senegal and Benin to serve their sentences. In that
regard, China knows that President Meron is committed
to completing the Karadžić case by the end of the year.
China welcomes the efforts and progress made by
the Office of the Prosecutor in tracking fugitives of
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. China
hopes that, in line with the requirement of the Security
Council to be small, temporary and efficient, the
Mechanism will continue to take measures to efficiently
push forward case trials and other work. China
commends the Office of Internal Oversight Services
for its evaluation report on the working methods of
the Mechanism. It is our hope that the Mechanism will
implement the recommendations in the report. China
consistently supports the international rule of law and
the work of the Mechanism.
In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to thank Peru in its capacity as Chair of the Informal

18-172759/25

S/PV.8278

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

Working Group on International Tribunals and the
Office of Legal Affairs for their work.
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): I would like to
thank President Theodor Meron and Prosecutor Serge
Brammertz for their useful and informative briefings
on the work of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals.
As this is the first open meeting on this topic since
the closure of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) at the end of last year, we would
also like to once again express our sincere appreciation
to the ICTY and its staff for the invaluable contributions
to international criminal justice and the development
of international law. We also appreciate the efforts
made, both by the ICTY and the Mechanism, to ensure
a smooth and efficient transition of the functions and
services of the Tribunal to the Mechanism.
The Mechanism will continue to fulfil and complete
the important work of the International Criminal
Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda.
Both Tribunals have played a key role in the fight
against impunity for the gravest crimes of concern to
the international community, such as genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes. They were both
forerunners of the International Criminal Court, which
is the only permanent, treaty-based international court
with jurisdiction in the fight against impunity today. In
that regard, we repeat the importance of ensuring the
universality of the Rome Statute.
In order for the Mechanism to complete its functions
and to prevent any delays in the implementation of
its mandate, it is essential that the Mechanism has
the required resources to deliver on its mandate. It is
also imperative that its independence and integrity be
upheld. The Mechanism has made important headway
since our previous briefing in December 2017 (see
S/PV.8120). The continued development of the ongoing
cases, including the completion of the case against
Vojislav Šešelj, demonstrates the progress of the
Mechanism. There has also been significant progress in
relation to gender-related matters. We welcome the fact
that the Registry is now reviewing how policies on the
support and the protection of victims and witnesses can
better reflect gender-sensitive and gender-appropriate
approaches. We also applaud the achievement by the
Mechanism of gender parity at the level of professional
staff within the Organization, as well as the appointment
of focal points, including for gender issues.
10/25

06/06/2018

We note with satisfaction that the practice of
judges exercising their functions remotely has worked
well, having been described as efficient and innovative
in the evaluation report (S/2018/206) of the Office of
Internal Oversight Services (OIOS). We also welcome
the work to revise the Code of Professional Conduct
for the Judges of the Tribunal (see S/2016/976, annex,
enclosure VII), which is an important element of
ensuring judicial accountability. We further note the
efforts made towards the transition to a digital archive.
The report on the evaluation carried out by the OIOS
made a number of important recommendations for
the Mechanism going forward. We are pleased to see
that the Mechanism has already begun to implement
those recommendations.
If the Mechanism is to succeed in delivering on
the mandate that we have given it, all Member States
must cooperate fully and provide full and unequivocal
support for its work. In that regard, Sweden is one of
the countries that has received convicted individuals
for the enforcement of sentences.
We note the concerns expressed by Rwanda and
underscore the importance of continued work to
promote communciation and cooperation with the
Government of Rwanda. We welcome the Mechanism’s
work in assisting national jurisdictions that prosecute
international crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia
and in Rwanda. We call on Member States to assist the
Mechanism in the arrest of the eight fugitives indicted
by the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda who
remain at large.
Finally, I want to join other representatives
in expressing our appreciation to Peru for its able
leadership as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals. We look forward to continuing
to work closely with the Group going forward.
Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank Judge Theodor Meron,
President of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals, and Prosecutor Serge Brammertz
for their informative briefings on the progress made in
the work of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals.
By the end of last year, we saw the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia complete its
mandate to prosecute those responsible for grave
violations of international humanitarian law in that
country. We have therefore been able to close the first
18-17275

06/06/2018

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

two international criminal tribunals for the prosecution
of the perpetrators of grave violations of international
humanitarian law. That jurisdiction was fully
transferred to the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals, which is complementing the
Security Council approach to establish justice and
end impunity in order to achieve international peace
and security. Peace means not only putting an end to
armed conflicts, but also ensuring justice for victims
of war crimes, genocide and ethnic cleansing. This
can be done by prosecuting those found responsible
for perpetrating such crimes in accordance with the
relevant international laws.
We take note of the report of the President of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals on the progress of its work (see S/2018/347).
In that regard, I would like to make the following
three points.
First, we welcome the efforts of the President
and the Prosecutor of the International Residual
Mechanism to improve its work by adopting effective
working methods that help to facilitate legal research,
analysis and the drafting of decisions and judgements
issued by the Mechanism, without prejudice to the
mandate set out in resolution 1966 (2010) and despite
the challenges it is facing. Those challenges include
heightened judicial activity, such as requests for the
review of judgements rendered, access to confidential
information and allegations of contempt of court; no
approval by the General Assembly for the Mechanism’s
proposed budget for the biennium 2018–2019. The
Mechanism therefore had to prepare a revised and
reduced budget by decreasing the size of its staff, which
had a negative impact on the implementation of the
Mechanism’s mandate, as well as on its staff morale.
Secondly, we commend the prompt proceedings
undertaken by judges, prosecutors and the Registrar
during the trials before the judges of the Mechanism so
as to swiftly issue judgements against the accused, such
as the issuance ahead of schedule of final judgements
in recent cases.
Thirdly, the Mechanism should take the remarks
of Member States on its work into account in order to
achieve the desired outcome, in particular in cases of
conditional early release.
In conclusion, I would like to thank Peru for its
strenuous efforts as Chair of the Informal Working

S/PV. 8278

Group on International Tribunals, as well as the Office
of Legal Affairs.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I would
first like to thank President Meron and Prosecutor
Brammertz of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals for their briefings and for
their comprehensive report (see S/2018/347). We also
wish to thank Ambassador Gustavo Meza-Cuadra,
Permanent Representative of Peru, for his leadership
of the Security Council Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals.
After 24 years of service, the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) completed
its mandate and closed its doors last December. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands would like to express
its sincere gratitude to all those who worked for and
with the ICTY. In many aspects, the court was unique
and groundbreaking — unique in its contribution to
international criminal justice case law, in its prosecution
of sexual violence as a war crime and in convicting so
many people accused of atrocity crimes.
The closure of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR) in 2015 and of the ICTY in 2017
mark the end of an era. We are now moving from the
early stages of justice in Rwanda and in the Balkans
to a more mature stage. However, much work remains
to be done. In that respect, we are grateful that the
Mechanism has now assumed the responsibilities
and all remaining functions from both the ICTY and
the ICTR.
Today, I will focus on three issues: first, the judicial
workload of the Mechanism; secondly, capacitybuilding; and thirdly, the early release policy.
My first point is on the judicial workload of the
Mechanism, which is higher than anticipated. We note
with satisfaction that the three cases on the docket of
the Mechanism are nonetheless all ahead of schedule.
The working methods implemented by the Mechanism
have enabled the judges to expeditiously render
judgments in the shorter legal proceedings. We fully
support those efficient working methods and encourage
the Mechanism to continue along that path.
Turning to my second point, the capacity-building
and outreach activities of the Prosecutor, we fully
support the three priorities of the Prosecutor to,
complete all trials and appeals expeditiously, locate and
arrest the eight remaining fugitives and assist national

18-1727511/25

S/PV.8278

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

jurisdictions in prosecuting international crimes. We
would like to underscore the importance of the last
priority in particular.
With the closure of both Tribunals, for the former
Yugoslavia and for Rwanda, ensuring accountability
for war crimes in the countries involved now entirely
depends on national judicial authorities. It is of the
utmost importance that national judicial authorities
be assisted, supported and advised in prosecuting war
crimes. We encourage the Prosecutor to continue those
very important activities.
Turning to my third point, the early release policy,
we take note of the current discussion. In that regard,
we acknowledge and underscore the authority given
to the Mechanism’s President by its statute in that
regard. The international legal order and the rule of
law require the international community to respect and
implement judicial decisions taken by the Mechanism
in accordance with the statute.
In conclusion, the Netherlands proudly hosted the
ICTY in The Hague and is proud to host the Mechanism
there as well, together with many other international
legal institutions. The quality of those international
legal institutions is determined by the quality of the
staff members and the quality of their leadership. In
our view, therefore, the prudent and careful following
of relevant decision-making procedures is crucial when
appointing those leading the institutions. That also
applies to the role of the Security Council in this regard.
Our Constitution obliges our Government to
promote and protect the international legal order, and
international criminal justice is a key element of that
endeavour. Let me once again commend Prosecutor
Brammertz and his team for all their hard work. To
President Meron, I should like to express my thanks
for his statement of two weeks ago before the Security
Council (see S/PV.8262); in particular, his personal note
moved my delegation and was quite compelling. We
share his concerns that international criminal justice
is still very much in its early stages, and therefore at a
highly vulnerable stage of development. The Kingdom
of the Netherlands remains determined to fight
impunity and to ensure that justice is done by victims
of international crimes worldwide. We will continue to
protect and promote the international legal order and to
do our utmost for international criminal justice.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, I should like to thank you,
12/25

06/06/2018

Sir, for having organized today’s meeting, and to
welcome Judge Theodor Meron and the Prosecutor
of the International Residual Mechanism of Criminal
Courts, Mr. Serge Brammertz, and thank them for their
valuable, informative and enlightening briefings. We
also want to thank the Chair of the Informal Working
Group and his entire team for the outstanding work
they are carrying out.
In general terms, the Government of the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea welcomes the significant progress
in the execution of the mandate of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, as
recognized in the March 2018 evaluation report
(S/2018/206) of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services (OIOS).
However, we must note that we have observed
a lack of uniformity in the application of rule 151 of
the Rules of Procedure and Evidence, referring to the
General Rules for the Granting of Pardon, Commutation
of Sentence and Early Release. Specifically, we refer
to the latest persons convicted by the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda to have been released
before having served out their full sentences.
While those rulings were issued following the
consideration of circumstances held to justify a
reduction in sentence or a pardon, it is also true that
the gravity of the crimes committed and the irreparable
damage caused are not open to discussion. We therefore
urge the Mechanism to cooperate with victims and
take into account their opinions, especially in cases of
pardon or early release of persons duly convicted of war
crimes, genocide or crimes against humanity, always in
accordance with due process. There is no peace without
justice, and it is important that victims feel that justice
has been done, since decision may foment attitudes of
revenge and hatred.
We underscore the need for the Security Council
to show unity in upholding the rule of law, ensuring
accountability and preventing impunity, in particular
for those responsible for genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes, as well as other serious
violations of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law, in order to ensure they
are not repeated.
In establishing the Mechanism, to cite but one
example, the Security Council once again demonstrated
its commitment to peace and to upholding international
law and international humanitarian law by supporting
18-17275

06/06/2018

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

the peaceful settlement of disputes, ensuring
accountability and promoting the fight against a
pervasive culture of impunity. However, to echo
what Judge Meron said a few weeks ago in this very
Chamber (see S/PV.8262), demanding accountability
for international crimes entails doing much more than
simply cooperating with international tribunals and
specialized entities. We agree with his observation that,
for accountability and an international order based on
the rule of law to truly take hold, officials of national
jurisdictions will have to shoulder the lion’s share of
this work, since it is only through broad-based national
participation and by using all the tools at our disposal,
including universal jurisdiction, that we may hope
to address the shortcomings in accountability. Any
training policy for national legal institutions in that
regard will therefore enjoy the strong support of the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea.
We also support the recommendations of OIOS and
call on States to redouble their efforts to collaborate
with the Mechanism.
I would like to underscore that all of my remarks
should in no way detract from the excellent and arduous
work being carried out by the Mechanism. We simply
wish to point out that, in keeping with the foreign policy
of our Government, we always advocate dialogue, close
cooperation and cooperation.
Lastly, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea is firmly
committed to an international order based on the rule
of law with the United Nations at its core, whereby the
Security Council must continue promoting mechanisms
such as the establishment of tribunals to combat the
culture of impunity in post-conflict situations.
Mr. Radomski (Poland): I would like to thank
President Theodor Meron and Prosecutor Serge
Brammertz for their informative reports (see S/2018/347
and S/2018/471) and briefings, and to pay tribute to
their commitment to fighting impunity and ensuring
accountability by way of the high quality work of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals (IRMCT). Let me also join other members
of the Security Council in expressing our thanks to
Peru for very ably and effectively chairing the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals.
Poland notes with satisfaction the significant
progress made in the work of the Mechanism and looks
forward to its further achievements. Recognition is due
to the efforts of the President, the Prosecutor and the

S/PV. 8278

staff in carrying out their tasks effectively and with
a sense of commitment while facing a considerable
workload, including increased judicial activity and a
large number of challenges.
We appreciate in particular the focus on the
expeditious completion of trials and appeals, and we
welcome the numerous innovative, flexible and costeffective practices and arrangements adopted to that
end. Instances of proceedings held ahead of previous
projected schedules are encouraging. Also positive
is the commencement of the implementation by the
Mechanism of the recommendations made by the
Office of Internal Oversight Services in March 2018.
Moreover, the efforts undertaken by the Mechanism to
protect and assist the victims and witnesses of atrocities
are especially commendable.
We take note of the challenges that the Mechanism
faces, including in relation to its budgetary situation.
Also in this respect, the crucial importance of sustained
cooperation and support from States Members of the
United Nations must be acknowledged, as we have a
major influence on the timely and efficient fulfilment
of the mandate of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals. In this context, we call on
all States to fully cooperate with the Mechanism,
in accordance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions, and to render the necessary assistance to
it, especially with regard to the location and arrest of
the remaining fugitives indicted by the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.
Finally, let me underline that international criminal
justice institutions, including the Mechanism, play a
crucial role in upholding accountability and fighting
impunity, which are key to effective conflict prevention.
Allow me to reassure the Council of Poland’s continued
and unwavering support for the Mechanism.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We are very grateful for the
briefings by the President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, Judge Theodor
Meron, and the Prosecutor, Mr. Serge Brammertz.
We take this opportunity to reiterate to them our
strong support in the discharge of the duties that have
been entrusted to them. We should like also to thank
and congratulate Peru for its work at the head of the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals.
There is no doubt that the work carried out by
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia

18-1727513/25

S/PV.8278

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

(ICTY) and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) has made a landmark contribution
over the past 24 years to the fight against impunity.
Both bodies have played a major role in the quest for
justice and the restoration of the rule of law. On this
understanding, and following the closure of the ICTY
last December, the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals has taken on the primary
responsibility for concluding, in a timely and effective
way, the remaining trials transferred to its purview.
The Mechanism must implement, with the highest
degree of rigour, the mandate conferred on it in
resolution 1966 (2010), of 22 December 2010, not just
continuing with the case law, rights and obligations
of both tribunals, but also taking on the vital role of
strengthening and supporting the work of national
jurisdictions. In all this it must abide by its original
design concept, meaning that it must be a small,
temporary and efficient structure whose functions and
size will decrease over time.
We have taken due note of the progress made in
the jurisdictional activities carried out during the
reporting period, including a new, unanticipated
trial in the Stanišić and Simatović case, as well as in
appeals hearings and review procedures. We would also
highlight the assistance and cooperation provided by
the Office of the Prosecutor to national jurisdictions so
as to help them with the strengthening and development
of their domestic capacities.
Moreover, we believe that the holding of remote
hearings is an innovative initiative that is efficient
in terms of both time savings and budgetary savings.
Nonetheless, this initiative needs to be improved and
further developed in order to guarantee better levels of
interaction between the judges. It is also key to address
the possible risks that it might present in terms of the
security of data and of confidential information.
We would highlight the Mechanism’s capacity to
discharge multiple functions simultaneously in the
cases handed over to it by the ICTR and the ICTY. We
urge the Mechanism to strengthen its harmonization
and integration efforts, taking steps to prevent the
differences in work culture between the Offices in
Arusha and The Hague from affecting the work of
the Mechanism.
Despite the progress reported, we wish to express
our alarm at the number of fugitives who have not yet
been apprehended and brought before the Mechanism
14/25

06/06/2018

for trial, despite the unceasing coordination activities
carried out by the Office of the Prosecutor alongside
States, regional and international organizations such
as INTERPOL. It is important in that context to recall
that criminal responsibility is individual and that
no community or nation is responsible for the acts
committed by individuals. That understanding should
encourage States to cooperate with investigations in
order to avoid impunity and guarantee reparations
for harm caused, which is a vital prerequisite
for reconciliation.
Moreover, instances of early release and related
problems are an issue that give us cause for great
concern, given that there appear to be gaps in terms of
the criteria for their implementation. In that respect, we
call on the Mechanism, through its various bodies, to
take the measures necessary to resolve the situation and
to prevent the legacy and the work of the ICTY and the
ICTR from being tarnished or diminished by the release
of individuals who then proceed to deny their crimes or
attempt to justify their crimes against humanity.
We have taken note of the difficulties encountered
during the reporting period on the relocation of 11
individuals who had served their sentences fully or
who had been acquitted of all charges. There may be
a possible humanitarian situation in this respect that
needs to be resolved and addressed quickly by the
Mechanism. For this reason, the support and assistance
of the international community is particularly important.
We have taken note of the assessment carried out
by the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the
functions of and the work carried out by the Mechanism
for the period 2016-2017. We note the generally
positive assessment and have also taken note of the
six recommendations contained therein and call on the
various bodies of the Mechanism to implement same as
soon as possible.
Finally, we urge the Mechanism to continue to
develop its jurisdictional activities in a determined
manner, making effective and efficient use of the
resources allocated to it, abiding by its temporary nature
and taking the precautions necessary to implement its
actions over the short and medium term.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I would like to start by
thanking the President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, Judge Meron,
and its Prosecutor, Serge Brammertz, for their
18-17275

06/06/2018

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

comprehensive progress report and briefing on the
work of the Mechanism.
We welcome the measures taken by the Mechanism,
including the Office of the Prosecutor, to further
enhance its efficiency as well as to streamline its
internal working methods and processes within the
chambers, despite its small staff and tight resources.
We note with appreciation the work done by the
Mechanism in assuming the responsibility for all
functions remaining from both the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia after their closure,
particularly their residual judicial mandates. The
measures taken by the Office of the Prosecutor to assist
and build capacity in national criminal justice sectors
with a view to supporting the prosecution of war crimes
cases arising out of the conflicts in Rwanda and the
former Yugoslavia are also commendable.
We have noted some of the challenges raised in the
report (see S/2018/471), in particular in relation to the
decision of the General Assembly not to approve the
Mechanism’s budget for 2018-2019 and its implications
for the long-term planning and operations of the
Mechanism. While welcoming the measures taken by
the Mechanism to reduce the impact of the decision,
the concerns raised in relation to its implications for the
completion of the functions of the Mechanism in a timely
and effective manner require further consideration.
We continue to note with concern that eight
fugitives indicted by the ICTR and five fugitives
who are currently expected to be brought to trial in
Rwanda remain at large. In that regard, we appreciate
the measures taken by the Office of the Prosecutor to
track and arrest remaining fugitives. It is important
that States continue to provide the necessary assistance
to the Office of the Prosecutor of the Mechanism,
including in the tracking of those fugitives.
We have also noted in the report the humanitarian
challenges faced by the Mechanism with regard to the
relocation of acquitted and released persons. In our
view, such issues require proper consideration in the
upcoming review of the Mechanism for International
Criminal Tribunals.
Some of the issues that continue to be raised by
Rwanda in relation to the early release of persons
convicted by the ICTR or the Residual Mechanism
cannot be overlooked. We have noted the briefing
note on the practice of the Residual Mechanism with

S/PV. 8278

regard to the early release of persons convicted by
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and
the Mechanism itself.
In the process leading towards the early release
of a person convicted by the ICTR, in accordance
with rule 150 of the Amended Rules of Procedure and
Evidence of the Mechanism, consultation with any
judges of the sentencing Chamber who are judges of the
Mechanism or at least two other judges, where none of
the judges who imposed the sentence are judges of the
Mechanism, is of the utmost importance. In addition,
consultation between the President of the Mechanism
and the country concerned, Rwanda, on early release,
in particular on the implication of such early release
for the victims and the community at large, is vital. In
that regard, lessons could be drawn from the Residual
Special Court for Sierra Leone.
I would like to conclude by reiterating the need for
continued support from the Council to the Mechanism
in the fulfilment of its mandated residual functions. The
support of Member States to the Residual Mechanism
also remains critical, including in relation to the
tracking of fugitives and the relocation of acquitted
or released persons, as well as in addressing budgetrelated issues.
Mr. Simonoff (United States of America): I
would like to thank President Meron and Prosecutor
Brammertz for their informative briefings.
The United States would like to begin by recognizing
President Meron. He has led the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals since
2012, overseeing the assumption of responsibilities
from the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) and the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY). President Meron’s efforts, through
his leadership of the Mechanism have helped ensure
that victims of horrific atrocities addressed by the ICTR
and ICTY receive meaningful measures of justice. He
has done so while running a lean, efficient operation.
The volume of work that the Mechanism conducts
is impressive given its lean operations — 253 judicial
decisions and orders issued during the past reporting
period alone, in addition to an ongoing trial in the case
Prosecutor v. Jovica Stanišić and Franko Simatović,
ongoing appeal proceedings in the cases Prosecutor
v. Radovan Karadžić and Prosecutor v. Ratko Mladić

18-1727515/25

S/PV.8278

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

and preparations for appeals in the case Prosecutor v.
Augustin Ngirabatware.
We would also like to recognize the work of
Prosecutor Brammertz. In particular we commend
his Office’s continued efforts in managing trials
and appeals cases, as well as the renewed focus on
the Tracking Unit activities to locate and apprehend
remaining fugitives. We also appreciate the ongoing
efforts to provide assistance to national war crimes
prosecutions, encourage regional judicial cooperation
and support reconciliation, all of which build on the
legacy of accountability established by the Tribunals.
With regard to the future, we urge the Mechanism
to continue to implement the recommendations of
the Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS), as
described in its report (S/2018/206) issued in March.
It is important to note that the OIOS concluded that
the Mechanism had “achieved much of what the
Security Council envisaged in resolution 1966 (2010)”
(S/2018/206, p. 1). The Mechanism took advantage of
operational innovations to streamline its work further.
The implementation of OIOS recommendations will
help the Mechanism become even more efficient and
effective at continuing to achieve its mandate. We
also welcome the revision of the Code of Professional
Conduct for the Judges of the Mechanism to include a
disciplinary mechanism.
We encourage the Mechanism to consider proposals
to respond to concerns raised by some States about the
early-release regime. We note that some individuals
who were released early have subsequently denied
responsibility for their crimes. We share the concern
that denial undermines the fight against impunity. We
recognize and encourage the practice of consulting with
the States concerned about the early-release regime.
In the former Yugoslavia, we welcome the
Prosecutor’s report of productive cooperation between
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia on transferred
cases. At the same time, we are concerned about his
report that Croatian authorities are not engaging in
a similar way, as well as a report of a breakdown in
cooperation between Kosovo and Serbia with regard
to war crimes prosecutions. We again highlight that,
although the ICTY may have closed last December,
the pursuit of justice for atrocities related to the
conflicts in the former Yugoslavia is not over. There
are many hundreds of cases currently in the hands of
national authorities in the region. We call on all of
16/25

06/06/2018

the Governments concerned to credibly investigate
and prosecute or otherwise resolve those cases, while
cooperating with one another and the Mechanism to
that end.
The United States also remains concerned about
the failure of the Government of Serbia to execute three
arrest warrants for individuals charged with contempt
of court in relation to witness intimidation in the case
Prosecutor v. Vojislav Šešelj. We continue to encourage
Serbia to fulfil its obligations, including with respect
to cooperation with the Mechanism. The United States
urges all States to undertake efforts to arrest and
surrender the eight remaining fugitives indicted by the
ICTR as soon as possible. The United States continues
to offer up to $5 million for information leading to
their arrest. The work of the Mechanism, like that of
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
previously, reminds us that in the face of terrible
atrocities, we can work together to hold perpetrators
accountable and to achieve a measure of justice for
victims. We look forward to continuing to support the
Mechanism in the fight against impunity.
Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): I would like to thank
the President of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals, Judge Theodor Meron, and the
Prosecutor of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals, Mr. Serge Brammertz, for their
reports (see S/2018/347 and S/2018/471) and for their
informative and comprehensive briefings.
We would also like to warmly welcome Her
Excellency Ms. Nela Kuburović, Minister of Justice
of Serbia, as well as the representatives of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia and Rwanda.
Kazakhstan is committed to combating impunity
and supporting international criminal tribunals. My
delegation notes with satisfaction the successful
continuation of the Mechanism’s work related to the
fulfilment of a number of functions of international
criminal tribunals, such as enforcing sentences,
protecting victims and witnesses, managing archives
and smoothly and effectively transitioning to the
Mechanism the remaining functions of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. We greatly
appreciate the leadership of President Theodor Meron
in successfully accomplishing that task.
Kazakhstan welcomes the fact that despite the
difficulties the Mechanism has faced owing to the
18-17275

06/06/2018

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

reduction in its budget for the current biennium, it
has made significant progress in establishing itself
as a small, temporary and effective structure. We are
pleased with the expenditure reduction plan that it has
developed and implemented.
We welcome the Mechanism’s development of rules,
procedures, and policies that are harmonized and based
on the best practices of both Tribunals, as well as its own
practice. This will ensure that it can fulfil its mandate
effectively and as well as possible. We consider the
code of professional conduct that has been formulated
for the Mechanism’s judges as a progressive step
towards strengthening the principles of accountability
and transparency in its functions. However, we believe
there is always room for improvement and urge the
Mechanism to take all necessary measures to build
transparent and accountable partnerships with all
the stakeholders involved. Given the paramount
importance of ensuring that Member States work with
the Mechanism in order to see international justice
done, we call on all States to cooperate fully with it. In
the context of the Mechanism’s priority task of seeking
the arrest of eight fugitives, we are pleased to note the
Prosecutor’s efforts in that regard and hope that they
will be arrested and brought to trial as soon as possible.
I would like to mention the work that the
Mechanism is doing with regard to the archives of both
Tribunals, which are truly priceless for both practical
and research purposes. We welcome and appreciate the
Mechanism’s development and implementation of an
integrated system for managing archives and records.
Considering that, we hope that the Mechanism’s
reduced budget will not affect the preservation of that
heritage in any way. Kazakhstan greatly appreciates
the Mechanism’s role and place in the administrative
system of international justice and in helping to
preserve our faith in international law and ensure that
those guilty of committing grave crimes will not go
unpunished. Lastly, we affirm our firm commitment to
strengthening the rule of law and promoting justice in
the world by supporting the Mechanism in every aspect
of its work.
The President (spoke in Russian): I will now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.
Our delegation closely monitors the work of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, particularly the judicial proceedings

S/PV. 8278

conducted within its framework, and we are grateful to
the Mechanism’s leaders for their detailed information
and reports on that. We pay close attention to the extent
to which it has been able to learn from the activities
of the International Criminal Tribunals established
by the Security Council. As we know, the history of
one of them, the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), was marred by a selective approach
to justice, numerous delays in its criminal proceedings
and violations of the rights of the accused to a fair trial.
The Mechanism’s current two-year mandate ends
on 30 June, as we are all aware. This month the Security
Council has to finish reviewing the Mechanism’s
activities to date and reflect the results in an appropriate
resolution, whose adoption is an essential condition for
extending the work of the Mechanism for another two
years. By the end of June, the terms of office of the
members of the Register of Judges, the President and
the Prosecutor of the Mechanism will expire.
Unfortunately, our analysis of the Mechanism’s
practice in specific cases confirms that it has inherited
the ICTY’s flawed working methods. The verdict in
the case of Vojislav Šešelj is another confirmation
of that. Rewriting an acquittal as a guilty verdict
with a sentence to time served only underlines the
shortcomings of the justice model in the ICTY and
Residual Mechanism’s format.
Similarly, very typical conclusions about what is
going on with the Mechanism can be drawn from the
report (S/2018/206) of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services (OIOS) prepared for the Security Council’s
review. Judging by the OIOS report, the Mechanism
seems to be taking the same line as the ICTY with
regard to to both internal administration and personnel
policy issues. As a result, the Office indicates that there
has been friction between management and workers
and a deteriorating atmosphere and low morale among
the staff, and Council members have discussed that this
morning. We warned of the danger of this as long as two
years ago when a proposal was made to automatically
reassign the ICTY leadership to the corresponding
posts in the Mechanism. Incidentally, for some reason
the extent of the judicial workload came as a surprise
to the Mechanism.
We are concerned about the OIOS report’s assertions
that the Mechanism’s Arusha branch is perceived by
some of the staff in The Hague as a field office. We
believe that the Prosecutor and Secretary’s move to

18-1727517/25

S/PV.8278

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

Arusha, announced in the report of the President of the
Mechanism, will improve administrative harmonization
and unity in both branches of the Mechanism as one
entity. We also hope that the move will enable the
Mechanism’s leadership to concentrate on its mandated
activities. Up to now the Prosecutor’s report is still
making too much of the issue of combating impunity
in the countries of the former Yugoslavia. It again
includes irrelevant evaluations of the prospects for
European integration with respect to those countries,
including in the context of the related strategy of the
European Union.
We would like to remind the Council that the
Mechanism should not overstep the limits of its mandate
and functions. As we have frequently noted, the Residual
Mechanism was established in accordance with Security
Council resolution 1966 (2010) as a temporary body,
with strictly limited powers for completing processes
that the ICTY and the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda were unable to finish. That is why its official
title includes the word “residual”. The temporary nature
of the Mechanism’s mandate requires that its residual
functions — including legal proceedings, whose delay
on the pretext of reduced funding is unacceptable — be
completed as quickly as possible.
We would also like to point out that the Mechanism,
according to its Statute, does not have the authority to
analyse the quality of national judicial systems. The
staff of the Mechanism should not be distracted by
any kinds of educational activities or events such as
seminars and training sessions, particularly for third
countries that are not part of the relevant region.
We would especially like to emphasize the
importance of protecting the right of the accused to
timely, appropriate and high-quality medical care.
Among other things, that right requires using reliable,
unembellished information about defendants’ health.
The ICTY’s mistakes in that regard must not be repeated
in any circumstances. Its legacy is marred by the
negligence that led to an entire roster of people dying in
custody. In general, we believe that at this stage, when
we have guiding estimates of how long it will take to
complete the proceedings in the cases of Ratko Mladić,
Jovica Stanišić and Franco Simatović, it is time for
the Council to think objectively about winding up the
Mechanism’s activities in the foreseeable future.
In conclusion, I want to say that we hope that the
Mechanism’s leadership will produce a well-thought18/25

06/06/2018

out plan for the course of its legal proceedings and other
statutory activities. We expect reliable projections,
maximum efficiency and transparency, as well as
strict adherence to judicial standards, including trial
timelines. In our view, the Security Council has already
provided all procedural and other opportunities for that
to the Mechanism.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the Minister of Justice of Serbia.
Ms. Kuburović (Serbia): I thank the Security
Council for this opportunity to address it today on
behalf of the Republic of Serbia.
Serbia fulfils all its obligations regarding
cooperation
with
the
International
Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. After the closing
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), only one first-instance case and
two appeal cases remain before the Mechanism.
My country has harmonized its legislation with
the relevant standards and facilitated cooperation with
the Mechanism with regard to all acts recognized by
the Security Council in the ICTY statute as serious
international crimes. By doing so Serbia has proved that
it is committed to fighting impunity. That commitment
is also reflected also in the number and rank of accused
persons processed by the Tribunal.
Serbia continues to facilitate the Mechanism’s
Office of the Prosecutor’s free access to all evidence,
documents, archives and witnesses; evidently, the
completion of the work of the Tribunal has had no
impact on cooperation with the Mechanism. The
cooperation takes place unencumbered. All requests
have been addressed, including those of the Office of
the Prosecutor, the Chambers and the Registry. And
the documents from the archives of State organs are
forwarded expeditiously.
The ongoing cooperation is centred on the case
Prosecutor v. Petar Jojić and Vjerica Radeta. On
two occasions, the Office of the Prosecutor requested
1,677 documents comprising several thousand pages.
In responding to the requests and proceeding from the
recommendations of the competent institutions, Serbia
asked for the application of Trial Chamber protective
measures. Requests to testify by two persons, who
are members of Serbia’s security services, have also
been made and approval has been granted. They, too,
18-17275

06/06/2018

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

have been relieved of their obligations with respect to
State, military and/or official secrets. Trial Chamber
protective measures have been requested in that case
as well.
Over more than 20 years, Serbia has handed
over to the Tribunal’s Office of the Prosecutor, its
Chambers and defence teams hundreds of thousands
of documents, many of which, however, have not been
used in the proceedings. Notwithstanding the promise
that the unused documents that do not belong to the
court records will be returned to Serbia, that has not
happened yet. In that context, let me point out that
the general question of the Tribunal’s archives has
not been resolved; its fate and use are related to the
establishment of information centres in the States that
emerged from the former Yugoslavia. During the latest
visit of the Tribunal’s President Agius to Belgrade,
Serbia indicated its readiness to establish such a centre
in Belgrade and designated a representative to a joint
working group that would also include representatives
of the Tribunal. Yet, despite two overtures, no response
has been received in that regard to date.
In its continuous efforts to improve its judicial
system, Serbia has followed the guidelines defined,
among others, by its national strategy for the prosecution
of war crimes. The strategy was adopted by the
Government of the Republic of Serbia on 20 February
2016 in full support of all judicial and executive bodies
included in investigations, as well as the organizations
monitoring and reporting on those proceedings as
independent observers.
On 26 August 2017, the Government established
a body to monitor the implementation of the strategy.
It consists of representatives from all the relevant
institutions, including the War Crimes Prosecutor,
and is chaired by the Minister of Justice. Two reports
had been adopted by 31 March, while a third is being
prepared for adoption in July. The reports are published
in both Serbian and English on the website of the
Ministry of Justice.
The Mechanism’s Office of the Prosecutor has
extended full support to Serbia’s draft prosecutorial
strategy for the investigation and prosecution of war
crimes for the period 2018-2023. In supporting the draft
strategy, the Prosecutor stated that the Office reiterates
its full commitment to supporting Serbia’s Prosecutor’s
Office in carrying out its important mandate to fight

S/PV. 8278

impunity for war crimes in Serbia. Serbia’s Prosecutor’s
Office for War Crimes adopted the strategy on 4 April.
In the context of the implementation of the national
and prosecution strategies, as well as of the capacity
of the Prosecutor’s Office for War Crimes of Serbia, it
is important to point out that a Deputy Prosecutor was
appointed recently and that the election of two other
deputies is expected to take place within a month. In
addition, the Government allocated funds to capacity
improvements last May, while the Ministry of Justice
increased the number of Prosecutor’s assistants by four
and approved the appointment of three more deputies.
In addition, the Judicial Academy is preparing a
curriculum to train prosecutors and judges to update
their knowledge of techniques for investigating and
trying war crimes and for protecting victims and
witnesses. The training will take place in cooperation
with the Mechanism’s Office of the Prosecutor.
In his report (S/2018/347, annex), the Mechanism’s
Prosecutor welcomes the number of cases processed in
Croatia, the majority of which were tried in absentia. Let
me recall that Serbia’s Office of the Prosecutor for War
Crimes has suspended 30 cases, involving more than
70 indicted persons, because their whereabouts were
unknown. Are we to understand that Serbia should have
recourse to instituting trials in absentia in order to make
the number of cases tried and resolved satisfactory?
The Prosecutor goes on to say in his report that
Serbia has not yet taken meaningful steps against highlevel suspects.In that regard, it should be borne in mind
that many of them were sentenced before the Tribunal
and that its practice related to the acquittal of the
indictees impacts the prosecution criteria and standards
of the Serbian side. Furthermore, Serbia cannot process
the war crimes committed against the Serbs in Kosovo
and Metohija because of Pristina’s continued refusal to
cooperate with Belgrade and respond to the requests
of the Office of the Prosecutor for War Crimes, as also
reflected in the report.
After the Mechanism took over from the Tribunal
the case Prosecutor v. Petar Jojić and Vjerica Radeta,
Single Judge Aydin Sefa Akay requested Serbia to
confirm that it could process that case. Proceeding
from the opinion of the competent court and the Office
of the Prosecutor, and with a commitment to providing
all procedural guarantees for a fair trial, Serbia in fact
confirmed its ability and readiness to take over the case.

18-1727519/25

S/PV.8278

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

The Amicus Curiae Prosecutor requested to be
actively included in the proceeding and the Single Judge
approved her request; she submitted her protestations
to the Single Judge of the takeover of the case by
Serbia. The Judge forwarded the submissions in the
form of a court order to Serbia requesting it to state its
position thereon within a certain period. The Ministry
of Justice replied to the Judge on three occasions, in
April and May.
The purpose of including the Amicus Curiae
Prosecutor in that case is not clear, unless it is intended
to delay the proceedings. We are concerned about the
Amicus Curiae Prosecutor’s comments in that regard.
She questions the competence of Serbian judicial
institutions and the parliamentary immunity of Jojić
and Radeta and analyses public opinion in Serbia.
That exercise is irrelevant to the conduct of judicial
proceedings before independent courts.
It is in Serbia’s interests to process that case. I
confirm once again Serbia’s readiness to take it over.
We expect the Mechanism to avoid the practice of
the Tribunal of procrastinating on some cases, and to
complete the remaining cases within a reasonable time.
Serbia continues to be committed to processing war
crimes irrespective of the nationality of the perpetrators
of grievous crimes against humanity.
Successful proceedings also depend upon regional
cooperation, most evident at the moment with Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Serbia’s judicial institutions have
recognized judgements handed down in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and have taken over the prosecution of
certain cases in which all process requirements had
been complied with. In 2017 and 2018, judgements
of Bosnia and Herzegovina courts were recognized
in seven cases, with Serbian courts sentencing the
defendants to 104 years in prison on the basis of those
judgements. All those convicted are Serbs. However,
one case, which is still pending, should not be used to
dispute the cooperation with Bosnia and Herzegovina,
as is done in the report.
In the context of cooperation with Croatia, a
meeting of the Ministers of Justice in Belgrade last
March resulted in the establishment of two commissions
charged, respectively, with the task of exchanging
lists of persons accused or sentenced for war crimes
and with preparing a bilateral treaty to address war
crimes processing. The first commission convened on
20/25

06/06/2018

26 April to exchange lists and agree on the modalities
for future cooperation. It is expected that the other
commission will commence it swork next month, which
is of paramount importance for the two countries to
address outstanding bilateral issues. Serbia will do its
utmost to achieve visible progress in resolving the issue
of missing persons in Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and Kosovo and Metohija, and bring closure to their
families. The joint commissions of Serbia, Croatia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina are charged with that task.
As I said in my previous statement to the Security
Council (see S/PV.8120), my country’s initiative
related to the enforcement of sentences in persons’
countries of origin will help to achieve the purpose of
punishment and resocialization, which the enforcement
of the sentences in faraway countries fails to do.
Convicted persons do not understand the language of
distant countries and cannot meet their families and
other relatives. More often than not, they are kept
in inadequate conditions and receive substandard
health care, which was brought out in the letters of
Judge Meron, the Mechanism’s President, to Estonian
authorities, the most recent of which was sent at the
beginning of May. Serbia is ready to provide guarantees
that all security measures will be taken in the event that
sentences are served in the country of origin. It also
accepts international monitoring.
We are concerned about the health of some accused
and convicted persons. Despite Serbia’s guarantees,
the Mechanism rejected some requests to temporarily
release certain persons for treatment. After months of
delay, prison doctors eventually prescribed therapy to a
convicted person identical to that proposed by Serbian
doctors long before. I wish to draw the attention of the
Council to inadequate medical care in certain cases. I
am doing so on this occasion since I believe that the
provision of adequate health care must not be contingent
on goodwill or subject to manipulation; it is, in short, a
basic human right.
In conclusion, I would like to point out that Serbia
has no outstanding issues with the Mechanism and
that its cooperation with it will continue to take place
unhindered. We expect this fact to be reflected in
future reports.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Vukašinović (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
18-17275

06/06/2018

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

on assuming the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I would also like to thank the leaders
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals for their respective reports (see S/2018/347
and S/2018/471) and for today’s detailed briefings on
the progress in the Mechanism’s work.
We note the continued progress by the Mechanism
in implementing residual activities of the now-closed
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY). The successful conclusion of the Mechanism’s
mandate in an efficient manner and within a reasonable
time frame is of crucial importance for justice and
reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
region. Throughout the years, the cooperation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina with the ICTY has been steadfast and
full, as evidenced by the Tribunal’s reports. In the same
vein, we remain committed to contributing actively to
the Mechanism’s efforts to accomplish its mission.

S/PV. 8278

of strengthening the human and material resources of
judicial institutions that are processing war crimes cases
in the country and in terms of general capacity-building
important for the full achievement of the benchmarks
and goals set out in the national war crimes strategy.
Consistent cooperation among the Prosecutors’
Offices and the relevant authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Serbia and Croatia, in accordance with
the principles of international justice and the rule of
law, is crucial to investigating and prosecuting war
crimes. We are pleased that Prosecutor Brammertz has
recognized that the productive cooperation between
the Prosecutor’s Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the Prosecutor’s Office for War Crimes of Serbia
continues to develop and grow stronger and that, as
such, sets a positive example for the region. Bosnia and
Herzegovina remains committed to the promotion of
stronger and more coordinated regional cooperation.

In addition to its cooperation with the ICTY, Bosnia
and Herzegovina remains committed to improving
the efficiency of domestic war-crimes institutions.
Accountable and independent judicial institutions that
enjoy public trust throughout the entire country is a
precondition not only for prosecuting and punishing
individual perpetrators of war crimes, but also for
achieving reconciliation among Bosniaks, Croats
and Serbs, who are the constituent peoples of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

The fight against impunity in a complex,
multinational State such as Bosnia and Herzegovina
is a crucial precondition for achieving reconciliation
and sustaining peace. In that regard, prosecuting war
crimes, regardless of the national or religious origin of
the perpetrators or victims, is of crucial importance for
long-term stability in the country and the region.

Bosnia and Herzegovina’s national war crimes
strategy plays a crucial role in making progress on
reconciliation. The implementation of the strategy is a
complex process in which many institutions at all levels
of authority in Bosnia and Herzegovina participate. In
that regard, we continue to make efforts to strengthen
the national justice system at all levels. We are currently
in the process of identifying and further defining
activities for promoting the implementation of the
national war crimes strategy with a view to bringing to
justice persons responsible for war crimes.

Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): I welcome the President
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, Judge Meron, as well as Prosecutor
Brammertz, and I thank them for today’s briefings. I
would like to assure you, Mr. President, and the highest
officials of the MICT present in the Chamber today,
of Croatia’s full support for the mission and work of
the Mechanism.

The Prosecutor’s Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina
filed 29 new indictments during the reporting period,
having shifted its activities over the past two years
from processing category 2 cases to addressing a large
number of important indictments in complex cases
involving senior- and mid-level suspects. We welcome
the support of the European Union, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the
United Nations Development Programme, in terms

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Croatia.

As a victim of the brutal aggression in 1990s,
during which numerous war crimes and crimes
against humanity were committed on its territory and
against its people, Croatia was a strong supporter of
the establishment of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) . We have placed our trust
in the Tribunal to serve as a shield against the extreme
level of brutality exercised during the aggression and
to properly punish the perpetrators of the worst crimes
committed in Europe since the Second World War.
With that purpose in mind, from the very beginning
of the ICTY’s work, in 1993, until its closure, at the

18-1727521/25

S/PV.8278

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

end of 2017, Croatia closely and fully cooperated with
the Tribunal.
Unfortunately, after more than 25 years, a
significant number of victims and their families still
have not found long-awaited justice. Croatia therefore
fully supports the Mechanism and its continued efforts
to bring to justice the most prominent perpetrators of
the horrible crimes committed during the 1990s on the
territory of the former Yugoslavia.
Croatia did not hesitate to do its part in ensuring
accountability. It is worth repeating that an important
part of Croatia’s accession to the European Union
(EU) — and we shall soon celebrate the fifth anniversary
of our EU membership — was a thorough reform of the
Croatian judicial system. The reform included creating
the specialized War Crimes Chambers and aligning it
with the highest international war crimes prosecution
standards. Full and unequivocal cooperation with the
ICTY was an essential part and parcel of Croatia’s
EU accession process, and we have spared no effort
in meeting all ICTY’s cooperation requests. That is
precisely the approach that we expect from all States
in the region, especially from Serbia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It is pivotal that they establish independent
and impartial judiciaries and show restraint when it
comes to any form of manipulation in investigations and
prosecution processes in all types of cases, either those
initiated by domestic prosecutors or those transferred
to national courts by the ICTY.
In order to persist on this path and deliver results,
a strong political commitment is required, as well as a
more decisive approach in processing war crimes, in
particular those related to the highest military ranks.
Similarly, full cooperation with the Mechanism is
essential, and, in that regard, the EU’s principled and
consistent conditionality policy serves as a strong
impetus, but also as an essential control mechanism.
We remain very concerned that Serbia’s lack of
cooperation with the Tribunal continues with the
Mechanism as well. We underline the need for Serbia
to fully cooperate with the Mechanism, including by
fully accepting and implementing all of its rulings
and decisions. In addition, bearing in mind Serbia’s
continuous disregard for some of the decisions of the
ICTY and the Mechanism, it would be contrary to the
main principles and interests of justice to hand over to
Serbia the case Prosecutor v. Petar Jojić et al.
22/25

06/06/2018

Cooperation with the Mechanism, as previously
with the Tribunal, as well as regional cooperation
among the States concerned pertaining to war-crime
issues have no alternative. Nonetheless, it has to be
emphasized that regional cooperation is not a one-way
street. It implies trust among the States concerned
and goes hand-in-hand with a willingness and sincere
commitment on the part of all States to prosecute war
crimes, without any double standards or exemptions
in relation to their nationals or members of certain
national groups.
As just mentioned by the Serbian Minister of
Justice in her statement, in a recent meeting between the
Croatian and Serbian Ministers of Justice — conducted
in a spirit of readiness to enhance cooperation — there
was agreement on the establishment of two joint
committees: one would work on bilateral agreement on
cooperation regarding the prosecution of war crimes,
and the other on the exchange of lists of persons accused
or convicted of war crimes. In the same vein, with a
view to resolving existing open issues in that area,
the Croatian Minister of Justice invited his BosnianHerzegovinian colleague to Zagreb for a meeting,
which we expect to take place next week.
With respect to the reports we have before us (see
S/2018/347 and S/2018/471), I have to stress that the
practice of naming unindicted co-conspirators in a
joint criminal enterprise is contrary in particular to the
European legal tradition, but also to the practice of a
number of American courts. That practice explicitly goes
against the main human rights standards and rules, such
as the right to a fair trial or the right to a good name and
reputation. That is particularly the case when the named
persons are deceased and do not have the possibility to
review the judgement in a separate procedure. I will not
enter into legal and other reasoning behind that wellestablished legal standard, but will only briefly remind
the Council and the participants in the discussion of
the main principle of criminal law — everyone charged
with a criminal offence shall be presumed innocent
until proved guilty by the competent court in an inter
partes procedure according to law. In addition, there
is no legitimate interest or significant justification for
naming unindicted co-conspirators in the ICTY or
Mechanism’s judgements, or in the formal statements
of its highest officials.
We are deeply concerned about the widespread
practice throughout the region of denying past
wrongdoing — a practice that goes hand-in-hand
18-17275

06/06/2018

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

with the glorification of war criminals and the crimes
committed. Part of that practice is revisionism, with its
devastating effects on the stability of the region. Croatia
therefore strongly condemns threats that Vojislav
Šešelj, a convicted war criminal and current member
of the Serbian National Assembly, made against the
representatives of Croats in Vojvodina, Serbia.
When he was interviewed only a few hours after
the Appeals Chamber sentenced him to 10 years in
prison for crimes against humanity against Croats in
Vojvodina in 1992, Šešelj openly stated that he would
readily repeat the crimes he was convicted of, and of
which he is proud. Regrettably, Serbian authorities
remained silent to those repeated outrageous outbursts
of hate against the Croatian minority in Vojvodina and
beyond, and Mr. Šešelj is still sitting on the Serbian
Parliament, contrary to Serbia’s own legislation.
As confirmed by the ICTY and the Mechanism’s
judgements, hate speech and outrageous statements
can result in catastrophic consequences, instigating
war crimes and crimes against humanity. Politicians
and high-level officials bear particular responsibility
for unmasking such statements, their full meaning and
contextualization, as well as for their absolute rejection
and condemnation. That is precisely what we expect
from Serbian officials, exposing Šešelj’s words for what
they really are, that is, evil gibberish of a convicted
war criminal.
Croatia pays great attention to the remaining cases
before the Mechanism, in particular the Prosecutor v.
Stanišić and Simatović case. We have every confidence
that the prosecution will provide the Trial Chamber
with enough evidence to determine beyond any doubt
Stanišić and Simatović’s criminal responsibility in the
armed conflict in Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina,
as well as their role in the joint criminal enterprise
as established by the ICTY in the case of aggression
against Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. We are
convinced that a similar joint criminal enterprise with
the purpose of establishing an ethnically homogeneous
Serbian State in Bosnia and Herzegovina by criminal
means will also be determined in the final judgements
in the Karadžić and Mladić cases.
Before concluding, allow me to stress that the issue
of missing persons is at the top of Croatia’s agenda,
which aims to take all measures to account for persons
who perished, or remain missing, and provide their
family members with any information on their fate.

S/PV. 8278

To that end, the strengthening of cooperation among
States in the region is of the utmost importance, which
includes the opening of all archives — something for
which Serbia still does not show readiness. We find the
Mechanism to be well-placed to play a supportive role
in that regard.
Finally, let me conclude by stating that Croatia
remains firmly committed to the development of good
relations and cooperation with neighbouring States, and
we strongly support their aspirations towards European
Union membership based on full compliance with the
membership conditions.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Rwanda.
Mrs. Rugwabiza (Rwanda): First of all, it my
pleasure to congratulate you, Mr. President, and
Russia on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council during the month of June. Let me assure you
of Rwanda’s full cooperation and active participation
during your presidency.
I thank Judge Meron and Prosecutor Brammertz
for their reports (see S/2018/347 and S/2018/471) and
briefings. I also take this opportunity to particularly
thank the Office of the Prosecutor, and Prosecutor
Brammertz himself, for the favourable cooperation
between his Office and the Prosecutor and judicial
authorities in Rwanda, including cooperation on the
apprehension of the remaining fugitives who are still
at large.
This is a fitting occasion to assess the results
and effectiveness of an important institution for
international justice. In the light of the magnitude of
the challenges to justice in the post-genocide era in
Rwanda, my Government accords particular importance
to an international mechanism that is functional and
can reinforce our own efforts in ensuring justice after
the atrocious crimes of the 1994 genocide against the
Tutsi in Rwanda.
The International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) was a pioneer in establishing a credible
international criminal justice system. Some of its
achievements, especially the verdicts it delivered in
relation to rape and media as weapons of perpetrating
genocide,
remain
significant
milestones
for
jurisprudence on genocide.
With those positive achievements in mind, it should
be a matter of concern to all of us that the legacy of the

18-1727523/25

S/PV.8278

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

ICTR and the credibility of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals are seriously at
stake. Since the Mechanism was established, in 2012,
it has released, before the end of their sentences,
more than 10 masterminds of the genocide against the
Tutsi in Rwanda. Those early releases were granted in
non-transparent circumstances and using inconsistent
procedures. It is worth noting that the Mechanism was
not able to apprehend or prosecute a single genocide
fugitive during the same period due to the lack of
cooperation by Member States.
A few weeks ago, my Government was very
surprised to receive, for the first time, a request from
the President of the Mechanism for an opinion on three
additional applications for early releases of genocide
convicts. We were surprised because the Government
had never received such a request in the six years of the
existence of the Mechanism. While we appreciate the
opportunity to provide our opinion, which we did, that
unique request from the Mechanism underlines the lack
of transparency and the inconsistency we have been
denouncing for a long time. It also demonstrated that
the decision not to seek the opinion of the Government
of Rwanda before or not to consult the associations
of victims and survivors before was at the personal
discretion of the President of the Mechanism and was
never a matter of his role. One may ask what allowed
the Mechanism to seek our opinion this time even as
the rules have remained unchanged. I would like to
elaborate a bit on a point made earlier regarding the
failing credibility of the Mechanism due the lack of
transparency on the issue of early releases.
In Rwanda we believe that the purpose of
incarceration is to rehabilitate individuals. Therefore,
what we are opposed to is not the principle of early
release in itself. Let me remind the Council that there
is no country on Earth, no jurisdiction, that has to
date commuted the sentences of or released early more
convicts of genocide than Rwanda has. The problem
lies in the lack of transparency and accountability in
the process used by the Mechanism to effect those early
releases. The problem lies in the criteria that are being
used. The problem lies in the lack of consideration
of the gravity of the crimes committed. The problem
lies in the lack of consideration of the total absence of
remorse expressed by those who are benefitting from
those early releases. The decisions have been made
solely by the Mechanism’s President. The Government
24/25

06/06/2018

of Rwanda and the associations of victims and survivors
have learned about those decisions in the media.
We continue to wonder what weight was given to
the gravity of the crimes committed by those convicts.
We continue to wonder what weight was given to their
lack of remorse. We continue to wonder what the
Mechanism, and particularly those who have made
those decisions, think when they themselves hear those
released denying their crimes and the genocide against
the Tutsi. A number of those who have benefitted from
early release have since regrouped and formed an
association denying the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi
and repropagating the genocide ideology. They are
free to undertake such criminal activities without fear
of consequences because they were released without
conditions. That will remain a part of the Mechanism’s
legacy. The Mechanism and its current President will
not be able to escape that legacy.
I would like to point to some of the best practices
of the Special Court for Sierra Leone. I will spare the
time of the Council and reference its Practice Direction
on the Conditional Early Release of Persons Convicted
by the Special Court for Sierra Leone, issued on
1 October 2013. Those best practices provide a robust
set of accountability mechanisms that the Residual
Mechanism could itself use. We expect and we hope
that the Council will be able to advise the Mechanism
to consider those best practices.
The first practice is under the eligibility criteria
for consideration for conditional early release. The
Special Court requires that to be eligible for early
release a convict has to prove a “positive contribution
to peace and reconciliation in Sierra Leone”, such as
“public acknowledgement of guilt, public support for
peace projects, public apology to victims, or victim
restitution”. The individuals being released by the
Mechanism are well known to deny the historical facts
for which they were convicted.
The second practice of the Sierra Leone Court is
stringent requirements for supervision, restitution to
victims, renunciation of ideologies contrary to peace
and reconciliation, and proposed areas of resettlement.
We believe that such elements are lacking in the
Mechanism’s process of determining eligibility for
early release. Yet they are reasonable accountability
mechanisms. There is absolutely nothing extraordinary
about requesting accountability, and it is a mechanism
18-17275

06/06/2018

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

S/PV. 8278

that needs to be put in place to ensure that released
convicts do not re-engage in criminal activities.

In conclusion, allow me to submit two very modest
suggestions to the Council.

Thirdly, the Special Court requires that witnesses,
victims, the Government of the home State and
representatives of requested areas of release are all
informed and engaged regarding early releases. In
particular, they should have an opportunity to provide
their opinion on requests for early releases prior to
the Court’s decision. As I mentioned earlier, we are
happy that for the first time in the six years of the
Mechanism we received a request a few weeks ago for
the Government’s opinion.

First, the Mechanism should be urged to put in
place clear rules of procedure for early releases and
to apply them transparently instead of leaving such a
grave decision of early release to personal discretion
rather than rules. The credibility of the Mechanism and
its legacy and contribution to the fight against impunity
are at stake.

Rwanda has shared its concerns in various
interactions with the Mechanism, with both the
President and the Prosecutor. No change has been made
to date to the rules of procedure for early release. We
are aware, however, of the constructive attempts by
a number of judges and the Prosecutor to amend the
current rules with stronger provisions for accountability
and obligations of transparency. However, we regret the
current paralysis on the matter, as there has yet to be
any change.

Secondly, rules of procedures to be put in place
should include conditions to prevent genocide convicts
benefiting from early releases from engaging in future
activities promoting genocide ideology and denial.
Again, the rules of procedure of the Special Court
of Sierra Leone can serve as best practices. We are
not asking for anything to be reinvented. Rather, we
are offering those best practices for consideration
and implementation.
Let me end my remarks by thanking the President
and the Council once again for this opportunity to
explain our concerns.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

18-1727525/25
