S/2016/498

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
31 May 2016
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali
I. Introduction
1.
In its resolution 2227 (2015), the Security Council extended the mandate of the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
(MINUSMA) until 30 June 2016 and requested me to report on its implementation,
focusing on progress in the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali and on the efforts of MINUSMA to support it. The present
report provides an update on major developments in Mali since my report dated
28 March 2016 (S/2016/281), and contains recommendations for the renewal of the
mandate of MINUSMA, taking into account the findings and recommendations of
the strategic review led by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.

II. Major political developments
A.

Implementation of the peace agreement
2.
During the period under review, some progress was made in the
implementation of the peace agreement. However, overall the process remained
behind schedule and many challenges continued to be encountered.
Political and institutional measures
3.
On 28 March, the Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad (CMA) opened
a four-day forum in Kidal, initially intended to conclude the cycle of intercommunal
and intracommunal talks launched in Anéfis in October 2015. Contrary to t he
original plan, the Government and the Platform coalition of armed groups withdrew
their participation, as the Government and signatory armed groups failed to
reconcile their views on the objectives of the forum and the participation of the
Government, even though it had contributed financially to it.
4.
On 31 March, the National Assembly adopted a law revising the Code des
collectivités territoriales. The law will pave the way for the establishment of interim
administrations in the regions of Gao, Kidal, Ménaka, Taoudenni and Timbuktu.
Following a petition by opposition members of the National Assembly to annul the
law, on 5 May, the Constitutional Court ruled that the law was in conformity with
the Constitution. The President, Ibrahim Boubacar Ke ïta, promulgated the law on
10 May.

16-08272 (E)

030616

*1608272*

S/2016/498

5.
On 31 March, the Council of Ministers appointed the new Governor of Kidal.
The Governor was sworn in on 5 May, while those appointed to head the newly
established regions of Ménaka (formerly part of the Gao region) and Taou denni
(formerly part of the Timbuktu region) were sworn in on 31 March and 7 April,
respectively. Owing to security and logistical challenges, the Governor of Taoudenni
remains in Timbuktu, while the Governor of Kidal remains in Gao. As at 18 May,
three of five of the Governors were deployed to their respective regions in the north,
while the number of prefects stood at 53 per cent (17 of 32). The overall number of
government officials absent from their duty stations at the subprefect level
decreased from 49 per cent reported in my previous report to 32 per cent, owing
mainly to the creation of the new regions. Four magistrates redeployed to
jurisdictions in Gao and Timbuktu, with assistance from MINUSMA. On 7 April, a
court opened in Gourma Rharous (Timbuktu region), increasing the number of
functional jurisdictions in the region to three. On 27 April, the Council of Ministers
made several key appointments, including at the level of prefect and subprefect, in
Gao, Kidal, Mopti and Timbuktu regions.
6.
Progress was also made with respect to the electoral calendar. On 12 April, the
Minister of Territorial Administration announced the holding of communal elections
on 25 September 2016; a constitutional referendum, during which the establishment
of a senate would be proposed, in November 2016; and regional elections in the first
semester of 2017. On 20 April, the Government issued a decree establishing a
committee of experts for the revision of the Constitution.
7.
On 25 and 26 April, the Agreement Monitoring Co mmittee (Comité de suivi de
l’accord) held its eighth meeting in Bamako, during which its members stressed the
need to accelerate the implementation of the agreement, particularly with respect to
the interim administrations and security mechanisms. While t he Government
presented the measures that it had taken, including the creation of the Ménaka and
Taoudenni regions and the review of the Code des collectivités territoriales, the
signatory armed groups in a joint letter deplored the lack of progress on the
establishment of the interim administrations, reiterating the need for further efforts
on institutional issues before moving forward on security and defence aspects. They
further deplored the delays in finalizing the development strategy for the northern
regions, including the national emergency response plan.
8.
MINUSMA continued to support the Ministry of National Reconciliation in
the preparation of the Conférence d’entente nationale, planned for later in 2016. On
25 and 27 March, the Ministry of National Reconciliation, with support from
MINUSMA, organized a conference on the theme “Consultations on Mali post conflict”, with more than 100 participants, resulting in recommendations on the
implementation of the agreement for consideration at the Conféren ce d’entente
nationale.
Defence and security measures
9.
On 13 April, CMA provided to the Technical Commission on Security a
preliminary list of 18,000 combatants for cantonment; the Platform has yet to
provide its list. While a 2013 assessment projected a total of 6,000 combatants from
both CMA and the Platform, the Government-led ad hoc working group on
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration subsequently revised the total to
10,000 each in 2016. MINUSMA began the construction of five new canto nment

2/26

16-08272

S/2016/498

sites on 25 April in Ber (Timbuktu region), Tessalit (Kidal region) and Tin Fatimata
(Gao region) and on 15 May in Ilouk and Tabankort (Gao region). On 20 May,
MINUSMA completed the construction of the first three sites in Likrakar (Timbuktu
region), Fafa (Gao region) and Inékar (Ménaka region), with support from the
Peacebuilding Fund. All sites include special arrangements for female combatants.
10. Progress was made in the establishment of the Operational Coordination
Mechanism, responsible for coordinating both mixed patrols and protecting
cantonment sites, with the finalization of its concept of operations and the
installation of its headquarters in Gao. On 8 April, the Government handed over
42 vehicles to the Mechanism for the launch of the mixed patrols, while four projects
to equip its headquarters were approved through the Trust Fund in Support of Peace
and Security in Mali. At the end of April, CMA and the Platform handed over lists
of their personnel to join the mixed patrols in Gao, while those for Kidal and
Timbuktu remained pending. The mixed patrols have yet to begin. MINUSMA
military observers conducted a total of 351 patrols in the north. They also
investigated 22 potential ceasefire violations, including eight joint investigations
with the mixed monitoring and verification teams. They found no evidence of
ceasefire violations.
11. On 18 May, the Council of Ministers approved a new draft decree on the
National Council for Security Sector Reform, placing it under the authority of the
Prime Minister. The National Council is of critical importance for the implementation
of provisions of the agreement on cantonment; disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration; integration into the Malian defence and security forces of elements of
signatory armed groups; and territorial police and local advisory committees on
security. The signatory armed groups have not yet designated their representatives in
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and integration commissions. On
7 April, the Ministry of Defence and Former Combatants, with support from
MINUSMA, organized a workshop to discuss the integration of former combatants
into the Malian defence and security forces.

B.

Other political developments
12. The reporting period was marked by a number of developments within and
between the signatory groups. On 21 March, the Front populaire de l ’Azawad
(FPA) — a splinter group of CMA — joined the Platform. On 7 April, the Mouvement
national de libération de l’Azawad (MNLA) re-elected Bilal Ag Acherif as its
Secretary-General at the conclusion of its third congress, held in Kidal.

C.

Regional cooperation
13. Following the terrorist attack in Grand-Bassam, Côte d’Ivoire, on 13 March,
which left dozens of civilians killed or wounded, the Ministers of Interior and
Security of Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, Mali and Senegal met on 23 and 24 March
in Abidjan and agreed on measures to strengthen security cooperation in West
Africa. Cooperation between the Ivorian and Malian authorities resulted in the arrest
of 15 individuals, including three Malians, related to the terrorist attack in Grand Bassam.

16-08272

3/26

S/2016/498

14. From 20 March to 1 April, the African Union undertook a preliminary
assessment visit to Mali, with United Nations support, to review options aim ed at
addressing the non-permissive environment in which MINUSMA operates in
northern Mali. The African Union Commission continued planning to undertake a
further assessment involving the United Nations, the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), the countries of the region and other partners. During a
meeting held in Bamako on 5 and 6 May, the Chiefs of Defence Staff of Algeria,
Mali, Mauritania and the Niger agreed to strengthen their security cooperation by
focusing on information- and intelligence-sharing and enhancing border controls.

III. Major security developments
15. On 18 April, up to 500 demonstrators in Kidal, protesting the presence of
international forces, breached the airstrip guarded by MINUSMA. The
demonstration turned violent, leaving two protesters dead and nine injured. Airfield
installations were seriously damaged by the demonstrators, further hindering the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to the local population and MINUSMA
operations. Two days later, another demonstration at the airport turned violent.
MINUSMA uniformed personnel withdrew from the airport to prevent further
escalation, as did CMA personnel deployed there. On 21 April, the organizers of the
demonstrations presented a series of demands, including the cessation of alleged
harassment and arbitrary detention by the French forces. On 29 April, after my
Special Representative spoke with various interlocutors, the demonstrators vacated
the airfield; CMA personnel, including an anti-terrorist unit of MNLA, resumed
control of airfield security. A preliminary investigation by MINUSMA was unable to
determine the circumstances of the two deaths; the Mission continues to investigate.
Asymmetric and other attacks
16. During the reporting period, complex attacks against the Malian defence and
security forces, the French forces and MINUSMA continued to be perpetrated by
violent extremist and terrorist groups. A total of 15 such attacks were reported
against MINUSMA, mainly in the Kidal region, with 5 peacekeeper s and 1 civilian
contractor killed and 11 personnel injured. The previous reporting period had seen a
total of 20 hostile acts, with 10 casualties and 61 injured. However, the attacks are
increasingly complex and sophisticated, with a combination of roadsi de explosive
devices and ambushes. On 18 May, along the Tessalit-Gao axis (Kidal region), an
unknown number of assailants attacked a MINUSMA convoy with mortar and small
arms fire after it had struck an improvised explosive device approximately 15 km
north of Aguelhok, killing five peacekeepers and injuring three others. In addition,
on 3 May, along the Gossi-Douentza axis (Timbuktu region), approximately
20 assailants attacked a MINUSMA convoy with small arms fire after it had hit an
explosive device, injuring two peacekeepers. Nine attacks against the Malian armed
forces and two attacks against French forces were reported, including on 12 April,
when three French soldiers were killed after the lead vehicle of a convoy had hit a
land mine in the Kidal region, in an attack later claimed by Ansar Eddine.
17. On 21 March, an attack was carried out against the Azalai Nord -Sud Hotel in
Bamako, the headquarters of the European Union Training Mission in Mali. One
assailant was killed by the guards, while three suspects were arrested in Bamako.

4/26

16-08272

S/2016/498

18. The French forces and the Malian armed forces conducted two joint counter terrorism operations in the areas of Gourma (Timbuktu region) and Ansongo (Gao
region), while the Malian armed forces conducted three counter -terrorism operations
in the Mopti and Ségou regions, resulting in the arrest of at least 49 suspects. On
13 April, the Council of Ministers extended the national state of emergency until
15 July.
Protection of civilians
19. Armed banditry continued to constitute the most significant threat to civilians,
accounting for 30 per cent of all reported incidents in Gao and in Mopti,
respectively, and 40 per cent in Timbuktu. Violent extremist and terrorist groups
continued to threaten and intimidate civilians, including civil servants and alleged
informants of the Malian and international forces, in the central and northern
regions.
20. Intercommunal violence decreased in the reporting period in Ménaka. In the
Mopti region, tensions between some members of the Bambara and Fulani
communities intensified and new self-defence groups reportedly emerged in
Douentza and Konna. On 30 April, unidentified armed men attacked a vehicle in the
vicinity of Malemana (Mopti region), resulting in the death of a deputy mayor of
Dioura (Ténenkou circle) as well as the youth leader of the Bambara community.
According to local authorities, since 30 April, violent clashes have resulted in at
least 26 people killed (23 from the Fulani community) and the displacement of
approximately 827 civilians of the Fulani community. On 5 May, a ministerial
delegation arrived in Kareri commune in Ténenkou circle to assess the situation and
contain the escalation of violence. Subsequently, a judicial investigation was
launched, while Malian defence and security forces established a temporary presence
in the area to appease the tension and facilitate the investigations into the events.
Further to reports of violent clashes in my previous report, on 21 and 25 March,
MINUSMA organized 16 sessions on peaceful coexistence, bringing together more
than 500 civilians who had fled recent intercommunal conflict in Inékar (Ménaka
region).
21. During the reporting period, MINUSMA police conducted 2,049 joint patrols
with the Malian police in urban areas, while the MINUSMA Force continued to
assume a robust and visible posture in the vicinity of Ansongo (Gao region), Kidal
and Ménaka, as well as in Timbuktu region. The MINUSMA Force also conducted
joint patrols with the Malian armed forces in the towns of Gao, Ménaka, Mopti and
Timbuktu. The Mine Action Service sensitized 16,668 people about explosive
hazards in conflict-affected areas in the central and northern regions and destroyed
386 explosive items.

IV. Human rights
22. The human rights situation continued to be of serious concern during the
reporting period. MINUSMA documented violations and abuses of human rights and
international humanitarian law committed by the Malian defence and security
forces, CMA, the Platform and other armed and violent extremist groups. A total of
96 cases of serious human rights violations and abuses were reported, with at least
131 victims identified, including 31 children, compared with 34 cases involving at

16-08272

5/26

S/2016/498

least 53 victims recorded the previous reporting period. The cases involved
7 instances of killing, summary execution and enforced disappearance; 3 instances of
inhumane detention conditions leading to death; 13 instances of ill-treatment;
2 instances of recruitment of children; 30 instances of illegal detention; 18 instances
of extortion and pillage; 1 instance of intimidation; and 22 instances of lack of due
process as a result of ineffective investigation. The recruitment and use of children by
armed groups, involving 29 children, was particularly concerning. MINU SMA
documented in one of the instances listed above the recruitment of 27 children,
including 14 girls and 13 boys, by the Groupe d’autodéfense des Touaregs imghads et
alliés (GATIA), part of the Platform coalition. There were other credible allegations of
recruitment and use of children by GATIA.
23. During the reporting period, 103 individuals were arrested for terrorism -related
charges, including 80 by the Malian defence and security forces in Bamako as well as
in the Gao, Mopti, Ségou and Timbuktu regions and 23 by international forces in the
north. Fifteen of them were reportedly subjected to summary execution (3), torture
(5) and ill-treatment (7) by the Malian forces. CMA continued to detain six Platform
combatants, while the Platform continued to detain a CMA combatant. As at
18 May, MINUSMA identified 295 conflict- and terrorism-related detainees, including
5 children, held in State-run detention facilities throughout the country. The
continued detention of children constitutes a violation of the Go vernment’s
commitment of 1 July 2013 to hand over children detained for association with
armed groups to civilian child protection actors.
24. The Ministry of Justice and Human Rights established monthly working
sessions with MINUSMA to review and address human rights violations
documented by the Mission. The first meeting was held on 14 April. In a positive
development in the fight against impunity, during criminal court hearings in
Bamako and Mopti that began on 2 May, the Court sentenced a dozen individ uals
charged with serious crimes, inter alia, acts of criminal association and terrorism.
Some of the individuals had been released within the framework of the confidence building measures between the Government and the signatory armed groups during
the period from 2013 to 2015. On 30 April, the Council of Ministers adopted a bill
on the reform of the National Commission for Human Rights, which provides for
greater financial autonomy and independence in accordance with the Paris
Principles (see General Assembly resolution 48/134, annex).
25. From 11 to 17 April, my Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict
visited Mali, and agreed with the Malian authorities on a joint framework for
cooperation and action in key areas such as access and provisio n of services; the
fight against impunity; legislative reform and strengthening the justice system; and
specific action plans for the army and police. The United Nations Population Fund
(UNFPA) documented, through its partners, 46 incidents of gender -based violence,
compared with 78 incidents recorded for the previous reporting period.
26. On 24 March, Pre-Trial Chamber I of the International Criminal Court
confirmed the war crimes charge against Ahmad Al Faqi Al Mahdi in relation to the
destruction of historical and religious monuments in Timbuktu.

6/26

16-08272

S/2016/498

V. Humanitarian situation
27. Criminality and the presence of violent extremist and terrorist groups remained
major impediments to the delivery of humanitarian assistance in central and
northern Mali. Eleven security incidents involving humanitarian actors were
reported, compared with four incidents in the previous period, of which three
specifically targeted humanitarian actors. On 29 April, a humanitarian convoy of an
international non-governmental organization was attacked in the Gao region,
resulting in three humanitarian workers being injured. Damages caused to the Kidal
airfield during the incident of 18 April affected aerial movements of humanitarian
personnel to and from Kidal. Humanitarian actors co ntinued, however, to provide
assistance and to plan for a strengthened presence in the Kidal region.
28. The continued deterioration of the security situation in parts of the Mopti
region and threats against local authorities, educators and students in the circles of
Djenné, Douentza, Mopti, Ténenkou and Youwarou led to the closure of 25 per cent
of schools in those areas. In the Ségou region, 20 primary and junior high schools
temporarily closed and 2 permanently closed. UNFPA provided emergency obstetric
and neonatal care to 5 district hospitals and 15 health centres, and provided 600
delivery kits, while the United Nations Children’s Fund worked with implementing
partners to provide immunization services in the Kidal region. In the Gao, Kidal,
Mopti and Timbuktu regions, the World Health Organization and its partners
vaccinated more than 1,454,000 children against polio.
29. The lack of investment in public infrastructure continued to constrain access to
water and electricity. Although humanitarian actor s had ensured permanent sources
of safe community drinking water for up to 9,550 people of a total estimated
population of 83,000 in Kidal, it is likely to be insufficient in the current drought
conditions. In Ménaka, the urgent rehabilitation of boreholes and water systems in
areas of return has yet to be addressed.
30. Since my last report (S/2016/281), the number of internally displaced persons
remained at 52,000, of which an estimated 51 per cent were children and 25 per cent
were women, while almost 145,000 Malian refugees remained in Burkina Faso,
Mauritania and the Niger. On 7 April, the third meeting of the Tripartite
Commission between Burkina Faso, Mali and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) took place in Bamako, with CMA and the
Platform as observers.

VI. Economic development, cultural preservation and
the environment
31. Since my last report, progress in the delivery of peace dividends and the return
of basic services to the north by the Government continued to be hampered by
persistent insecurity, a lack of basic infrastructure, and the limited redeployment of
government officials to the north, as well as delays in establishing the interim
administrations. MINUSMA and the United Nations country team continued
supporting the population, particularly in the central and northern regions.
MINUSMA used quick-impact projects to deliver assistance such as the provision of
potable water and solar-powered electricity kits to community health centres in
Mopti and Timbuktu regions and livelihood support to women in Timbuktu region.

16-08272

7/26

S/2016/498

The Peacebuilding Fund, along with its implementing p artners, including the United
Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization, the International Organization for Migration and UNHCR, supported
625 income-generating activities in the Gao and Timbuktu regions. MINUSMA and
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization continued
rehabilitating part of the World Heritage mausoleums in Timbuktu, with work on the
Sankore and Sidi Yahia mosques starting on 15 April.

VII. Conduct and discipline
32. During the reporting period, no allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse
were registered. For the allegation reported during the previous period, the Member
State concerned conducted an investigation in Mali and concluded that it could not
be substantiated. Nevertheless, the alleged perpetrator will be charged with
disobedience and will not be accepted for deployment to any current or future
United Nations peacekeeping operation. MINUSMA conducted seven sexual
exploitation and abuse risk assessment visits to military camps to sensitize
personnel about discipline and my zero-tolerance policy. In addition, the Mission
continued to inform the public and partners about the expected standards of conduct
for United Nations personnel, focusing on the impleme ntation of my zero-tolerance
policy, while stressing the importance of preventing sexual exploitation and abuse
and reporting such cases.

VIII. Strategic review of Mali
33. An integrated strategic review mission was conducted from 14 to 20 March,
led by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, to assess the appropriateness of
the mandate and configuration of MINUSMA three years after its deployment,
taking into account political and security developments, including the signing of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. The strategic review team
consulted a broad cross-section of stakeholders, including the Prime Minister,
Modibo Keïta, government ministers and other officials, including the Speaker of
the National Assembly; civil society representatives; political parties; the leadership
of the signatory armed groups; members of the diplomatic community, including
regional partners; the leadership and personnel of MINUSMA; and the United
Nations country team. The strategic review team cond ucted field visits to Gao,
Kidal, Mopti and Timbuktu.

A.

Findings of the strategic review

1.

Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
Political and institutional reforms
34. Progress on the political and institutional reforms in the agreement remained
limited. The implementation of decentralization measures; the establishment of
interim administrations; the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
combatants; and security sector reform remained behind schedule. To address this
situation, interlocutors urged the swift deployment of the governors for Kidal,

8/26

16-08272

S/2016/498

Ménaka and Taoudenni, as well as the support of international partners to install the
interim administrations that should serve as a catalyst for advancing other
provisions of the agreement, including on defence and security and the delivery of
peace dividends. Interlocutors underlined that there would be no lasting and
effective presence of State authority without the deployment of police, justice and
corrections institutions to protect the population and ensure the rule of law.
35. Some interlocutors expressed high expectations regarding the holding of local
and regional elections, as well as the revision of the Const itution. Others,
particularly within the opposition and women and youth organizations, advocated
for an inclusive process to bring on board key segments of the population and
ensure that their concerns were duly taken into account. In this respect, they
emphasized the importance of holding the envisaged Conférence d ’entente
nationale, calling for its preparatory process to begin urgently.
Defence and security provisions
36. Interlocutors emphasized the need for clear national strategies to take forwar d
security sector reform and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. They
called upon the newly established commissions on integration and on disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration to expedite the elaboration of modalities for the
process, as well as criteria for integrating combatants into the reconstituted national
army. They stressed the urgent requirement to activate the Operational Coordination
Mechanism and launch the mixed patrols, including to provide security for
redeployed State and interim administrations, reverse the expansion of the violent
extremist and terrorist threat and advance cantonment. This would require a
substantial level of trust between the parties, as well as further consultations on
security arrangements for cantonment and other defence and security provisions. As
agreed at the meeting of the Technical Commission on Security on 13 April, the
early integration, through the mixed units, of elements of the signatory armed
groups into the Malian defence and security forces could serve as an interim
measure to establish the minimum security conditions required to move forward
with the implementation of other relevant provisions of the agreement, without
prejudice to the anticipated plans of the two commissions, which should address
long-term solutions.
37. Government officials were also of the view that enhancing coordination
mechanisms with MINUSMA could facilitate the redeployment of the Malian
defence and security forces to the central and northern regions, including by
MINUSMA providing operational and logistical support and mentoring to Malian
security institutions in areas of mutual deployment, complementing the work of the
European Union Training Mission in Mali. Many interlocutors expressed the view
that time was of the essence and that failure to provide tangible security and other
dividends to the population would result in the further entrenchment and expansion
of violent extremist and terrorist groups.
38. Concern was expressed at the intensification of banditry and intercommunal
violence over the past year in the Mopti and Ségou regions owing to the limited
presence of State institutions, hampering the delivery of basic services in remote
areas. Together with intercommunal tensions and perceptions of political, s ocial and
economic marginalization, it provided fertile ground for the spread of self -defence
militias and violent extremist groups, including the Front de libération du Macina

16-08272

9/26

S/2016/498

(FLM). In the first half of 2016, such groups were responsible for at least
64 incidents that resulted in 35 civilian casualties.
Reconciliation and justice
39. Many interlocutors noted that the mechanisms in the agreement in respect of
reconciliation and justice could play a fundamental role in ensuring long -term peace
and stability in Mali. However, uneven progress had been made. Both the
Government and civil society expressed support for the establishment of an
international commission of inquiry. Civil society also stressed the important role of
the Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission, while expressing disappointment
at not being consulted on its membership. While stressing the need to continue to
fight impunity, some interlocutors noted that, notwithstanding that releasing
detainees had an important confidence-building effect, it also undermined the
credibility of the justice system. Counter-terrorism operations undertaken by the
Malian armed forces had led to human rights violations in certain communities,
which compounded the communities’ feeling of marginalization from the peace
process. The ability of MINUSMA to monitor and investigate allegations of human
rights violations has been adversely affected by the deteriorating security situation.
Humanitarian situation and economic development
40. Many interlocutors, in particular the representatives of civil society and
traditional and religious leaders, expressed high expectations that the peace process
and strengthened collaboration among the signatory parties would translate into the
immediate delivery of basic services and improvement in the lives of the population.
However, State institutions and services remained absent in large parts of the north,
owing mainly to increasing insecurity. Although such insecurity also had an impact
on humanitarian and development interventions, United Nations system agencies
and other partners continued to deliver basic services where access was possible.
41. The Government has not yet finalized its strategy for the development of the
north or the national emergency plan. As a result, the outcomes of the international
conference for the economic recovery and development of Mali, held in Paris in
October 2015, has not yet translated into tangible results. Mali ’s partners had
pledged $3.6 billion for the period 2015 to 2017, including $722 million for the
north. So far, they have disbursed $780 million in total, including $177 million for
the north. The joint evaluation mission to the north conducted by the World Bank,
the African Development Bank and the Islamic Development Bank, in accordance
with article 36 of the peace agreement, had estimated that $4.9 billion was required
for the recovery of northern Mali over three years.
2.

Ceasefire and overall security environment
42. While there have not been any violations of the ceasefire since August 2015,
the overall security situation in Mali deteriorated significantly during the past year.
Security incidents have increased in intensity and sophistication. Terrorist and
violent extremist groups have improved their modus operandi, with a higher level of
flexibility that allowed them to quickly adopt new techniques and tactics. These
groups have enhanced their capacity to carry out attacks against public targets, as
seen in the attack on the Radisson Blu Hotel in Bamako in November 2015 as well
as in Ouagadougou and Grand-Bassam, Côte d’Ivoire. In addition, the multiplicity

10/26

16-08272

S/2016/498

of armed groups, particularly in the north, as well as their complex and rapidly
changing relationships, rendered the environment particularly volatile and
unpredictable.
43. Malian and international forces continued to suffer casualties with a doubling
in the number of attacks perpetrated by violent extremist groups in northern Mali.
Attacks have spread to the centre of the country, particularly in the Mopti region.
Against this backdrop, the Government and a number of other Malian stakeholders
stressed the need to enhance the mandate and posture of MINUSMA to enable it to
better protect itself and implement its ma ndate. Acknowledging that United Nations
peacekeeping operations are not well suited to conduct counter -terrorism operations,
they called upon the United Nations and other partners to provide targeted logistical
support to the Malian armed forces, in the light of the constraints they face.
3.

Regional situation
44. Interlocutors highlighted the continued influence of regional developments on
Mali, as well as the impact the situation in Mali had on the Sahel and West Africa
regions. Particular concerns were expressed about the spread of violent extremist
and terrorist groups and their linkages with organized criminal networks. Regional
cooperation to address the terrorist threat increased following the attacks in Burkina
Faso, Côte d’Ivoire and Bamako. Interlocutors welcomed existing initiatives to
counter terrorism and organized crime in the Sahel, including in the context of the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G5 Sahel) and the African Union -led Nouakchott
process. They also welcomed the support provided by the French -led Operation
Barkhan to G5 Sahel countries. At the same time, interlocutors stressed that
successfully addressing the scourge of terrorism and organized crime in the Sahel
region would require long-term support and investment in cross-border security
arrangements and the gathering and sharing of intelligenc e, as well as enhanced
coordination.

IX. Proposed adjustments to the Mission
A.

Mandate
45. Taking into account recent political and security developments in Mali,
including the signing of the peace agreement, as outlined above, it is recommende d
that MINUSMA be extended for another year, until 30 June 2017, with its current
mandate. To accelerate the next phase of the stabilization process, MINUSMA
should, however, prioritize its support to the Government in the implementation of
key provisions of the agreement, in particular those related to the gradual restoration
and extension of State authority. The Mission should therefore focus on aspects
outlined below, with some recommendations for adjustments to its mandate and
posture, bearing in mind that its operational effectiveness would be contingent upon
enhancing its capabilities and augmenting its uniformed and support components.
Political support, good offices and reconciliation
46. The Mission should continue to fully assume its role in assisting the parties to
implement their commitments under the peace agreement. To do so, MINUSMA
should enhance its support to the Agreement Monitoring Committee, including by

16-08272

11/26

S/2016/498

providing expertise to strengthen its secretariat and subcommittees. Furthermor e, it
is recommended that the Committee, with the support of the international mediation,
appoint the independent observer provided for in article 63 to further support it and
its mechanisms. MINUSMA should continue its efforts in support of electoral
reform and preparations for local and regional elections, while also enhancing the
inclusiveness of the peace process, particularly for women and youth, such as by
supporting the convening of the Conférence d’entente nationale.
Restoration and extension of State authority
47. MINUSMA should continue to support the Government’s efforts for the
effective and gradual restoration and extension of State authority, including through
the establishment of interim administrations, the operationalization of the two newly
formed regions of Ménaka and Taoudenni. MINUSMA should also support the
gradual redeployment, according to modalities to be jointly defined with the
Government, of the Malian defence and security forces, including once they are
reformed and reconstituted. MINUSMA should, in particular, support the expansion
of State authority and the enhanced presence of the Malian defence and security
forces in the Mopti region to prevent a further deterioration of the security situation;
mitigate intercommunal tensions and address violent extremism; and facilitate the
delivery of basic services.
Ceasefire monitoring, protection of civilians and stabilization
48. In the light of the threat environment and to enhance the posture of
MINUSMA, consideration could be given to the mandate of the Mission,
specifically confirming that MINUSMA can take all necessary means, in its areas of
deployment and within its capabilities, to ensure that its areas of operation are not
used for hostile activities of any kind that would prevent it from discharging its
duties under its mandate, and to protect United Nations personnel, facilities,
installations and equipment. In doing so, MINUSMA should coordinate with the
Government and international forces. MINUSMA should also continu e to support
the Malian authorities in protecting civilians, stabilizing the key population centres
and other areas where civilians are at risk, notably in the north of the country,
including through long-range patrols, and, in this context, to deter threats and take
active steps to prevent the return of armed elements to those areas. MINUSMA
should continue to patrol, either independently or in coordination with the Malian
armed forces, along key axes. To support the efforts of the Government, MINUSMA
would develop tailored multidimensional responses to intercommunal tensions,
taking into account local conflict dynamics.
Security sector reform and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
49. To accelerate the resumption of security responsibilities by the State
throughout its territory, MINUSMA should support the early integration of the
mixed patrols — comprising elements from the Malian defence and security forces
and the signatory armed groups — into the Malian defence and security forces, as an
interim measure and without prejudice to the anticipated plans of the
demobilization, disarmament and reintegration and integration commissions.
50. The Mission should also support the redeployment of the Malian defence and
security forces by mobilizing the support of international partners to provide

12/26

16-08272

S/2016/498

training and equipment in areas to be determined in consultation with the
Government and partners. Collaboration and intelligence -sharing should also be
enhanced among the Malian armed forces, international partners and MINUSMA, as
part of overall efforts to counter violent extremist groups. Any support provided to
the Malian defence and security forces must be implemented in accordance with the
human rights due diligence policy on United Nations support to non-United Nations
security forces.
51. It is recommended that the Government and MINUSMA elaborate detailed
benchmarks, with timelines, for the gradual redeployment of the Malian defence and
security forces to the north, which would trigger a review of t he deployment of
MINUSMA. As part of this effort, the Mission would consider gradually handing
over some of its sites close to the Niger belt to the Malian defence and security
forces in the coming two years.
Human rights and the rule of law
52. The Mission should continue to support the training of the Malian defence and
security forces to promote the full respect of human rights standards when
conducting counter-terrorism operations. The Mission should also focus on
enhancing coherence between customary law and statutory law while building the
capacity of national corrections and judicial actors.
Humanitarian assistance and projects for stabilization
53. The development component of the agreement is a key element of the peace
process. The United Nations country team and MINUSMA should enhance their
collaboration to ensure an integrated response to support the restoration and
extension of State authority and the delivery of basic services. The Mission would
focus on the political and security components of the agreement, while the United
Nations country team, with its specialized expertise, would lead the Organization ’s
efforts on the agreement’s development aspects.
Regional cross-border and inter-mission cooperation
54. Cross-border and inter-mission cooperation remain key to enabling the
implementation of the mandate of MINUSMA by creating a more enabling
environment for its operation. The Mission should therefore explore measures to
enhance its coordination with regional security initiatives, as well as the security
agencies of countries bordering Mali, including through the exchange of liaison
officers. MINUSMA should also enhance its synergies and exchange of intelligence
with regional security arrangements, including the African Union -led Nouakchott
process and the G5 Sahel initiative, to more effectively address common security
challenges and expedite the stabilization of Mali and the Sahel. MINUSMA should
also strengthen its capacities in terms of regional analysis, in close coordinati on
with the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahe l, including through the
United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel, and other entities in the subregion.
55. The Mission should capitalize on the ongoing United Nations rapid response
capability development under the inter-mission cooperation framework in West
Africa to enhance its operations. In that context, and on the basis of an assessment
of the threat environment, required tasks and available resources, it is proposed that
the 650-troop strong quick reaction force, currently in the United Nations Operation

16-08272

13/26

S/2016/498

in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) be transferred to MINUSMA, following its withdrawal
from UNOCI in March 2017. While the unit would remain primarily a MINUSMA
asset, it is proposed that it could also operate in Liberia in the event of a serious
deterioration of the security situation, under the same arrangements between
UNOCI and the United Nations Mission in Liberia, pursuant to resolutions 2162
(2014) and 2190 (2014), respectively. As mobility is essential to making this force
effective, it is proposed that the UNOCI aviation unit of 85 personnel currently
supporting it also be transferred. Consultations with the respective troop contributing country, and subsequent modalities for transferring the unit to Mali, are
ongoing, pending approval by the Security Council. I will report on the agreed
modalities and the proposed concept of operations for the employment of this unit in
my next progress report on the situation in Mali.

B.

Capabilities, configuration and deployment
Military component
56. As at 18 May, the strength of the MINUSMA military component stood at
10,407 personnel, of which 1.78 per cent were women, representing 96 per cent of
the authorized strength of 11,240 personnel. The Force comprised seven infantry
battalions deployed in three sectors, force reserves, headquarters staff, enablers,
support units and 40 military observers.
57. Enhancing the ability of the Mission to fulfil its mandate and adopt a more
robust posture in an environment as insecure, inhospitable and complex as northern
Mali requires adequate capabilities. As outlined in my prior report ( S/2016/281),
MINUSMA continued to lack key capabilities, such as an attack helicopter unit, a
military medium-utility helicopter unit, a combat convoy battalion and a force
protection unit. The MINUSMA Force remained underresourced in terms of
armoured personnel carriers and continued to lack the requisite military st aff
officers with specialized expertise, including in intelligence and imagery analysis.
58. In addition, many of the Mission’s infantry units continued to face serious
challenges in meeting United Nations standards for contingent -owned equipment,
with 12 units lacking major equipment and 7 units under 60 per cent of self sustainment requirements. Given that northern Mali is the most lethal threat
environment for improvised explosive devices in which any United Nations
peacekeeping mission is deployed, improving the manoeuvrability and protection of
the Force would require that contributing countries take urgent measures to meet
their obligations under their respective memorandums of understanding by
deploying the remaining armoured personnel carriers needed under the current Force
requirements. In addition, almost half of the level I clinics run by troop -contributing
countries are not fully compliant with United Nations standards. Efforts are under
way, in consultation with troop-contributing countries, to identify innovative options
for meeting the requirements, including by seeking bilateral partners to help fill
gaps in essential equipment, including operation and maintenance training for major
equipment.
59. The absence of the State in large parts of the north resulted in MINUSMA
serving as a primary target for violent extremist groups. Accordingly, the Mission
has been required to address its own safety and security challenges first, thereby
restricting its ability to fully implement its mandate. The strategic review conducted

14/26

16-08272

S/2016/498

a thorough troop-to-task analysis, on the basis of the updated security and threat
assessment and the limited deployment of the Malian defence and security forces.
60. In sector north, the first priority is the deployment of the o utstanding
capacities to sustain the logistic supply and provide escalation dominance and
robust protection and air mobility for quick reaction and casualty evacuation
(combat convoy battalion, attack and utility helicopters). In addition, sector north
still lacks a dedicated intelligence surveillance and reconnaissance capability to fill
the information gap with regard to providing warning for hostile action and gaining
insight into local conflict dynamics.
61. In sector west, violence has spread southwards into the Mopti and Ségou
regions. The attacks have been associated with Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb,
Al-Mourabitoun and FLM. There is potential to prevent and reverse the spread of
instability with the support of MINUSMA before the influence of violent extremist
groups takes root and, with the right measures, the State can regain legitimacy. The
situation in Timbuktu is relatively stable; however, the security situation in the
Goundam-Leré-Ber belt is deteriorating.
62. It was concluded that the current strength, capabilities and deployment of the
MINUSMA Force, even with outstanding capability gaps addressed, is insufficient
in the current security situation, given the need for greater mobility, manoeuvrability
and self-protection. An augmentation was considered necessary to better enable the
Mission to implement its mandate, including with respect to the protection of
civilians and support to the redeployment of the Malian defence and security forces
to the north as part of its exit strategy.
63. It is therefore recommended that the strength of the military component be
increased by 2,049 personnel, bringing the authorized strength to 13,289. The
additional personnel would include: (a) 150 special forces in Timbuktu that would
contribute to intelligence-gathering and extending the range of operations; (b) an
explosive ordnance disposal company of 140 personnel in Timbuktu to enhance
protection; (c) an intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance company of
115 personnel in Kidal; (d) 135 personnel for enhancement to sector and Force
headquarters and existing intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance units ;
(e) 200 personnel to augment the combat convoy battalion to improve logistic supply
to the north; (f) 20 staff officers for a new command post in Mopti to provide
tactical mobility and emergency response, including evacuation; (g) a 650 -troop
strong quick reaction force and an aviation unit of 85 personnel; and (h) 554 troops
to cover extra manpower for a pledged unit, owing to higher requirements by the
contributing countries with respect to self-sustainment, force protection and/or
intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance requirements. To enhance the
Mission’s intelligence capacity, all military personnel and units engaged in
intelligence and information management will be reinforced and streamlined into a
structure directly under the authority of the Force Commander.
French forces
64. In its resolution 2227 (2015), the Security Council authorized the French
forces, within the limits of their capacities and areas of deployment, to use all
necessary means to intervene in support of MINUSMA when under imminent and
serious threat, if requested by the Secretary-General.

16-08272

15/26

S/2016/498

Police component
65. As at 18 May, the police strength of MINUSMA stood at 1,145 personnel,
including 276 individual police officers, of whom 35 were women, and 869 formed
police unit officers, of whom 41 were women, of an authorized strength of 1,440
personnel, including 320 individual police officers and 1,120 officers in eight
formed police units. Formed police units are deployed in Bamako, Gao, Kidal,
Mopti and Timbuktu; one is currently deploying to Gao; and one platoon is
temporarily in Douentza. The remaining unit is tentatively scheduled to deploy to
Goundam in August.
66. On the basis of the evolving security situation and continuing challenges
facing Malian law enforcement agencies, it was concluded that the current police
strength of MINUSMA was insufficient to fully implement its mandate. It is therefore
recommended that the Mission’s police strength be increased by 480 personnel,
including three additional formed police units and 60 individual police officers,
bringing the total authorized police strength to 1,920 personnel. It is also
recommended that formed police units be deployed to Ménaka and Mopti, with the
third unit in Bamako to serve as a reserve for rapid deployment to the regions, while
also being available for joint patrols with the national police in Bamako, if
requested by the Malian authorities. All formed police units would need to increase
the average number of armoured personnel carriers from 6 to 10, in the light of the
threat environment. The individual police officers would expand c o-location to
enhance mentoring and advisory support for specialized units of national law
enforcement agencies, including supporting the establishment of transnational
organized crime and counter-terrorism units in Gao, Mopti and Timbuktu.
67. MINUSMA will also make adjustments within its current strength, including
by establishing a special intervention team of 30 officers in Bamako to support
crisis response. Efforts are also under way to deploy a police riverine capacity to
enhance the protection of civilians and provide operational support to the Mali
security forces in countering transnational organized crime on the Niger River.
Civilian component
68. In accordance with General Assembly resolutions 69/289 A and B, MINUSMA
has 1,713 civilian posts, including 801 national posts, 740 international posts and
172 United Nations Volunteers. As at 18 May, 86 per cent of civilian staff, of which
25 per cent were women, were deployed.
69. To ensure that the staffing structure of MINUSMA optimally address es both
substantive and support requirements, a civilian staffing review will be conducted
after the adoption of the next resolution on MINUSMA to ensure full alignment with
the new mandate. Given the magnitude of support challenges in Mali, consideration
may be given to temporarily increasing the strength of the support component until
the Mission reaches full operational capacity.
Support considerations
70. The Mission faces unique and serious challenges in meeting its logistical and
support requirements, as a result of the vast and inhospitable terrain in Mali, as well
as the challenging security environment. The MINUSMA Force continued its efforts
to secure the main supply routes by conducting 25 escorted logistics convoy

16/26

16-08272

S/2016/498

missions during the reporting period. However, the delayed deployment of the
combat convoy battalion and the shortfall in armoured personnel carriers and other
mine-protected vehicles continued to limit logistical support to the MINUSMA
bases in the north. Damages caused to the Kidal airfield negatively affect the United
Nations logistical and operational capacities in the region. Rehabilitation work is
estimated to cost between $1.7 and $2.1 million and will commence only after the
clearing of explosive ordnance devices and once security measures are in place.
71. To further streamline the supply chain and facilitate more efficient and
effective movement of goods to the northern and western sectors, it is recommended
that the main logistics hub be relocated from Bamako to Gao and the route through
Benin and the Niger be used as an additional supply route, which will be
substantially shorter than transporting goods from Dakar to Gao and Kidal , as is
currently the case. This would entail relocating the majority of civilian logistics
personnel from Bamako to Gao. A secondary logistics hub would be maintained in
Bamako to facilitate the transport of cargo to sector west.
Safety and security of personnel
72. The general insecurity in the north, in particular the continued deadly attacks
against MINUSMA, raises significant concerns relating to the safety and welfare of
United Nations personnel. While the continued effectiveness of security ope rations
remains a primary concern, the Secretariat will work closely with troop - and policecontributing countries to ensure that responsibilities to provide for the welfare of
deployed personnel are met, and that options available to the Secretariat to su pport
the rotation of contingent personnel more frequently than the standard of every
12 months, in cases of high operational tempo, and the targeting of peacekeepers are
considered. Other welfare programmes are being implemented to mitigate the high
levels of stress for civilian staff in Kidal and Tessalit.
73. Considerable potential remains for the further integration of technology and
intelligence to enhance the security of MINUSMA personnel, installations and
assets, while also deploying additional resources, including an intelligence,
surveillance and reconnaissance company to Kidal, as proposed in paragraph 63
above. The Mission would also need to enhance its capability to conduct day and
night emergency medical evacuation, requiring two additional sp ecialized
helicopters with night vision capability; emergency air medical teams in Mopti and
Tessalit; and four medical teams in Aguelhok, Douentza, Leré and Ménaka.

X. Financial considerations
74. My budget proposal for the maintenance of the Mission for the period from
1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017 amounting to $945.5 million gross is currently before
the Fifth Committee of the General Assembly for review and consideration. Should
the Security Council decide to extend the mandate of MINUSMA beyond 30 June
2016, and approve my recommendations contained in paragraphs 45 to 73 above, it
is my intention to seek additional resources for the operation of the Mission from
the General Assembly during the main part of its seventy -first session.
75. As at 26 May 2016, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special Account for
MINUSMA amounted to $79 million. The total outstanding assessed contributions
for all peacekeeping operations as at that date amounted to $2,372.6 million.

16-08272

17/26

S/2016/498

76. Reimbursement of troop/formed police costs has been made for the period up
to 31 January 2016, while reimbursement of the costs of contingent -owned
equipment has been made for the period up to 31 December 2015, in accordance
with the quarterly payment schedule.

XI. Observations
77. One year after the signing of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation by
the Government of Mali and the signatory armed groups, and three years into the
deployment of MINUSMA, Mali has come a long way on the path to stabilization. I
commend the leadership role played by President Keïta and the leaders of the
signatory armed groups who have managed, over the past year, to sustain a political
dialogue that has been conducive to some progress on political and institutional
reforms, as well as the effective cessation of hostilities, since the conclusion of the
talks held in Anéfis in October 2015.
78. I acknowledge in particular the commitment made by President Keïta and the
leaders of the signatory armed groups, on 27 February, to agree on a new timelin e
for the implementation of the key institutional and security provisions in the peace
agreement. This, in itself, is an acknowledgement that the challenges for the
implementation of the agreement are daunting, and that progress made so far has
been uneven. The political and institutional reforms, notably those related to
decentralization, security sector reform and the rule of law, offer a historical
opportunity to bring a sustainable solution to the longstanding governance and
security challenges that lie at the core of the Malian crisis. I therefore remain
concerned by the continuing delays in the implementation of the agreement and
share the feeling of urgency expressed by Malian and international stakeholders alike.
79. The onus is on the Malian stakeholders to redouble efforts to accelerate the
implementation of the agreement. I recall, once again, their commitment under
article 50 of the agreement to implement it in good faith and to work towards its full
implementation. I welcome the appointment of the three Governors for the Kidal,
Ménaka and Taoudenni regions, and the promulgation of the law revising the Code
des collectivités territoriales, which constitute important milestones for the gradual
restoration and extension of State authority.
80. The slow progress in the activation of the defence and security provisions in
the agreement, including the mixed patrols and the cantonment, the delayed
restructuring of the security sector and the continued absence of law enforcement
institutions in a large part of the Malian territory, have significantly contributed to
the deterioration of the security environment in the north. The Government and the
signatory parties are now confronted with the urgent need to engage in a “race
against the clock” to reverse the determination of the terrorist and violent extremist
groups to derail the implementation of the agreement.
81. I call upon the Government and the signatory armed groups, with the support
of MINUSMA and other partners, to capitalize on the recent creation of the
integration and disarmament, demobilization and reinsertion commissions and on
progress on political reforms to accelerate the cantonment process, launch the
operationalization of the mixed patrols, as well as the special units, and provide
security for the gradual extension of State authority to the north. I also call upon the
Government to engage in a genuine dialogue with the signatory groups, with the

18/26

16-08272

S/2016/498

support of international partners, with a view to agreeing on the modalities for the
integration of elements of signatory armed groups within the reconstituted Malian
defence and security forces to enable progress on cantonment and the establishment
of the mixed units and the mixed patrols.
82. In that context, I urge the Government, in close coordination with MINUSMA
and other partners, including the European Union military and police training
missions in Mali, to define a road map for the gradual extension and redeployment
of the reformed and reconstituted Malian armed forces, as well as law enf orcement,
justice and corrections capacities, as the most appropriate response to the rise of
terrorism and violent extremism in the country. While the Government should
continue leading the reform of the Malian security institutions, I encourage the
international community to increase its support to further strengthen the capacities of
the Malian armed forces, particularly by providing training, equipment and mentoring.
83. It is my firm belief that without urgent progress on the defence and security
provisions of the agreement, the Government and the signatory armed groups will
continue to face significant strategic reversals affecting the security environment in
the northern, central and southern regions of Mali, as demonstrated by the terrorist
attack against a MINUSMA convoy on 18 May, during which five peacekeepers
were killed. I strongly condemn the cowardly attacks against civilians, signatory
armed groups, the Malian and French forces and MINUSMA. I reiterate that attacks
targeting United Nations peacekeepers constitute war crimes under international law
and that all perpetrators, organizers, financers and sponsors of terrorist acts must be
brought to justice in accordance with international law. I also express my heartfelt
condolences to the bereaved families and the Governments of those concerned, as
well as to the people and Government of Mali who continue to suffer
unconscionable losses. I urge all Malian parties to refrain from violent action and to
condemn the use of children as human shields. In that context, I again condemn the
events of 18 April in Kidal that exemplify the fragility of the peace process as well
as the lack of commitment of some actors. I deeply regret the loss of life and
reiterate the commitment to provide full clarity on wha t transpired.
84. I remain extremely concerned by the expansion of attacks by violent extremist
and terrorist groups in the Mopti and Ségou regions, where Malian security and law
enforcement agencies are facing increased threats that have also hampered th e
operations of the United Nations agencies, funds and programmes and other partners
in the area. While commending the Malian authorities for launching counter terrorism operations in those regions, I call upon the Government to ensure that any
response is undertaken in full compliance with its international human rights
obligations. I am concerned about allegations of human rights violations being
committed in the course of such operations, further alienating already marginalized
communities. The fight against terrorism must not infringe upon basic human rights
and fundamental freedoms or aggravate the marginalization of certain communities.
I emphasize, once again, that human rights violations committed in the name of
countering violent extremism will give terrorists their best recruitment tools.
85. It is also important to continue to fight impunity and address long -standing
grievances of local communities, including regarding the inclusiveness of the peace
process. I call upon the Government and signatory armed groups, with the support
of international mediation, to promote the broad involvement of all Malian
stakeholders in the peace process, including through sustained political dialogue,

16-08272

19/26

S/2016/498

more proactive outreach initiatives and enhanced participation by women and youth.
The convening of the Conférence d’entente nationale will play an important role. I
also call upon the Government to continue to work closely with MINUSMA and
other partners to operationalize the Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission,
whose structures in the regions should contribute to bringing justice and
reconciliation closer to local communities.
86. I am encouraged by the resolve demonstrated by the Malian leadership to curb
the expansion of violent extremism, including through the endorsement of the five
priorities under the Integrated Assistance for Countering Terrorism Initiative for
Mali, namely the strengthening of the judicial system, the coordination of terrorism related issues at the national and regional levels, security sector reform, the
enhancement of border security and the prevention of violent extremism.
MINUSMA will support the Government in the implementation of this initiative
with financial support from the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre.
87. The return of basic services and the establishment of income -generating
activities remain critical to addressing continuing humanitarian concerns and
unemployment, particularly among youth and former comba tants who are vulnerable
to radicalization. I strongly encourage the Government to sustain its efforts to expand
the coverage of basic social services in the central and northern regions to ensure that
conflict-affected communities benefit from the long-awaited dividends of peace.
MINUSMA will continue to deepen its engagement with the United Nations country
team so as to ensure an effective complementarity of efforts, an early transfer of
responsibilities, as appropriate, and the rapid delivery of basic services to the most
vulnerable areas of the country, in full respect of humanitarian principles.
88. Security and stability in Mali is inextricably linked to that of the Sahel and
West Africa regions, as evidenced by the recent terrorist attacks in Burkina Faso,
Côte d’Ivoire and Mali, as well as the continued instability in some countries of the
Sahel. The stabilization of Mali will only be possible with the strong and effective
engagement of the countries of the region, as such threats cannot be contained by
borders. I welcome the commitment by regional leaders to work closely together to
this end, in particular at a time when the United Nations is adapting its
peacekeeping footprint in the region. The ongoing security initiatives spearheaded
by the African Union, ECOWAS and the G5 Sahel are important mechanisms to
bring together relevant stakeholders and operationalize this commitment. I
underscore the importance of enhanced regional ownership of such initiatives. I
encourage bilateral and multilateral partners to increase their support to these
organizations and initiatives, including with the provision of financial and logistical
assistance, so as to enhance the region’s collective efforts to more effectively
combat terrorism, violent extremism and transnational organized crime. I encourage
further collaboration by the countries of the region to reinforce collaboration with
the Government of Mali and MINUSMA on issues related to border security and
intelligence-sharing as well as through the United Nations integrated strategy for the
Sahel. MINUSMA will continue to play its role in accordance with its mandate and
to enhance its support to these regional initiatives.
89. Looking ahead, I intend to keep the rapidly evolving political and security
landscape under close review, while continuing to ensure that MINUSMA is
appropriately resourced and positioned to achieve its priority objectives. I will
continue to engage with the Government to develop realistic and credible

20/26

16-08272

S/2016/498

benchmarks towards the gradual establishment and extension of State authority that
would help better sequence the engagement, priorities, posture and footprint of
MINUSMA in the months and years ahead, bearing in mind the timelines in the
agreement for major institutional reforms, as well as the presidential elections
scheduled for 2018. This could also be helpfully framed by a shared vision of the
Mission’s end state.
90. My Special Representative will continue to use his good offices to proactively
engage with the Government of Mali and the signatory armed groups to that effect,
and to overcome potential obstacles in rolling out the key political, institutional and
security reforms in the agreement. In close coordination with international
mediation, MINUSMA will also continue to play a key role in the strategic
coordination of the dialogue between the Government and international partners on
issues related to the implementation of the agreement. Meanwhile, the Mission will
deepen its support for the activities of the Agreement Monitoring Commi ttee and
other mechanisms set forth in the agreement, while calling upon the Committee to
seriously consider the appointment of the independent observer.
91. I therefore recommend that the Security Council extend the mandate of
MINUSMA for a period of one year, until 30 June 2017, with an authorized strength
of up to 13,289 military personnel and 1,920 police personnel, while reprioritizing
the mandate of MINUSMA, as outlined in paragraphs 45 to 73 above, in particular
those related to the protection of United Nations personnel, facilities and assets, the
protection of civilians and the implementation of stabilization tasks.
92. In addition to the recommended adjusted mandate and strength, it remains
critical that MINUSMA urgently address outstanding gaps in force requirements,
enhance its capabilities, including intelligence and the use of technologies, and
continue to adjust its posture to be responsive to the deteriorating security situation.
Such measures would better enable MINUSMA to implement its man date. I urge all
Member States that have pledged uniformed personnel and assets to MINUSMA, or
are providing support to MINUSMA troop- and police-contributing countries, to
accelerate the deployment of any pending personnel and materiel. I also urge the
rapid deployment of any additional military and police capabilities, should the
Security Council so authorize. I commend all MINUSMA contributing countries for
their continued support in pursuit of peace, including the unprecedented
contribution extended by European troop- and police-contributing countries, for the
pledges that they have made in support of MINUSMA.
93. Lastly, I wish to express my gratitude and full support to my Special
Representative for Mali, Mahamat Saleh Annadif, for his tireless effort s. I wish to
pay special tribute to the civilian and uniformed men and women of MINUSMA for
their dedication and contribution to Mali under extremely difficult circumstances. I
also express my gratitude to the African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States, the European Union and bilateral partners, United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes, non-governmental organizations and all other partners, many
of which have been serving under difficult conditions and facing grave threats in a
hostile environment, for their contribution in support of peace and stability in Mali.

16-08272

21/26

S/2016/498

Annex
Military and police strength of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
as at 30 April 2016
Police component

Country

Military component
(staff officers and units)

Individual police officers

Male

Male

Female

Total

Female

Formed police units

Total

Male

Female

Total police
Total

Male

Female

Total

139

139

139

140

140

166

1

167

3

27

Albania
Algeria
Argentina
Armenia

1

1

Australia

5

5

1 445

1 445

Belgium

7

7

Benin

258

258

Bhutan

3

3

2

2

Austria
Bangladesh

139

26

1

27

24

3

27

24

13

13

13

13

Bolivia (Plurinational
State of)
Bosnia and
Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil
Brunei Darussalam
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso

1 691

29

1 720

Cambodia

192

13

205

Cameroon

3

3

16

16

16

16

1 443

1 443

4

4

4

4

Burundi

Canada
Central African
Republic
Chad
Chile
China

387

15

402

Colombia
Congo
Côte d’Ivoire

4

4

Croatia
Cyprus

22/26

16-08272

S/2016/498

Police component

Country

Czech Republic

Military component
(staff officers and units)

Individual police officers

Male

Male

Female

Total

5

1

Female

1

Total

17

Male

Female

Total police
Total

Male

Female

Total

6

5

1

6

1

1

1

1

9

9

9

9

1

Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Denmark

Formed police units

1

18

Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt

68

El Salvador

98

68

Estonia

1

1

Ethiopia

1

1

Finland

4

4

France

22

22

4

102

Fiji

Gabon
Gambia

4

4

Germany

129

129

Ghana

219

219

16

3

19

16

3

19

7

3

10

7

3

10

1

1

Greece
Grenada
Guatemala
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau

847

6

1

853
1

Honduras
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia

140

4

144

Ireland
Israel
Italy

1

1

1

1

Jamaica
Japan
Jordan

1

1

Kazakhstan
Kenya

3

4

7

Kyrgyzstan

16-08272

23/26

S/2016/498

Police component
Military component
(staff officers and units)

Individual police officers

Country

Male

Male

Latvia

1

Female

Total

Female

Formed police units

Total

Male

Female

Total police
Total

Male

Female

Total

1

Lesotho
Liberia

47

2

49

Libya
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Madagascar

2

2

2

2

Malawi
Malaysia
Mauritania

5

5

Mongolia
Montenegro
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Nepal

146

4

150

Netherlands

442

30

472

16

3

19

16

3

19

Niger

856

6

862

13

12

25

13

12

25

Nigeria

65

13

78

2

2

110

31

141

Norway

72

9

81

2

New Zealand
108

31

139

Pakistan
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal

3

3

1

1

2

666

16

Qatar
Republic of Korea
Republic of Moldova
Romania

2

2

Russian Federation
Rwanda
Samoa
Senegal

656

10

2

18

276

4

280

292

6

298

Serbia

24/26

16-08272

S/2016/498

Police component

Country

Sierra Leone

Military component
(staff officers and units)

Individual police officers

Male

Male

Female

Total

234

2

3

4

936

Female

7

Total

Formed police units
Male

Female

Total police
Total

Male

Female

Total

5

2

3

5

3

3

3

3

3

7

Singapore
Slovakia
Slovenia
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sweden
Switzerland

213

21

4

3

Tajikistan
Thailand
The former Yugoslav
Republic of
Macedonia
Timor-Leste
Togo

921

15

1

134

6

140

137

6

143

1

47

Tunisia

46

47

46

Turkey

3

3

3

3

9

9

9

Uganda
Ukraine
United Kingdom of
Great Britain and
Northern Ireland

2

2

9

9

7

7

9

10 641

239

United Republic of
Tanzania
United States of
America
Uruguay
Vanuatu
Yemen
Zambia
Zimbabwe
Total

16-08272

10 455

186

32

271

797

41

838

1 036

73

1 109

25/26

S/2016/498

26/26

16-08272
