UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL
THIR

RECORDS

TY-FO UR TH YEAR

2141”
NEW

COUNCIL

UN LlBRbP’J
MEETING:

26 APRIL

1979

UN/g4

YORK

MAY'I 4 1982
rnCLI;C::TIO~N

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional
Expression

agenda (S/Agenda/2141)
of thanks to the retiring

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
President
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Adoption
of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The situation in the Middle East:
Interim report of the Secretary-General
under Security Council resolution 444
(1979) concerning the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (S/13258)
Letter dated 25 April 1979 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/13270) .

WPV.2141

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the O#kial Records of the Security Council The date of the
documcnt,ind~cat.es the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is
given.
.’
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before. 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.
._.
,”

2141st MEETING’
Held in New York on Thursday, 26 April 1979,, at 11 a,m.
President: Mr. Ole WLGARD

(Norway).

2. The PRESIDENT:
‘This meeting of the Security
Council has been convened iti respbnse to the request
formulated by the representative of Lebanon in the letter
he addressed to me as President of the Council on 25
April [S/13270]. In that letter, reference is made to ‘the
interim report of the Secretary-General concerning the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, which was
circulated on 19 April 1979 as document S/13258 in
response to the request made by the Council in connexion
with the adoption of resolution 444 (1979) on 19 January.
Since the receipt of the Secretary-General’s
report, extensive consultations have been held with the members of the
Council and other interested parties and, as a result, I
have been authorized, as President of the Council, to
make the following statement which has been agreed
upon by the,members of the Council [S/13272]:

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia,
France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Utiion of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Zambia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2141)
1. Adoption

of the agenda

2. The situation in the Middle East:
Interim report of the Secretary-General
under
Security Council resolution 444 (1979) concerning the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(s/13258)
Letter dated 25 April 1979 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/13270)

“The Security Council has studied the SecretaryGeneral’s interim report on the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon, circulated on 19 April 1979 in document S/13258, in accordance with the request made by
the Council at its 2113th meeting, on 19 January 1979.
“On behalf of members of the Council, I wish to state
that they are following with the deepest concern the
significant increase of tension in tite area, particularly
during the past months, and that they share the
Secretary-General’s
anxiety over the present situation
in which the Force is unable fully to implement its
mandate. I wish to express to the Secretary-General the
satisfaction and appreciation we feel for the efforts that
he has undertaken towards the full implementation of
Council resolution 425 (1978), and also to commend
most highly the performance of ‘the officers and men of
the Force under the most difficult circumstances. If for
any reason the Force were to be eroded, a highly dangerous and volatile situation would inevitably arise in
the area.

The meeting was called to order at 11.40 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
1. The PRESIDENT:
As President of the Security
Council, I wish to take this opportunity
to speak on
behalf of my colleagues in order to express our appreciation of the services rendered by Ambassador Leslie 0.
Harriman of Nigeria in his capacity as President of the
Council for the month of March. During his term of
office, Ambassador Harriman presided over an unusually heavy schedule of meetings of the Council, as well as
informal consultations, relating to a number of important and delicate issues affecting international peace and
security. On behalf of the Council, I wish to pay a tribute
to him for the skill and dedication with which he guided
our work last month.

“Members of the Security Council share the views
expressed in the Secretary-General’s
report about what
should still be done towards the full implementation of
the objectives of resolution 425 (1978) and emphasize
in this connexion the importance of the deployment of
the Force in all parts of Southern Lebanon.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted,

“The Security Council expresses its special satisfaction at actions taken by the Government of Lebanon
and in particular the deployment of the Lebanese army
contingent under the ‘phased programme of activities’.
Members of the Council consider that the continuation
of such efforts, called for by the resolutions of the
Council, should ultimately lead to the return of the
effective authority of the Government of Lebanon over

The situation in the Middle East:
Interim report of the Secretary-General under Security
Council resolution 444 (1979) concerning the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (S/13258)
Letter dated 25 April 1979 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/13270)
1

all its territory. In this respect, the Council reiterates its
- call for strict respect for the territorial integrity, unity,
sovereignty and political independence of Lebanon
within
its internationally
recognized boundaries.
Members of the Council consider that all measures
should be taken urgently towards the implementation
of the ‘phased programme of activities’, and particu-

larly such measures as are deemed necessary to ensure
the safety of the Force and of its headquarters. If such
measures are not taken and, afortiori, if further serious
incidents occur, they feei that the Council should meet
without delay to consider the situation.”
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.

2
Litho

in United

Nations.

New York

Price:

%U.S. 1.50

79~70402-December

1981-2250
