S/PV.7976

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7976th meeting

Monday, 19 June 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Llorentty Solíz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bolivia (Plurinational State of))

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Moustafa
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skau
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Hickey
Ms. Sison
Mrs. Carrión

Agenda
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace
Report of the Peacebuilding Commission on its tenth session (S/2017/76)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-17415 (E)
*1717415*

S/PV.7976

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace
Report of the Peacebuilding Commission on its
tenth session (S/2017/76)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Cho Tae-yul,
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Korea
and Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, and
His Excellency Mr. Macharia Kamau, Permanent
Representative of Kenya and former Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/76, which contains the report of the
Peacebuilding Commission on its tenth session.
I now give the floor to Mr. Cho Tae-yul.
Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic of Korea): I would first
like to congratulate Ambassador Kamau, Permanent
Representative of Kenya, on the strong leadership and
commitment with which he successfully chaired the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) last year, working
tirelessly to lay the ground for a stronger, more
effective and more relevant body. The Commission
made important progress in 2016 in implementing the
various resolutions adopted regarding the review of the
peacebuilding architecture. This year we are building
on those achievements as the PBC continues to promote
an integrated, strategic and coherent approach to
peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
In response to the Security Council’s January
presidential statement (S/PRST/2017/2) emphasizing
the importance of the PBC’s role in convening
peacebuilding efforts, the Commission has been making
an effort to use its convening role, in collaboration with
the United Nations Office in West Africa and the Sahel,
to mobilize a greater commitment and partnership
between the United Nations, the countries of the Sahel
and other international and regional partners with a
view to advancing the implementation of the United
2/6

19/06/2017

Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. On 6 March,
I convened a PBC meeting in which we were briefed
by Mr. Pierre Buyoya, former President of Burundi
and African Union High Representative for Mali
and the Sahel; Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for West
Africa and the Sahel; Mr. Najim Elhadj Mohamed,
Permanent Secretary of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel); and Mr. Angel Losada, European Union
Special Representative for the Sahel. Representatives
of the countries of the G-5 Sahel also participated in
the meeting. In addition, in my capacity as Chair of
the PBC, together with the Assistant Secretary-General
for Peacebuilding, I also attended last week’s meeting
of the Ministerial Coordination Platform for the Sahel
in N’Djamena. The meeting enabled me to identify
opportunities for the PBC to support, on request,
the efforts of the countries of the Sahel to achieve
development and stability. I look forward to discussing
that in more detail at the informal interactive dialogue
to be held later this morning.
The resolutions that I just mentioned called for
the PBC to consider reviewing its working methods
so as to enhance efficiency and flexibility in support
of peacebuilding and sustaining peace. In that regard,
in accordance with its mandate and upon request from
the relevant States, the Commission continues its
consideration of country- and region-specific situations.
At the request of the Gambian Government,
the Commission convened a meeting to discuss the
peacebuilding priorities of The Gambia, following
my visit to the country last March. The meeting
was preceded by developments on the ground and
important regional initiatives in support of the
political situation in The Gambia, strongly supported
by the Secretary-General. At the PBC meeting, the
Permanent Representative of The Gambia provided a
direct account from the perspective of the Government,
while the Commission provided a platform to discuss
international and regional support.
On 7 June, the PBC also convened a meeting on the
situation of the Solomon Islands, upon the request of its
Prime Minister, who presented the key peacebuilding
challenges facing his country at this crucial time, as the
Regional Assistance Mission to the Solomon Islands is
expected to withdraw from the country this month.
The Commission not only benefited from the direct
engagement by the Prime Minister, but also heard from
17-17415

19/06/2017

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

S/PV.7976

a representative of the Young Women’s Parliamentary
Group and key regional partners of the Solomon
Islands, including the members of the Pacific Islands
Forum and the Chair of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations. It was an excellent opportunity for
the Commission to demonstrate its unique value as
a partnership forum for countries to engage with the
international community in connection with challenges
involved in peacebuilding and sustaining peace.

comprehensive advice upon request from the principal
organs of the United Nations.

However, a number of priorities remained for the
Commission during its eleventh session, upon which I
will elaborate briefly.

Secondly, with regard to coherence, the resolutions
on the review of the peacebuilding architecture
recognize the importance for the Commission to
promote an integrated, strategic and coherent approach
to peacebuilding and bring sustained international
attention to sustaining peace. During the past several
years, the PBC has demonstrated that, by bringing
together various parts of the United Nations system in
one forum, it can induce better integrated and coherent
work in the countries concerned. Through discussing
country-specific and regional peacebuilding issues
with senior representatives of related departments,
the PBC has an opportunity to reinforce that message
and enhance the United Nations coherent approach to
peacebuilding and sustaining peace. I am committed to
use the remainder of the current session to work in that
direction so as to engage relevant United Nations actors
and explore ways to work better together.

First, concerning the matter of partnerships,
partnerships and cooperation with relevant stakeholders,
both within and outside the United Nations, are
crucial. The Commission should examine all available
opportunities so as to strengthen its collaboration with
international financial institutions, including the World
Bank and the African Development Bank, as well as
with regional and subregional organizations, such as
the African Union (AU). Earlier this month, together
with the group of ambassadors from the PBC, I met
with the President of the World Bank in Washington
D.C., a number of executive directors and several other
senior officials. We discussed ways to strengthen the
partnership between the PBC and the Bank in support of
conflict-affected countries that are on the agenda of both
the United Nations and the World Bank. That discussion
will continue at the PBC’s annual session on 30 June
on the partnership for financing for peacebuilding, at
which Kristalina Georgieva, Chief Executive Officer of
the World Bank Group, has agreed to attend along with
Secretary-General António Guterres.
In connection with the African Union, I intend to
follow up on the work of my predecessor and visit AU
headquarters during the latter part of this year so as
to strengthen collaboration with the African Union,
especially its Peace and Security Council.
Within the United Nations, as well, we need to
further explore ways to improve the quality of the
advice that we provide to the General Assembly, the
Security Council and the Economic and Social Council.
In recent months, the Security Council called on the
PBC to advise on a number of regional and countryspecific issues, including the Sahel region, the Central
African Republic, Liberia and Guinea-Bissau. Those
are opportunities for the Commission to prove that,
through its convening role, it can provide solid and

In line with the aforementioned presidential
statement on the Sahel, the PBC intends to propose a
joint meeting with the Economic and Social Council on
the Sahel region on 28 June to look at ways to address
the development challenges in the region, the outcome
of which we will be ready to report to the Security
Council upon request.

Thirdly, concerning the issue of gender, in 2016,
the Commission adopted its gender strategy, which is
now being integrated into the work of the PBC. The
Commission will continue to build on past achievements
to promote the gender dimension of peacebuilding and
provide opportunities for the increased participation of
women in peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
Fourthly, and finally, with regard to transparency,
efficiency and flexibility, the Commission will continue
to consider ways to respond in a rapid and effective
manner to requests for advice and support, including
through newly established focal points on gender, youth,
institution-building, financing and national ownership.
The PBC is an intergovernmental advisory body
to the General Assembly, the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council. Its relevance depends
upon its capacity to provide the kind of advice that
can enrich the deliberations of its parent bodies. The
PBC remains committed to providing that kind of
advice by fully utilizing its convening role and diverse
membership, while recognizing that peace, development

17-174153/6

S/PV.7976

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

and human rights are closely linked and mutually
reinforcing. We Stand ready to respond to requests to
contribute to building and searching for peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Cho
Tae-yul for the information that he has provided to
the Council.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Kamau.
Mr. Kamau (Kenya): I am pleased to be here
today to present the annual report (S/2017/76) of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) on its tenth session.
I congratulate you, Sir, for your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council, and commend you
for the manner in which you have conducted its affairs.
I should like to commend the representative of the
Republic of Korea, as Chair of the PBC at its eleventh
session, for his leadership, and all the PBC members,
including members of the Council, for their continued
commitment to the work of the Commission. I also
wish to thank you, Mr. President, for your decision,
to convene the annual informal interactive dialogue
between members of the Security Council and the PBC
immediately after this briefing this morning. We look
forward to that informal exchange as an opportunity to
further enhance the advisory role of the Commission to
the Council.
I will now turn to the presentation of the
Commission’s annual report on its tenth session. The
year 2016 was an important one for the Peacebuilding
Commission, marked by the adoption of the resolutions
on the review of the peacebuilding architecture and
several activities that the Commission undertook to
implement those resolutions. In April 2016, the General
Assembly and the Security Council not only reaffirmed
the relevance of the Peacebuilding Commission as an
intergovernmental advisory body, but also stressed the
Commission’s importance in promoting an integrated,
strategic and coherent approach to peacebuilding and
bringing sustained international attention to sustaining
peace, thereby serving as a bridge among the principal
organs and a platform to bring together United Nations
States Members and a broad range of partners who are
interested in peacebuilding. I should like to direct the
attention of the Security Council to the following points.
First, during the period covered by the report, the
Commission diversified its engagement and expressed
its ability to be flexible in response to requests by
Member States. It convened a range of country-specific,
4/6

19/06/2017

regional and thematic discussions. The Commission’s
consideration of peacebuilding opportunities and
challenges after the outbreak of the Ebola epidemic in
West Africa was well informed by a visit by the Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission to the region, which
explored the subregional peacebuilding opportunities
and challenges. Throughout that time, the Commission
provided an important platform to address requests of
Member States to discuss cross-border and subregional
challenges and, at the same time, to improve coherence
among various stakeholders. The Commission also
benefited from expert briefings from the Department
of Political Affairs, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the United Nations Development
Programme, thereby providing evidence of a further
step forward in the Commission’s efforts to enhance a
coherent approach to peacebuilding across the system.
Secondly, the value of the Peacebuilding
Commission lies in its ability to fully utilize its diverse
membership to reinforce its bridging role among the
principal organs and entities of the United Nations.
We all agree that development, peace and security, and
human rights are interlinked and mutually reinforcing,
while acknowledging that development itself cannot
guarantee peace, like peace alone cannot guarantee
sustainable development. That is why we worked
with the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council to discusss possible synergies among
peacebuilding, sustaining peace and sustainable
development. When requested, we provided advice
to the Security Council in a holistic manner — for
example, in the case of Liberia and Guinea-Bissau
Thirdly, throughout the tenth session, the
Commission also made important progress in building
stronger relations with key partners, including
international financial institutions, regional and
subregional organizations and other bodies within the
United Nations system. The Chair engaged the African
Union Peace and Security Council on issues of mutual
interest and potential areas of future cooperation
with the Commission, as required in the twin
resolutions — General Assembly resolutions 70/262
and Security Council resolution 2282 (2016). I urge the
Commission to continue in that direction and to look
for opportunities to strengthen its collaboration with
Member States, civil society organizations and, where
relevant, private sector actors.
Fourthly, peacebuilding efforts require predictable
and sustained resources. In that connection, in 2016,
17-17415

19/06/2017

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

the Commission continued its efforts to strengthen the
synergies with the Peacebuilding Fund. During the tenth
session, we had several opportunities to build those
synergies. The meeting on financing for peacebuilding
in Kyrgyzstan, in October 2016, is only one example
of how the Commission can provide a platform to the
Peacebuilding Fund recipient countries to discuss the
impact of the Fund in support of national peacebuilding
efforts. I hope that Kyrgyzstan will be followed by
other countries in actively seeking engagement with
the Peacebuilding Fund as a platform to share their
peacebuilding experiences and success stories.
Fifthly, the General Assembly and the Security
Council encouraged the Peacebuilding Commission to
consider diversifying its working methods to enhance its
efficiency and flexibility. Following the adoption of the
resolutions of April 2016, the Commission conducted a
review of its rules of procedure and working methods
with a view to, inter alia, examining possible forms
of engagement by the Commission and enhancing its
advisory role, including by aligning its work to relevant
Security Council meetings.
Beyond those five points, there is a lot more that
the Commission did in 2016 to support peacebuilding
and sustaining peace, including through its countryspecific activities, as indicated in the annual report
(S/2017/76). I am confident that, under the capable
chairpersonship of the Republic of Korea, the
Peacebuilding Commission will continue to evolve into
an even more dynamic and important platform for the
membership to engage on challenges and opportunities
for building and sustaining peace.
In conclusion, allow me to thank Assistant
Secretary-General
Fernandez-Taranco
and
his
entire team at the Peacebuilding Support Office for
their support throughout the tenth session and their
dedication to peacebuilding and sustaining peace. I
would also like to wish my Ambassador Cho Tae-yul
every success as Chair in 2017.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Kamau for his briefing and for the work he has
carried out.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Carrión (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
First and foremost, Uruguay would like to express its
solidarity with the Governments of Colombia, Mali and

S/PV.7976

the United Kingdom in the light of the attacks that have
taken place in those countries recently. We extend our
deepest condolences to the relatives of the victims.
I thank the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Ambassador Cho Tae-yul, and the former Vice-Chair
and former Chair of the Commission, Ambassador
Macharia Kamau, for their informative briefings and the
work they do in leading the Peacebuilding Commission.
Since the Security Council and the General
Assembly adopted substantially identical resolutions on
peacebuilding — resolution 2282 (2016) and resolution
70/262, respectively — the Peacebuilding Commission
has been revitalized and has made progress in
implementing its goals and considering many situations
that go beyond those within the purview of the countryspecific configurations.
In January, the Security Council acknowledged
the cooperation between the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel and the Peacebuilding
Commission and underscored the importance of the
work of the Commission in consolidating peace in
West Africa and in encouraging deeper commitment
and strengthening partnership among the countries of
the Sahel and other partners in order to promote the
implementation and adaptation of the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.
The conflicts that have been witnessed in the Sahel
countries and in the Lake Chad basin are exacerbated
by a number of contributing factors, such as the spread
of the terrorist threat, the scarcity of State authority, the
humanitarian and food crises, and the effects of change
climate, among others. Against that backdrop, we pay
tribute to national, regional and international efforts
aimed at relieving the situation and providing financing
to the Sahel region and the Lake Chad basin. Both the
Multinational Joint Task Force in the Lake Chad basin
and the initiative to establish the Group of Five for the
Sahel are clear examples of coordinated regional efforts
that have played key roles in responding to situations
of this nature, which have transboundary elements and
affect entire regions.
We believe that the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission lends a holistic and comprehensive
vision to the challenges presented by both regions.
The Peacebuilding Commission, as a coordinator of
all efforts under way, will undoubtedly strengthen the
cooperation of all parties, including that among the
bodies and agencies of the United Nations; regional and

17-174155/6

S/PV.7976

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

subregional organizations, such as the African Union
and the Economic Community of West African States;
as well as cooperation among international financial
institutions and donor countries. Such coordination
is vital if we are to approach these situations in a
comprehensive and inclusive way that addresses
peacekeeping and security concerns, humanitarian
assistance and development cooperation. In that
connection, Uruguay believes that closer contact and
interaction between the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Security Council is a priority. To that end,

6/6

19/06/2017

we underscore the usefulness of interactive meetings,
such as the one scheduled today, and the need for more
frequent contact between both bodies.
In conclusion, I would like to congratulate the
Peacebuilding Commission for including a gender
perspective in its work, as it is clear that women are key
actors in both preventing and resolving conflicts and
they have a key role to play in the recovery of societies
and in the processes of building sustainable peace.
The meeting rose at 10.30 a.m.

17-17415
