106

General Assemhly-Twenty-sixth Session

(b) To refrain from all direct or indirect relations,
economic or otherwise, with South Africa, where those
relations concern Namibia;
(c) Not to recognize as legally valid any rights or
interests in Namibian property or resources purportedly
acquired from the South African Government after
27 October 1966;
(d) To take effective economic and other measures
designed to ensure the immediate withdrawal of the
South African administration from Namibia, thereby
making possible the implementation of General Assembly resolutions 2145 (XXI) and 2248 (S-V);
7. Invites the Security Council to take effective
measures, in conformity with the relevant provisions. of
the Charter to secure the withdrawal by South Afnca
of its illeg~l administration from Namibia, and the
implementation of the resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council designed to enable
the people of Namibia to exercise their right to selfdetermination;
8. Calls once again upon South Africa to treat
Namibians captured during their struggle far freedom
as prisoners of war in accordance with th~ Geneva
Convention relative to the Treatment of Pnsoners of
War, of 12 August 1949,34 and to co~ply wi~h. !he
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civihan
Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,35 and, in
this regard, invites the International Committee of the
Red Cross to exercise its good offices to secure South
Africa's compliance with those Conventions;
9. Requests all States and the specialized agencies
and other organizations . within the ~ni~ed Natio~s
system, in co-operation w1th the .~rgamzat10n of Afncan Unity, to render to the Nam1bian people_ all mor~l
and material assistance necessary to contmue their
struggle for the restoration of their inalienable right to
self-determination and independence, and to work out,
in active co-operation with t~e l!nited Nati~ms CouJ?cil
for Namibia and the Orgamzatlon of African Uruty,
concrete programmes of assistance to Namibia;
10. Invites the specialized agencies to give full
publicity, through all media, to the question of Namibia and to the conditions prevailing in the Territory to
which their respective spheres of competence are
related;
11. Recommends the report of the United Nations
Council for N amibia86 to all States and to the subsidiary organs of the General Assembly and other
competent organs of_ the United Natio1;s, _as we~I ~s
the specialized agencies and other organ~zatlons. w1th!n
the United Nations system, for appropnate act10n, m
conformity with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council;
12. Reaffirms the direct responsibility of the United
Nations in regard to the Territory of Namibia and its
obligation to lead the Namibian people to selfdetermination and independence;
13. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia in accordance with the provisions of the relevant
'
.
resolutions
of the General Assembly, to contmue
to
discharge its functions and responsibilities, and in
particular:
34 United

Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 15 (1950), No. 972.

85 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 15 (1950), No. 973.
86 O/ficial Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth

Session, Supplement No. 24 (A/8424).

(a) To represent Namibia whenever it is required;
( b) To continue its consultations, at United N ations

Headquarters, in Africa or elsewhere, with the rel?resentatives of the Namibian people and the Orgamzation of African Unity;
(e) To assume responsibility for the urgent ~stablishment of a short-term and long-term co-ordmated
programme of technical and financia! assistance to
Namibia, as explained in the report of t~e SecretaryGeneral,37 in line with the relevant provis1ons of General Assembly resolution 2248 (S-V);
14. Notes with appreciation the recognition by a
large number of States of the identity certificates and
travel documents issued to Namibians by the United
Nations Council for Namibia38 and once again calls
upon all other States which have not yet done so to
recognize those documents;
15. Calls upon all States to co-operate fully with
the United Nations Council for Namibia in its efforts
to discharge its responsibilities;
16. Requests the Secretary-General, bearing in mind
the recommendation of the United Nations Council for
Namibia concerning the enlargement of its membership
with a view to ensuring broader representation on the
Council,39 to hold consultations among the permanent
members of the Security Council and other regional
groups not represented on the United Nations Council
for Namibia and to report thereon to the General
Assembly;
17. Urges the Secretary-General, in view of the
recommendation of the United Nations Council for
Namibia, to undertake the necessary consultations to
nominate as soon as possible a full-time United Nations
Commissioner for Namibia;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
provide the necessary assistance and facilities to the
United Nations Council for Namibia and to the United
Nations Commissioner for Namibia for the discharge
of their respective duties and functions;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to take the
necessary steps to intensify publicity relating to Namibia, and to issue a series of United Nations commemorative postage stamps to publicize the direct responsibility of the United Nations for Namibia;
20. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
present resolution to the competent subsidiary organs
of the General Assembly, other organs of the United
Nations, the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system;
21. Further requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its twenty-seventh
session on the implementation of the present resolution.
2028th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.

2872 (XXVI). United Nations Fund for Namibia
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27 October
1966, by which the United Nations decided to termínate the Mandate of South Africa over Namibia and
87 A/8473.
38 See O{!icial

Records of the General Assembly, Twentysixth Session, Supplement No. 24 (A/8424), annex I.
89 /bid., Supplement No. 24 (A/8424), para. 197.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

assume direct responsibility for the Territory until its
independence,
Reatfirming its resolve to discharge that responsibility in regard to the Territory,
Mindful that, by assuming direct responsibility for
Namibia, the United Nations incurred a solemn obligation to assist and prepare the people of the Territory
for self-determination and independence,
Recalling further its resolution 2679 (XXV) of
9 December 1970, whereby it decided to establish a
United Nations Fund for Namibia to provide comprehensive assistance to the people of the Territory,
Recognizing that South Africa's continued illegal
occupation of Namibia at present prevents the United
Nations from furnishing needed large-scale assistance
within the Territory,
H aving examined the report of the SecretaryGeneral4º on the development, planning, execution and
administration of a comprehensive programme of assistance to Namibians in various fields,
Having considered the recommendations set out in
that report and having noted that the assistance envisaged consists of:
(a) Short-term and intermediate-term assistance to
those Namibians who are at present accessible to
international aid,
( b) Toe drawing up of a plan of co-ordinated
intemational assistance to be implemented within
Namibia following the withdrawal of South Africa
from the Territory,
Bearing in mind that the scope of the programme, as
well as its financing and administrative machinery, will
be subject to review by the General Assembly when
South Africa's illegal occupation of Namibia is terminated,
l. Expresses its appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General and the conclusions and recommendations contained therein;
2. Reaffirms its previous decision, contained in
resolution 2679 (XXV), to establish a United Nations
Fund for Namibia for the purpose of putting into effect
the comprehensive programme of assistance to Namibians outlined in the report of the Secretary-General;
3. Decides, as a transitional measure, to allocate
to the Fund the sum of $50,000 from the regular
budget of the United Nations for 1972;
4. Authorizes the Secretary-General to appeal to
Govemments for voluntary contributions to the Fund;
5. Invites Govemments to appeal to their national
organizations and institutions for voluntary financia!
contributions to the Fund;
6. Authorizes the Secretary-General to implement
the short-term and intermediate-term measures contained in his report as soon as the necessary funds are
available;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to make the
necessary arrangements for the administration of the
Fund and for the comprehensive programme, in conformity with the proposals and suggestions set out in
paragraphs 77 to 85 of the report; 40
8. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system to render
all necessary assistance to the Secretary-General in
40 A/8473.

107

carrying out the tasks assigned to bim under the present
resolution;
9. Decides, pending the entry into full operation of
the comprehensive programme, that Namibians shall
continue to be eligible for assistance through the United
Nations Educational and Training Programme for
Southem Africa and the United Nations Trust Fund
for South Africa;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to undertake
a study of tbe economic, social and cultural needs of
Namibia, with a view to the formulation of a contingency plan of co-ordinated intemational and technical assistance, to be implemented in Namibia following the withdrawal of South Africa from the Territory;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly at its twenty-seventh session on
the implementation of the present resolution.

2028th plenmy meeting,
20 December 1971.
2873 (XXVI). Activities of foreign economic and
other interests which are impeding the im•
plementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of lndependence to Colonial Coun•
tries and Peoples in Southern Rhodesia, Namibia and Territories under Portuguese
domination and in ali other Territories under colonial domination and efforts to eliminate colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination in southern Africa

The General Assembly,
Having considered the ítem entitled "Activities of
foreign economic and other interests which are impeding the implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples in Southern Rhodesia, Namibia and Territories
under Portuguese domination and in all other Territories under colonial domination and efforts to eliminate
colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination in
southem Africa",
Having examined the report of tbe Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to this
question,41
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970,
containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling further its previous resolutions on the
item, in particular resolution 2703 (XXV) of 14 December 1970,
Reaffirming that the administering Powers, in accordance with Chapters XI and XII of the Charter of the
United Nations, have the obligation to ensure the
political, economic, social and educational advancement of the inhabitants of the Territories under their
administration and to protect the human and natural
resources of those Territories against abuses,
41 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth
Session, Supplement No. 23A (A/8423/Rev.1/ Add. l ).
