S/2016/488

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 May 2016
Original: English

Letter dated 24 May 2016 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
The present letter is submitted in response to the request contained in the
thirteenth paragraph of the statement of 25 April 2016 by the President of the
Security Council (S/PRST/2016/5) that the Secretary-General present a plan
outlining the manner in which the Office of the Special Envoy for Yemen would
support the next phase of its work with the parties, in particular its support to the
Yemeni parties in developing a road map for the implementation of interim security
measures, especially at the local level, withdrawals, the handover of heavy weapons,
the restoration of State institutions and the resumption of political dialogue.
Since the uprisings in Yemen broke out in early 2011, I have been actively
engaged, through my good offices, in helping Yemenis to find a peaceful solution.
The United Nations provided support for the negotiations between the Government
and the opposition, which resulted in the signing of the Initiative of the Gulf
Cooperation Council and its Implementation Mechanism, in Riyadh on
23 November 2011. The United Nations has since remained actively engaged with
all Yemeni political groupings to facilitate and provide support for the effective
implementation of the Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism.
In a letter dated 18 June 2012 (S/2012/469), I had the honour to inform the
President of the Security Council of my intention to establish a small Office of the
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Yemen in order to fully meet the
expectations of the Security Council contained in its resolutions 2014 (2011) and
2051 (2012). The President of the Council responded in a letter dated 21 June 2012
(S/2012/470) that the members of the Council had taken note of the intention
expressed in my letter.
Since the establishment of the Office of the Special Envoy in 2012, the United
Nations has provided support for the Yemeni-led political transition process and has
promoted inclusive participation, including of previously marginalized groups, such
as women, youth, the Houthis and Southern Hirak. With the support and facilitation
provided by the United Nations, Yemenis concluded a National Dialogue
Conference in January 2014, which brought together 565 delegates from all of the
regions and political groupings of Yemen. The outcome document of the National
Dialogue established the foundations for a new federal and democratic Yemen, with
support for the rule of law and good governance. A Constitution Drafting
Commission was created in order to draft a new constitution based on the National
Dialogue Conference outcomes.

16-08572 (E)

010616

*1608572*

S/2016/488

Despite important progress in the political transition, conflicts between the
Houthis, other armed groups and government forces led to an escalation of military
violence in mid-2014. Notwithstanding agreements brokered by my then Special
Adviser, the Houthis and allied units of the armed forces seized control of Sanaa
and other parts of the country in September 2014 and over the ensuing months.
The United Nations facilitated numerous rounds of negotiations in an attempt
to resolve the political impasse, but these efforts were ineffective to halt the
escalation of military confrontations. In March 2015 the Islamic State claimed
responsibility for attacks on two mosques in Sanaa, killing hundreds of worshippers.
In the same month, Houthi-allied air force units bombed the presidential palace in
Aden, where President Abd Rabbuh Mansur Hadi had taken refuge after fleeing
Sanaa. At the request of the President, a coalition of countries led by Saudi Arabia
intervened militarily on 26 March 2015 in order to secure the return of the
Government. Ground fighting between Houthi forces and Houthi-allied segments of
the national army against Government of Yemen forces and allied militias
intensified and spread, triggering a humanitarian emergency. Al-Qaeda in the
Arabian Peninsula and other such terrorist groups have actively exploited the chaos,
extending their control over significant areas and conducting frequent attacks
against government and civilian targets in many areas.
In its resolution 2216 (2015) the Security Council requested me to intensify
my good offices role in order to enable the resumption of a pea ceful, inclusive,
orderly and Yemeni-led transition. Since then, my Special Envoy has facilitated
successive rounds of consultations, including direct talks in Switzerland in June and
December 2015, in order to obtain a cessation of hostilities and a resum ption of the
political transition process.
My Special Envoy convened a new round of peace talks, hosted by Kuwait,
which commenced on 21 April 2016. The Security Council, in the aforementioned
statement of the President of the Council of 25 April 2016, expressed support for the
Kuwait talks and called upon the Yemeni parties to develop a road map for the
implementation of interim security arrangements, especially at the local level,
withdrawals, the handover of heavy weapons, the restoration of State inst itutions
and the resumption of political dialogue.
In order to alleviate the humanitarian situation and create an environment
conducive to the talks, a cessation of hostilities negotiated by my Special Envoy
came into effect on 10 April 2016. Despite ongoing challenges in Ta’izz, Al-Jawf
and Ma’rib, the cessation of hostilities has led to a decrease in the level of military
violence in most parts of the country. The De-escalation and Coordination
Committee, composed of military representatives of the two s ides, is operating from
Kuwait and local de-escalation committees have been established in six
governorates to provide support for the cessation of hostilities. The nationwide
cessation of hostilities remains extremely fragile and requires urgent additiona l
support from the United Nations. The deterioration of the cessation of hostilities
could undermine the Kuwait talks and derail the progress towards greater stability
and security.
The Kuwait talks are a crucial step for creating a positive political dyn amic
and for developing a road map for the return of Yemen to a peaceful and orderly
political transition. While both sides have committed to reaching agreements in

2/4

16-08572

S/2016/488

Kuwait, there remain deep differences between the two sides which will need to be
overcome in order to achieve a successful outcome.
Helping to ensure the success of this process and the implementation of any
agreements emerging from Kuwait is one of my top priorities. This will require
continued support from the international community, espec ially States in the region.
It will also require the United Nations to increase its mediation and facilitation
efforts to provide support to the Yemeni parties, as well as additional substantive
expertise in the design of interim security arrangements, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, ceasefires, disengagement and other security
sector issues.
The Office of the Special Envoy for Yemen will continue to exercise my good
offices with a view to facilitating the conclusion of a comprehensive sett lement that
will bring about a permanent end to the conflict and agreement on a road map for
the completion of the remaining tasks of the Implementation Mechanism of the
Initiative of the Gulf Cooperation Council and the outcomes of the comprehensive
National Dialogue Conference. The Office will also continue to carry out the tasks
as enumerated in the aforementioned exchange of letters with the President of the
Security Council in June 2012 (S/2012/469 and S/2012/470).
In order to fulfil the new responsibilities and tasks pertinent to the plan
requested by the Security Council in support of the Yemeni parties and the peace
process, I intend to strengthen the Office of the Special Envoy for Yemen to
undertake the following main functions:
(a) Lead United Nations assistance, in the Kuwait talks and subsequent
consultations, in facilitating and providing technical advice on the negotiation and
design of:
(i) Interim security arrangements, including the formation of security
committees, the negotiated withdrawal of militias and armed groups and the
orderly handover of heavy weapons to the State;
(ii) The restoration of State institutions, including respect for the legally
established lines of authority and the removal of any obstructions to the proper
functioning of State institutions;
(iii) The preparations for the resumption of political dialogue, including
agreements for finalizing and adopting the draft constitution, undertaking
electoral reform and holding general elections;
(b) Lead United Nations assistance with regard to expanded facilitation and
the provision of technical advice to the Yemeni parties with the aim of ensuring
greater respect for and compliance with the cessation of hostilities, including
through support for the De-escalation and Coordination Committee, local
committees and additional local mechanisms;
(c) Lead United Nations assistance for the implementation of the initial
stages of agreements concluded in Kuwait and in subsequent consultations and to
plan and prepare for the provision of United Nations support for the implementation
of more comprehensive agreements.
The Special Envoy for Yemen will continue to exercise my good offices role,
including through regular and frequent visits to Yemen and close engagement with

16-08572

3/4

S/2016/488

all Yemeni sides and international and regional partners. The expanded Office will
require staff with expertise in political mediation and facilitation, electoral affairs,
ceasefires, disengagement, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, other
security sector issues and the accompanying administrative, security and support
services.
The enhancements of the Office of the Special Envoy would be conducted in
two phases. The first phase would provide support for the cessation of hostilities,
the design and negotiation in the above-mentioned areas, the initial stages of
implementation in Sanaa and the planning and preparation of broader United
Nations support for the following stages of implementation, in full consultation with
the United Nations system. The second phase would provide support for the
implementation of agreements more comprehensively in several locations outside
Sanaa. It would only be initiated if and when the Kuwait talks or subsequent rounds
make further progress towards a comprehensive settlement.
I intend to move the Office of the Special Envoy for Yemen fro m New York to
Amman as soon as practicable. It would serve as a staging ground to provide
support for operations in Yemen. The presence of the Office in Sanaa would remain
limited in the first phase, but would increase over time as the security situation
permits. The security situation would be monitored closely and mitigating measures
would be adjusted to the threat level assessed. In this context, it bears repeating that
all parties must provide for the safe, rapid and unhindered access by humanitarian
and United Nations personnel, in particular safety and security personnel and
security equipment, in order to ensure the delivery of mandates.
I count on the support of the Security Council for my approach. A detailed
budget proposal outlining the resource requirements for strengthening the Office of
the Special Envoy for Yemen would be submitted to the governing bodies, as
appropriate.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

4/4

16-08572
