S/2019/445

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 May 2019
Original: English

Special report of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission and the Secretary-General of the
United Nations on the strategic assessment of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
I. Introduction
1.
The African Union Peace and Security Council, in its communiqué of 11 June
2018 (PSC/PR/COMM.(DCCLXXVIII)), and the United Nations Security Council,
in its resolution 2429 (2018) of 13 July 2018, authorized the drawdown and
reconfiguration of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). The Councils also endorsed a whole-of-system approach with regard to
Darfur and a transition concept for the United Nations country team, for a two-year
time frame, within which was envisaged the exit of the mission on 30 June 2020, and
its liquidation by December 2020, provided that there was no significant change in
the security situation in Darfur and that key indicators were fulfilled. The Security
Council requested the Chairperson of the African Union Commission and the
Secretary-General of the United Nations to provide, through a strategic review, by
1 May 2019, an assessment of the following: progress made in implementing the
reconfiguration; the overall impact of further reductions on the areas that UNAMID
has withdrawn from; cooperation of the Government of the Sudan with UNAMID,
including the removal of bureaucratic hindrances to UNAMID; whether the
conditions on the ground remain conducive to further reductions; and whether the
capacities of the United Nations country team and the Government of the Sudan have
increased to the level necessary to absorb former UNAMID tasks.
2.
The review process was initiated by a joint visit by the Assi stant SecretaryGeneral for Africa of the Departments of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and
Peace Operations, the Assistant Administrator and Director of the Regional Bureau
for Arab States of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the
Assistant Secretary-General for Peacebuilding Support, from 9 to 12 February 2019,
which helped to define the priorities of the engagement of the United Nations in the
Darfur transition. Subsequently, a joint African Union -United Nations assessment
team visited Khartoum, Darfur and Addis Ababa, from 6 to 19 March. The team was
led jointly by the African Union Commission and the Departments of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs and Peace Operations of the United Nations Secretariat and
comprised representatives of both entities, including the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), the Department of Operational
Support, the Peacebuilding Support Office, UNDP and the World Food Programme,
and the Deputy Humanitarian Coordinator for Darfur. The review team held

19-08859 (E)

070619

*1908859*

S/2019/445

consultations with UNAMID, the Government of the Sudan, the United Nations
country team and African Union officials. They visited team sites and met with State
and local authorities, the native administration, representativ es of civil society and
internally displaced communities in Darfur.
3.
The present report covers the period from 14 July 2018 to 15 May 2019 and
contains an analysis of the main political and security trends and conflict drivers in
Darfur, an assessment of progress in the implementation of Security Council
resolution 2429 (2018) and a new mission concept with adjusted priorities to help to
guide considerations on the future of the mandate of UNAMID (see
S/PRST/2018/19), as well as options for the further drawdown and eventual exit of
the mission by 2020, while recommending joint African Union -United Nations
engagement to address conflict drivers subsequent to the exit of UNAMID. In view
of the potential impact of the political developments in the Sudan since 11 April on
UNAMID, the Security Council agreed to extend the time frame for the submission
of the assessment report until 1 June 2019.

II. Conflict analysis
4.
Although the Darfur peace process remained stalled, developments in the Sudan
created an opening for relaunching the process and implementing the outstanding
provisions of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. The removal of the Pr esident
of the Sudan, Omer Hassan A. Al-Bashir, on 11 April 2019 has offered an opportunity
to address the challenges facing the Sudan in an inclusive and holistic manner,
including with regard to the long-delayed talks between the Government and the
non-signatory groups to the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.
5.
Overall, the impact of the recent political developments on the security situation
in Darfur has been moderate, despite a peak in violence in several camps for internally
displaced persons and fractures within State security forces in the immediate
aftermath of the events of 11 April. In general, the security situation remained
relatively stable, with little disruption in the trends observed since 2016. Overall,
Darfur has evolved into a post-conflict setting characterized by fragile public
institutions, facing challenges owing to criminality, a protracted humanitarian crisis
and lack of development. Important conflict drivers related to access to land and
resources, climate change and environmental degradation and violations of human
rights must be addressed further.

A.

Political analysis

1.

Darfur context: peace process and implementation of the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur
6.
The Darfur peace process reached a brief breakthrough with the signing of a
pre-negotiation agreement between the Government of the Sudan, the Justice and
Equality Movement (JEM/Gibril) and the Sudan Liberation Army/Minni Minawi
(SLA/MM), in Berlin on 6 December 2018, to resume peace talks in Doha on the
basis of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. The signing was preceded by
intensive negotiations led by the African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security
in Addis Ababa on 22 November 2018. Subsequently, in solidarity with the protests
against the Government, the signatory movements to the Berlin agreement suspended
their participation in the follow-up negotiations. For its part, the Sudan Liberation
Army/Abdul Wahid (SLA/AW) persisted in its refusal to participate in negotiations

2/19

19-08859

S/2019/445

with the Government. On 12 April, the Transitional Military Council, which had
removed the President, welcomed dialogue with the armed groups.
7.
The implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur continues, albeit
at a slow pace. While its institutional framework and related mechanisms have been
established, including the six commissions, they have yet to become fully operational
owing to lack of funding and human resources, but mostly lack of political
determination to address particular provisions. Realization of the com mitments of the
Government of the Sudan and external partners’ funding pledges to the Darfur
Reconstruction and Development Fund remain well behind schedule. There has been
some progress, however, with respect to provisions on power-sharing, the final
security arrangements and the Darfur Internal Dialogue and Consultations process. A
review of the Darfur Development Strategy is ongoing, with a view to aligning its
objectives to address the issues that remain outstanding from the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur and extending it to cover the period 2020–2025.
8.
During the reporting period, the Darfur Internal Dialogue and Consultations
process was completed in all Darfur states at the locality level and followed by a
two-day conference for internally displaced persons, held on 16 and 17 December
2018, in Nyala, South Darfur. Participants presented nine proposals to the then -VicePresident of the Sudan on key requirements for a durable solution and for sustaining
peace in Darfur.
2.

National context
9.
The recent political developments at the national level led to significant changes
in the 30-year-old system of governance in the Sudan, which had a direct impact on
Darfur. What started as protests against the Government, in Atbara on 19 December
2018, over the removal of subsidies on essential commodities, soon spread across the
country and led to the removal of the President by the Transitional Military Council
on 11 April 2019. The interim Constitution of 2005 was suspended, and a three -month
state of emergency took effect, followed by the lifting of the daily curfew, the release
of political detainees and the declaration of a countrywide ceasefire. Meanwhile,
negotiations were ongoing with the Declaration of Freedom and Change Forces, an
umbrella opposition group, and other parties on a joint transitional mechanism and
related arrangements, while protests continued in Khartoum and elsewhere. The
African Union Peace and Security Council issued a statement on 15 April demanding
the handover of power to a civilian-led transitional authority within 15 days,
subsequently extended for an additional period of up to 60 days by its communiqué
of 30 April 2019 (PSC/PR/COMM.(DCCCXLVI)).
10. Those events initially had repercussions in Darfur, where large crowds in m ajor
urban centres gathered to celebrate events in Khartoum. The demonstrators targeted
National Intelligence and Security Service facilities, perceived as symbols of the
previous Government. In El Fasher, Nyala, Zalingei, El Geneina and Ed Daein,
security forces, mainly National Intelligence and Security Service personnel,
allegedly fired shots indiscriminately to disperse demonstrators, killing at least 15
civilians and injuring hundreds. At the Kalma camp for internally displaced persons
in Nyala, South Darfur, 16 people were killed and 17 others injured, after violent
confrontations between rival groups among the population in the camp. Attacks
against National Intelligence and Security Service personnel and premises were also
reported in Nertiti and Golo, in Central Darfur, Kabkabiya, Kutum and Saraf Umra,
in North Darfur, Kass, in South Darfur, and Mournei, in West Darfur. Zalingei, Golo,
Nertiti, Kass and Kalma were the locations most affected by the recent surge in
violence after the change of regime in Khartoum. While the Darfur armed movements
welcomed the fall of the Government and supported demands for a civilian -led

19-08859

3/19

S/2019/445

transition government, they have yet to articulate a coherent position on their role in
the transition.
3.

Regional context
11. During the reporting period, prior to the developments since 11 April, the Sudan
was actively engaged in several peace processes in the region involving its immediate
neighbours, including South Sudan in June and July 2018, along with the President
of Uganda, and the Central African Republic in January and February 2019. The
ongoing conflict in Libya remains a major threat to stability in the region, however,
in particular in the Sudan, as Darfur rebel groups have become part of that conflict.
12. Following the lifting of economic sanctions by the United States of America on
17 January 2017, a second stage of engagement between the Sudan and the United
States commenced in October 2018. The negotiations focused on six tracks, including
additional progress on the cessation of hostilities in Darfur and the Two Areas,
improving humanitarian access, enhancing cooperation on counter-terrorism efforts
and making progress on realizing human rights. However, the United States has
suspended the talks pending the establishment of a civilian-led transition authority.
The Sudan is an active member of the Khartoum process with the European Union, a
platform for political cooperation and regional collaboration among the countries
along the migration route between the Horn of Africa and Europe.

B.

Security analysis

1.

Fighting between the Government of the Sudan and armed groups
13. While two of the three main rebel groups in Darfur, namely, SLA/MM and
JEM/Gibril, have lost their foothold in Darfur since 2014, they rema in active in Libya
and South Sudan. According to the Panel of Experts on the Sudan (see S/2019/34)
and the Panel of Experts on Libya (see S/2018/812), Libya is an important source of
financing for those groups, which are involved in mercenary and criminal activities.
SLA/MM reportedly has the largest presence there, with some 800 to 1,000 rebels
fighting on the side of the Libyan National Army. JEM/Gibril now co mprises some
100 to 200 fighters and, in 2018, its presence was reported in the south of Libya,
working mostly for forces against the Libyan National Army. JEM/Gibril reportedly
cooperates closely with the Union des forces de la résistance, a Chadian rebel group.
Both Darfuri groups have repeated their unilateral declarations of ceasefire every few
months since October 2015.
14. The only armed group still present in Darfur that is yet to join the political
process, SLA/AW, has been gradually fragmented by internal divisions, while its
territory has shrunk considerably and its operational capabilities significantly
reduced, following military operations by government forces. In 2018, SLA/AW lost
Boulay, in northern Jebel Marra, Golol in western Jebel Marra and Gubbo in southern
Jebel Marra. Internal divisions over the engagement in negotiations with the
Government of the Sudan have further fragmented SLA/AW and, on 1 May, several
senior officials of the movement decided to remove Abdul Wahid from his leadersh ip
position. The group is currently reported to have between 1,000 and 2,000 fighters
(see S/2019/34) who are mostly engaged in hit-and-run operations against
government security forces and attacks on nomadic tribes. Moreover, SLA/AW
support among internally displaced persons has eroded significantly during the
reporting period (ibid.), in particular in Hamadiya, Central Darfur, and Kalma, South
Darfur. SLA/AW continues to reject the Transitional Military Coun cil’s call to
participate in negotiations or to join the transitional arrangements.

4/19

19-08859

S/2019/445

2.

Security sector and rule of law issues
15. Some adjustments to the security sector have taken place, notably in addressing
militia groups and weapons control (see S/2018/530). Reports indicate ongoing
efforts to make the Rapid Support Forces a regular force (see S/2019/34), with
recruitment expanded to non-Arab communities in Darfur and tribes outside Darfur.
Nevertheless, their involvement in human rights violations, including conflict -related
sexual violence, continues (see S/2019/280).
16. The security forces continued with the weapons collection campaign launched
in August 2017, although at a slower pace and with low numbers of weapons
collected. The campaign has reportedly contributed to improving the security
environment in Darfur, in particular in towns and on main road s, whereas in rural
areas, it has been reported that few weapons have been collected. The process has
been criticized for targeting specific groups, while excluding tribal forces allied with
the Government, which are often accused of attacks on and harassment of internally
displaced persons aimed at preventing their return to their places of origin.
17. The footprint and capacity of law enforcement and rule of law institutions
outside the main urban centres continue to have a negative impact on the level o f
security. The trends identified in the previous report ( S/2018/530) continue, affecting
mostly internally displaced persons, in particular women and children. The
prevalence of crime and human rights violations and abuses, including conflictrelated sexual violence, remain major protection challenges in areas affected by
violent conflict in Darfur. Following the events of 11 April, the Transitional Military
Council dissolved the national legislature and the federal Government, replaced the
state governors with military commanders and, in response to the demands of
protestors, replaced the Attorney General and the Chief Justice.

3.

Intercommunal conflicts
18. The number of intercommunal clashes and fatalities continued to decline as a
result of the extension of State authority and reconciliation efforts by the local
government and the native administration. For the period from July 2018 to January
2019, the mission recorded a total of 10 intercommunal clashes and 30 fatalities,
compared with 14 clashes and 136 fatalities in the period between July 2017 and
January 2018. However, the conflict drivers, in particular access to land and other
natural resources, are not being addressed in a systemic way, affecting internally
displaced persons returning to their areas of origin and the relations between
pastoralist and farming communities.
19. Several intercommunal conflicts persist. In North Darfur, the dispute betwe en
the Northern Rezeigat herders and returnee farmers, mostly Tunjur and Fur, over
access to farmlands continued in Kutum, Shangil Tobaya, Tawilla, Kabkabiya and
Saraf Umra. In South Darfur, tensions between the Masalit and the Fallata over land
tenure and competition for natural resources in Graida remain unresolved, despite the
signing of a peace agreement in July 2018. Similar tensions exist between the Salamat
and the Fallata in Buram. In East Darfur, while the land -based conflict between the
Southern Rezeigat and the Ma’aliyya in Abu Karinka and Adilla remains unresolved,
progress was made with the signing of a Declaration for Peaceful Coexistence on
29 November 2018. In West Darfur, mediation efforts by the native administration
and UNAMID have facilitated the resolution of several cases of land disputes between
herders and farmers. In Central Darfur, animal theft perpetrated by SLA/AW against
the Northern Rezeigat aggravated tensions between the latter and the Fur community,
which is perceived to support the rebel group.

19-08859

5/19

S/2019/445

C.

Conflict drivers

1.

Access to land and resources
20. Land tenure and the management of natural resources have remained constant
sources of conflict, in particular in rural areas of Darfur, where tensions continue
between a mixture of customary, statutory and religious legal systems of ownership,
which are further complicated by situations of displacement. Communities that have
been driven from their lands find it difficult to formally prove customary ownership
of those areas and are consequently unable to receive compensation. Several practical
solutions have emerged at the Darfur state level, where local governments have
decided to transform some of the internally displaced persons settlements into urban
dwellings. On 5 November 2018, the Governor of North Darfur officially launched
the transformation of the camps in Abu Shouk, El Salam and Zamzam into fully
serviced residential districts. The heads of the three camps have submitted a list of
requirements for the implementation of the new housing schemes, including the
construction of schools and mosques and the creation of employment opportunities
for young people.

2.

Climate change and environmental degradation
21. Environmental degradation is among the main drivers of conflict in the Sudan,
in particular in Darfur. Scientific evidence shows that the desert spread southwards
by approximately 100 km over the past four decades, while the overgrazing of fragile
soils accelerated as the livestock population increased fivefold. F urthermore, research
indicates an ongoing long-term drying trend, with a decrease in annual median rainfall
of 15 to 30 per cent, across the Sahel to the Sudan, similar to the 1970–1990 dry
period, which led to drought and desertification and the famine of 1984–85, and which
preceded the conflict in Darfur. Chad and the Sudan are among the countries predicted
to face significant food supply gaps if the trend continues. Researchers forecast that
a new dry period will result in more people losing their liveli hoods and migrating to
cities or across borders, which, alongside the fragile state of local governance and of
traditional conflict resolution and mediation systems, could contribute to a relapse
into conflict.

3.

Human rights and protection
22. Human rights violations and abuses continue to occur across Darfur, with a
significant increase in the number of documented cases, including killings, assault,
abduction and conflict-related sexual violence, in the Jebel Marra area during the
reporting period. Internally displaced persons, especially women and children, are the
most vulnerable to attacks, mainly perpetrated by government and affiliated forces,
including the Rapid Support Forces. There is insufficient action to address violations
and abuses, in a context where State authorities are absent in several localities and
judicial institutions are weak. As a result, internally displaced persons and local
populations have expressed a lack of trust in law enforcement bodies. There has been
an upward trend in human rights violations in the Nertiti area, where conflict -related
sexual violence and sexual and gender-based violence cases are prevalent, and in the
Guldo and Golo areas, where the Rapid Support Forces reportedly burned down
dozens of villages in 2018, displacing hundreds of civilians to Kass and Nyala.
Human rights violations and abuses also persist in some localities with no active
military operations, including in areas from which UNAMID has withdrawn, such as
Jebel Moon, West Darfur, where an attack by armed militia in January 2019 resulted
in the killing and displacement of civilians.

6/19

19-08859

S/2019/445

23. Conflict-related sexual violence and sexual and gender-based violence continue
to be underreported, owing to fear and restricted access to affected areas. Confli ctrelated sexual violence, with rape constituting 80 per cent of documented cases,
occurred in both urban and rural settings, including around camps for internally
displaced persons, water points, villages of return and other remote areas. Members
of the security forces, including the Rapid Support Forces and the Sudanese Armed
Forces, were identified as perpetrators in over 30 per cent of sexual violence cases.
Impunity remains a serious concern.
24. Notable progress has been achieved in child protection, leading to the delisting
of the government security forces from the list of parties to conflict that recruit or use
children in situations of armed conflict, with the commitment by the Government to
transform the national action plan pertaining to ending and preventing the recruitment
and use of children into a national prevention plan. However, the rights, welfare and
safety of children remained major concerns, as grave violations against children,
mainly perpetrated by government security forces, continued. Killing and maiming of
children accounted for the highest number of violations affecting children, which
occurred in the context of reported attacks on civilians in Jebel Marra.

D.

Advances at risk in the context of the economic crisis
25. The current economic crisis could jeopardize some of the gains in Darfur, with
far reaching consequences for the whole of the Sudan, in particular in the aftermath
of the events of 11 April. The economic policy adjustments undertaken by the
Government to stabilize the economy prior to 11 April led to a sharp drop in the
population’s purchasing power and were insufficient to establish broad -based growth.
The Sudan remains heavily indebted, and its international reserves are limited, while
the lifting of the sanctions regime brought little relief to the country. The recent
pledge of $3 billion by Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates is expected to
alleviate the immediate crisis, but the economy is in need o f structural adjustments in
order to keep up with the demand for livelihood opportunities.
26. This situation is having a particular impact on those who are already living in
poverty, with one in four people already living below the extreme poverty line a nd
one in three (36 per cent of the population) living in poverty. The crisis has had a
major impact on the humanitarian situation. According to the latest food security
analysis, nearly 5.7 million people were estimated to be in crisis or at emergency
levels of food insecurity in the period between October and December 2018, up from
3.8 million for the same period the previous year, due to food prices having more than
doubled in 2018. Unemployment is estimated at around 22 per cent, with a much
higher rate among young people, who constitute about 60 per cent of the total
population, significantly affecting the educated and women, who played a leading
role in the recent political developments.

19-08859

7/19

S/2019/445

III. Progress on implementing the African Union Peace and
Security Council communiqué of 11 June 2018 and
United Nations Security Council resolution 2429 (2018)
and presidential statement of 11 December 2018
A.

Strategic issues

1.

Political process and impact on the mission mandate
27. The pre-negotiation agreement reached in Berlin on 6 December 2018 was a
noteworthy development in the political process and an achievement in the mandate
of UNAMID. However, while the effective impact on the Darfur talks has yet to be
assessed, the new national political dynamics would likely require a renewed
commitment by the Sudanese authorities and armed movements, as well as a
coordinated strategy between the African Union, the United Nations and other key
stakeholders involved in the mediation, to help to advance the prospects of a lasting
peace in Darfur.

2.

Two-pronged approach to reconfiguration
28. During the reporting period, the reconfiguration and drawdown of UNAMID
took place in line with the recommendations and timelines of set out in the previous
report (S/2018/530), African Union Peace and Security Council communiqué of
11 June 2018 (PSC/PR/COMM.(DCCLXXVIII)) and United Nations Security
Council resolution 2429 (2018). The mission has consolidated the two-pronged
approach by focusing on peacekeeping in the Jebel Marra area and on peacebuilding
and stabilization across Darfur. During the period from Ma rch to June 2019,
UNAMID will undertake the following: (a) reduce the military strength to 4,050
troops; (b) handover the three sector headquarters of Ed Daein, El Geneina and Nyala;
and (c) abolish 799 civilian posts and positions (94 international, 668 n ational and 37
United Nations volunteer).

3.

Assessment of the drawdown and the impact of the closure of team sites and
sector headquarters
29. Based on the assessments conducted during the joint visit by UNDP and the
Departments of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and Peace Operations and the
missions of the review team, as well as the one conducted by UNAMID and the United
Nations country team, a limited adverse impact has been reported from the drawdown
of the mission and the closure of team sites. The local population and internally
displaced persons reported that the reduction of UNAMID patrols did not
significantly affect their freedom of movement or access to livelihood services. In
some areas of East and West Darfur, internally displaced perso ns reported cases of
physical and verbal harassment by nomads. In Labado, in East Darfur, and Greida and
Al Salam, in South Darfur, there were reports of villagers being prevented from
gaining access their farms by armed nomads. In Mornei, in West Darfur, and Korma
and Um Baru, in North Darfur, the local population reported a negative impact on the
socioeconomic situation, owing to the mission’s withdrawal, in the context of the high
levels of poverty in the area.
30. Overall, community leaders reported that the security situation inside the camps
for internally displaced persons remained generally stable, however, cases of human
rights violations and abuses and minor incidents of threats, theft and looting were still
reported. Police posts are established in most of the camps, but the low number of
police officers and logistical challenges remain concerns. In some camps, community
policing volunteers who were trained by UNAMID discontinued their service owing

8/19

19-08859

S/2019/445

to a lack of incentives. Mornei, in West Darfur, and Labado, in East Darfur, are
reportedly being used as recruitment and training centres. In Korma, North Darfur,
community leaders requested that UNAMID hand over its assets to the local
community and expressed their grievances over the lack of services, such as schools
and hospitals, in the area.
31. The strategic assessment observed that the majority of the 23 team sites, which
were handed over to the Government of the Sudan during the previous phases of the
drawdown, are still occupied by the security forces, contrary to the letter of
commitment given by the local authorities on the future use of the premises, whereas
others have been abandoned and are at risk of becoming unusable if not properly
maintained. The Government has reiterated its commitment that the premises are to
be exclusively used for civilian purposes and has undertaken to expedite that process.
The mission should strengthen the protection of personnel and assets, following the
attack and looting of the UNAMID “super camp” in El Geneina on 14 and 15 May,
prior to its handover.
32. Many interlocutors noted the need for enhancing rule of law mechanisms. In
Labado, East Darfur, the absence of local courts is reportedly encouraging criminality
and impunity. In Mornei, West Darfur, communit y leaders undertook to ensure their
own security. In Um Barrou, North Darfur, the population relies on rural courts, while
in Al Salam area, in South Darfur, the level of police presence in several villages is
low and logistical challenges are hampering their work. UNAMID continues to
support the extension of State authority at the local level, including by assisting with
the establishment of the rural courts and strengthening the capacities of the police
through programmatic funding and the State liaison functions.
4.

State liaison functions
33. Considerable progress has been made in implementing the transition through the
establishment of the State liaison functions in four Darfur states (East Darfur, West
Darfur, North Darfur and South Darfur) in line with the recommendation made in the
previous report (S/2018/530), following the conclusion of 10 memorandums of
understanding and the transfer of funds to nine United Nations country team entities.
Within that framework, 58 UNAMID staff, including police advisors, have co -located
with nine United Nations agencies to jointly implement $15 million of programmatic
activities aimed at advancing three transition priorities in order to prevent a relapse
into conflict, namely, rule of law (police, justice and corrections), durable solutions
for the displaced populations and host communities, and human rights and capacity building. A UNAMID mobile team is monitoring the human rights situation in the
areas covered by the State liaison functions. About 47 per cent of allocated funds have
been either disbursed or committed in support of programmatic activities.
34. Within less than a year, the State liaison functions have proven to be promising
pilot initiatives on the integration of the United Nations system across Darfur and
have enabled the joint planning, programming and implementation of mandated
activities between UNAMID and the United Nations country team, in coordination
with government counterparts. The co-location of UNAMID staff has enhanced the
United Nations country team’s capacity in the four Darfur states. However, the shortterm nature of funding and the challenging fundraising context threaten the
sustainability of the impact, although linkages between State liaison function
activities and existing United Nations agencies projects and programmes have been
made to enhance it. Joint UNAMID-United Nations country team activities will serve
as a catalyst for further investments in critical conflict prevention and peacebuilding,
including continued humanitarian assistance as well as multi -year investments in
resilience. Under the joint leadership of the resident coordinator and the Deputy Joint
Special Representative a transition cell has been established in Khartoum to facilitate

19-08859

9/19

S/2019/445

the establishment of the State liaison functions and programme design and
implementation. Programme management and operations aspects are coordinated by
mission components in Darfur. However, coordination and communication at the
State level and in the United Nations country team in Khartoum must be enhanced.
State liaison function teams also reported challenges with implementation linked to
cash and fuel shortages caused by the overall economic crisis in the Sudan, which are
expected to continue to affect delivery.
5.

Progress on the implementation of benchmarks
35. In its presidential statement of 11 December 2018 ( S/PRST/2018/19), the
Security Council requested a streamlining of the benchmarks and indicators proposed
by the Secretary-General (see S/2018/912), while acknowledging that some were
more immediate priorities and others reflected longer-term peacebuilding objectives
in Darfur. Substantively, the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur provisions would
serve as a basis for indicators of achievement for the eventual exit of UNAMID (see
resolution 2429 (2018)). The assessment team is therefore proposing a streamlined
set of benchmarks and indicators of achievement as guidance for the period ahead, to
the exit of UNAMID, and to assist the Sudanese authorities in further focusing their
joint work with international partners beyond June 2020.
36. As indicated in the progress reports on UNAMID and the review of the
implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur ( S/2017/747, annex), the
benchmarks related to the implementation of the institutional and legislative
framework provided for in the Doha Document have been gradually completed.
However, major challenges remain in guaranteeing adequate funding and human
resources in order for mechanisms supporting its implementation to be fully
functional.
37. The State liaison functions have proven to be an enabling framework for the
Government of the Sudan and civil society to focus on priority areas for sustaining
peace. In the rule of law area, they contribute to strengthening the criminal justice
chain in the return and settlement areas, strengthening the rural courts mandated to
adjudicate intercommunal conflicts and providing mediation services, contributing to
community stabilization and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
strengthening accountability for conflict-related crimes. In the area of protection and
human rights, they present an opportunity to engage with the authorities, the National
Human Rights Commission and civil society on developing a stronger civilian
protection framework and early warning mechanisms and strengthening national
capacity in monitoring and reporting on human rights and transitional justice.
Discussions with the Sudanese authorities are ongoing on the opening of a country
office of OHCHR. An OHCHR technical assessment team visited the Sudan in early
December 2018 and subsequently submitted to the Government of the Sudan a
proposal on the establishment of a fully mandated country office. The Sudanese
authorities extended an invitation to OHCHR in April, and subsequently in May 2019,
to initiate negotiations on the draft host country agreement, but the visit was
postponed to a later date in the light of recent events.
38. Addressing the needs of internally displaced persons in a sustainable way
remains one of the pertinent challenges to preventing a relapse into conflict in Darfur.
In the 2018 United Nations humanitarian needs overview, it was noted that there were
2 million internally displaced persons in the Sudan, including 1.8 million in Darfur,
of whom 1.6 million were registered in camps. There are also 300,000 refugees from
Darfur in Chad, some of whom are currently returning. Darfur is also offering shelter
to some 147,000 South Sudanese refugees, 80 per cent of whom live in out-of-camp
settlements among host communities. Darfur state governments have offered
internally displaced persons three options to ensure their long -term needs, namely,

10/19

19-08859

S/2019/445

integration into host communities, return to their areas of origin or relocation to
another area. The implementation of those options at the state level is mixed, with
North and South Darfur states being at an advanced stage of implementation.
Internally displaced persons face ongoing challenges in terms of security, access to
lands of origin and livelihoods and lack of economic opportunities. Tensions exist
with host communities in urban areas, where the presence of internally displaced
persons has affected the communal makeup of towns and placed a strain on local
resources.

B.

Operational issues
39. During the reporting period, 11 incidents of shooting, intimidation or threats and
physical assault targeting United Nations and humanitarian personnel were recorded,
all of them criminal in nature. There were 36 denials of access and restrictions of
movement to UNAMID in areas of clashes with armed groups, of which 34 were
imposed by the Government and two by SLA/AW. There was significant improvement
in the release of shipments and issuance of visas, with only four shipments delayed
beyond the normal approval period and 97 per cent of visas approved. On 18 April,
the Transitional Military Council reassured United Nations representatives of its
support for the implementation of their mandates.

IV. Framing the exit and the whole-of-system approach
40. The strategic assessment team concluded that, while a number of challenges
remained in Darfur, there had been no strategic reversal of the positive trajectory with
regard to Darfur, since the previous mandate renewal. The recent political
developments in Khartoum, however, necessitate a responsible exit strategy for the
mission. While the current dynamics do not warrant a change of the exit date, in June
2020, the mission should implement a gradual drawdown. In that regard, activities
directly aimed at political support and mediation, conflict prevention, reconciliation
and protection must be maintained and scaled up during the transition, with a focus
on identified priority areas in Jebel Marra. It is also recommended that a human
rights-based approach underpin programmatic activities in the State liaison functions,
in particular in the areas of rule of law and protection, including advocacy and
capacity-building. An increased focus on community-based support and
accompaniment is also recommended, pending the establishment of long -term
governance structures on the basis of a national consensus on the way forward, which
is the object of the ongoing political negotiations. A review of the situation shou ld be
conducted in November 2019 to determine the appropriate course of action regarding
the pace of the drawdown of uniformed personnel and reductions in civilian
personnel.
41. The team proposes that the mission transition from prevention through
peacekeeping to prevention through peacebuilding, given that: (a) with the current
peacekeeping footprint, which as at January 2019 covers only a fraction of the Darfur
territory, UNAMID would have a minimal impact in addressing security challenges
in the region; (b) the Government of the Sudan has continued to extend State authority
across Darfur, and its security forces control the territory; (c) the withdrawal of
UNAMID in 2017 and 2018 from areas previously under its control has had only a
minimal adverse impact; (d) the prospects for a rapid resumption of the political
process that could justify retaining a security presence to accompany its security related outcome in the coming months are uncertain; and (e) the present set of
outstanding challenges will require political support, peacebuilding and stabilization
efforts. In view of the foregoing, the team concluded that peacekeeping was no longer
19-08859

11/19

S/2019/445

the most appropriate instrument in Darfur and that the conditions were met for the
drawdown to proceed.
42. The mission’s current priorities therefore must be revisited, and its mandate
during its final year of operation should focus on political facilitation, civilian
protection in the areas of deployment and the State liaison functions, as an innovative
integration mechanism of the whole-of-system approach in support of the Sudanese
authorities, aimed at playing a catalytic role in building peace. In that regard, the four
current transition priorities can serve as anchors to optimize the mandate and
reconfigure the mission accordingly. It is recommended that investments be made in
the transition and efforts on resource mobilization be intensified.

A.

Streamlining benchmarks and adjusting the posture of the mission
43. In view of the progress made in the implementation of the benchmarks and
outstanding priorities for sustaining peace in Darfur, the strategic assessment team
proposes that the benchmarks be streamlined to serve as long-term progress
indicators, beyond the departure of UNAMID, along the following three priority
areas:
(a) The political process: The review team recommends that the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission and the Secretary-General of the United Nations
develop an updated strategy on the Darfur peace process with the support of Member
States, the African Union High-level Implementation Panel, UNAMID and the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Horn of Africa. The following
benchmarks would take priority:
(i) Peace talks between parties resume with the full support of relevant
internal and external stakeholders. In this context, a number of trust -building
measures, including the lifting of the state of emergency in Darfur and renewed
commitment of the parties to participate in the talks, are necessary;
(ii) The Doha Document for Peace in Darfur commissions and the Darfur
Reconstruction and Development Fund are staffed and operational in all Darfur
states. Mechanisms are in place to ensure the accompaniment of the political
process, including the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of former
combatants and arms control;
(iii) Remaining phases of the Darfur Internal Dialogue and Consultations
process are completed and its outcomes, especially those related to the
governance system, are reflected in the constitutional process;
(b) Institution-building: The political process must be accompanied by
efforts to strengthen Sudanese rule of law institutions, which will create the
conditions necessary for a functioning administration capable of ensuring public
safety services, access to and delivery of justice, access to land and other natural
resources and respect for the fundamental rights of the population, in line with the
international obligations of the Sudan The following b enchmarks would apply:
(i) Police stations, offices of public prosecutors, courts and prison and
detention facilities are established in main areas of return and resettlement of
internally displaced persons. Those institutions should be able to perform ba sic
functions;
(ii) The Darfur Land Commission is fully functional, and the rural courts are
established and functioning in priority areas of return and resettlement and those
affected by intercommunal conflicts;

12/19

19-08859

S/2019/445

(iii) Measures are in place to ensure that the Special Prosecutor of the Special
Court for Darfur Crimes takes a balanced approach to investigations, including
in cases of conflict-related sexual violence;
(iv) The National Human Rights Commission functions in compliance with the
principles relating to the status of national institutions for the promotion and
protection of human rights (the Paris Principles) and its human rights
subcommittees are operational in Darfur;
(v) In accordance with the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, the
Government will establish unrestricted access for international and national
actors providing support and protection to internally displaced persons, refugees
and victims of conflict;
(c) Long-term support to stabilization: Reliable rule of law and police
institutions, creating durable solutions for internally displaced persons, delivering
basic services and ensuring a sustainable, rights-based approach for the Darfur
population will establish the longer-term conditions necessary for the prevention of a
relapse into conflict. These and the following benchmarks constitute long -term
objectives for the Government of the Sudan and its national and international partners:
(i) The Sudan Police Force, the Special Court for Darfur Crimes, the Office
of the Special Prosecutor and the courts and prison authorities are established
and able to execute their functions in accordance with human rights and
international standards across Darfur, with special focus on cases of sexual and
gender-based violence and child protection;
(ii) Local government institutions and the tribal administration are able to
address intercommunal and other local conflicts;
(iii) In line with the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, the Sudanese
authorities take the measures necessary to ensure the rights of freedom of
expression, of assembly and association, the right to participate in public affairs
and the right to form and participate in civil society organizations in Darfur;
(iv) Negotiations with OHCHR are concluded on the establishment of a fully
mandated country office in the Sudan.

B.

Leveraging the State liaison functions
44. The State liaison function framework has enabled UNAMID, the United Nations
country team and the Sudanese authorities to work together towards addressing
critical conflict drivers and preventing a relapse into conflict, on the basis of joint
analysis and planning. Moving forward, UNAMID should expand the use of the State
liaison functions as an entry point for integration and for enhanced ownership of the
Sudanese authorities. The recent political developments in the Sudan warrant
flexibility, adjustments to programming and closer coordination with local authorities
and partners to enhance ownership. The mission and the United Nations country team
should strengthen planning, analytical capacity, coordination and communication
with regard to the State liaison functions at all levels. It is recommended that the
mission-specific programme management and coordination functions are merged
with those of the transition cell and that the State liaison functions coordination
structure be strengthened at the Darfur level.
45. As part of the next phase of the mission drawdown in the greater Jebel Marra
area, the existing State liaison functions in North Darfur and South Darfur should be
expanded and additional State liaison functions established in Central Darfur, to al so
include Golo. All remaining UNAMID programmatic resources should be

19-08859

13/19

S/2019/445

reprogrammed to support ongoing peacebuilding activities and the State liaison
functions. It is recommended that the administrative and financial arrangements
governing the State liaison functions and the related personnel be retained until
December 2020.
46. Under the leadership of the Government and with the support of Germany, Italy,
Qatar, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the European Union
and UNDP, the revitalization of the Darfur Development Strategy commenced in
March 2019 and is expected to be finalized later in 2019. The revitalized Strategy will
serve as the overall strategy for peace consolidation by addressing conflict drivers,
stabilization and longer-term development in Darfur. As such, relevant State liaison
functions, the Peacebuilding Fund and other activities must feed into and be aligned
with the Strategy, prioritizing peacebuilding, providing fast and catalytic support and
creating a bridge with the political objectives of the benchmarks. Recommendations
of the Darfur Internal Dialogue and Consultations process should inform both the next
phase of the Strategy and ongoing peacebuilding programmes.

C.

Balancing peacekeeping and peacebuilding priorities for prevention
47. In the light of the foregoing, the strategic assessment team concluded that the
present conditions across Darfur and the outstanding challenges towards a lasting
peace are no longer of a peacekeeping nature and therefore proposed that the strategic
focus and mandate of UNAMID shift to political and peacebuilding support, in line
with the recommendations contained in the previous report ( S/2018/530). This
requires an adjustment of the mission’s posture, footprint and operational capabilities
and warrants a gradual and responsible drawdown of peacekeeping personnel and an
exit by June 2020.
Drawdown options
48. Three options are proposed for the Security Council’s consideration. Two
options consist of two phases, using the same time frames but diff erent paces of
drawdown, namely, 1 July to 31 December 2019 and 1 January to 30 June 2020. One
option has three phases, namely, 1 July to 31 December 2019, 1 January to 31 March
2020 and 1 April to 30 June 2020. In support of efforts to reach a political s ettlement,
a module composed of military observers, individual police officers and civilian staff
will interact with parties on the ground. In addition, a reserve capacity of up to one
battalion is maintained to intervene in extremis situations, such as wh en the physical
protection of civilians is required, notwithstanding access request, and Sudanese
security forces are not able to act. The three options are as follows:
(a) Option one takes into account the conflict trends of the past year and the
areas affected by the events since 11 April 2019, which are proposed for closure
during phase two. The mission will maintain a reserve of a minimum of two
companies to intervene in extremis in locations from which UNAMID will withdraw
during phase one. The following eight team sites will be closed in phase one:
Kabkabiya, Sortony, Kutum, Tawilla, Shangil Tobay, Menawashi, Khor Abeche and
Saraf Umra. At least 1,759 military personnel, 287 individual police officers and
4 formed police units will be repatriated. The closure of the remaining five team sites
(Zalingei, Golo, Kass, Nertiti and Kalma), including the repatriation of the rest of the
uniformed personnel and contingent-owned equipment will take place during phase
two;
(b) Option two follows the same rationale as option one, while adopting a
more gradual drawdown. During phase one, the following eight team sites will be
closed: Kabkabiya, Sortony, Kutum, Tawilla, Shangil Tobay, Menawashi, Khor

14/19

19-08859

S/2019/445

Abeche and Saraf Umra. At least 1,719 military personnel, 330 in dividual police
officers and 4 formed police units will be repatriated. In phase two, the mission will
close Kass and Kalma, with at least 1,009 military personnel, 90 individual police
officers and 2 formed police units repatriated. The closure of the remaining three team
sites (Zalingei, Golo and Nertiti), including the repatriation of the rest of the
uniformed personnel and contingent-owned equipment, will take place during phase
three. The mission will maintain an average reserve capacity of two compani es to
intervene in extremis in locations from which UNAMID will withdraw during phases
one and two;
(c) Option three takes into account the conflict trends of the past year and
follows a geographical rationale. In addition, it puts the onus on the Sudanes e
authorities to deliver security in some sensitive areas, while also giving the mission
sufficient time to monitor and intervene with adequate resources in case of escalation.
The mission will maintain one battalion in reserve to intervene in extremis in
locations from which UNAMID will withdraw during phase one. During phase one,
the following 10 team sites will be closed: Kabkabiya, Sortony, Kutum, Saraf Umra,
Tawilla, Shangil Tobay, Menawashi, Khor Abeche, Kass and Kalma. At least
1,759 military personnel, 420 individual police officers and 7 formed police units will
be repatriated. The closure of the remaining three team sites (Golo, Nertiti and
Zalingei), including the repatriation of the rest of the uniformed personnel and
contingent-owned equipment will take place during phase two.
49. UNAMID will gradually drawdown uniformed capacity, and the focus will be
on a controlled and coordinated exit from Darfur. The strategic assessment team
considers that the closures of team sites and repatriations in Ju ne 2020 could be
affected by the rainy season and would lead to the liquidation period being extended
beyond the end of 2020.
50. The safety and security of the logistics hub in El Fasher should be appropriately
arranged owing to its vital role in the mission’s exit and liquidation. In view of this,
the option of using uniformed personnel as a guard force for protection purposes, as
authorized by the Security Council, should be considered for use in the final
liquidation of UNAMID. In addition, the Sudanese authorities must assist, including
in ensuring security escorts from team sites to El Fasher and for shipments to Port
Sudan.
51. We propose the following benchmarks to monitor the progress, cooperation and
support during the closure of team sites and the liquidation phase from the Sudanese
authorities, who must: (a) expedite the handover of the team sites to their civilian end
users, before the condition of these facilities is deteriorated by the elements. The
future handover of sector headquarters and team sites should contain a time-bound
clause for handover to end users; (b) expedite the issuance of visas for members of
the liquidation team and export permits for all contingent -owned equipment and
United Nations-owned equipment; and (c) provide security for all mission personnel,
equipment and installations. On 13 May 2019, the Transitional Military Council
issued decree 102 of 2019 requesting the handover of UNAMID camps to the Rapid
Support Forces.

D.

Enablers of the transition to peacebuilding

1.

Ownership by the Government of the Sudan: joint planning, coordination and
monitoring structures
52. The support of the Sudanese authorities will continue to be crucial to facilitating
smooth drawdown and liquidation processes and to ensuring the timely repatriation
of mission personnel and contingent-owned equipment and the transfer and disposal

19-08859

15/19

S/2019/445

of the mission’s assets. Their cooperation will also be required in the expedited
issuance of visas for members of the additional teams providing assistance with the
drawdown and liquidation and export permits for all assets, as well as for the
protection of the liquidation team and assets following a complete repatriation of
UNAMID contingents and formed police units. To ensure better coordination with
government officials at all levels, UNAMID should revive the existing Tripartite
Coordination Mechanism at both the strategic (every 6 to 8 weeks) and working (on
a monthly basis) levels. A similar consultative mechanism at the regional and state
levels should also be established to facilitate liaison with Government authorities,
with adequate escalation mechanisms.
2.

Strengthening mission leadership and coordination with the United Nations
country team
53. In support of the sustained drawdown and liquidation activities, there is a need
to ensure adequate leadership, integration and coordination. The mission ’s
substantive planning and coordination capacity is being enhanced to oversee its exit
and the transition, including through the deployment of a dedicated surge capacity
team to support the mission and the United Nations country team. Furthermore, the
mission support component should establish an independent, standalone liquidation
planning cell, within existing resources, with a focus on coordinating and d irecting
liquidation activities. The activities must be supported by a strong communications
strategy.

3.

Funding: programmatic, Peacebuilding Fund and larger resource mobilization
54. Ensuring a smooth transition and avoiding a relapse into conflict b y addressing
the structural drivers of violent conflict in Darfur will require significant resources
over the coming decades. To that end, the Peacebuilding Fund can play an important
role in providing timely, catalytic and risk-tolerant support, alongside and in
complement to existing and envisaged programmatic funding for Darfur, including
through supporting engagement efforts of the State liaison functions and the transition
priorities identified in the revised Darfur Development Strategy.
55. Should the Sudan be declared eligible for support from the Peacebuilding Fund,
its use is envisaged in the following areas: (a) rule of law, with a particular focus on
improving access to local justice institutions and enhancing the effectiveness of rural
courts; (b) durable solutions, with a particular focus on supporting displaced
populations and returnees with land rights, livelihood opportunities and access to
justice and law enforcement services; and (c) peacebuilding for human security, with
a focus on strengthening the capacities of local government and national institutions
to promote peacebuilding and effectively address intercommunal disputes. In the first
phase of support, locally based peacebuilding programmes would be developed in a
locality in each Darfur state on the basis of an analysis of local conflict drivers and
in coordination with and support of local administration. The programmes would also
engage with existing State liaison functions and contribute to implementing the
revised Darfur Development Strategy and priorities identified during the Darfur
Internal Dialogue and Consultations process. Subsequent phases would seek to
mobilize considerable additional resources towards the implementation of the revised
Strategy.

4.

Human rights configuration and mechanisms
56. In the period ahead, it will be essential to support the Government ’s efforts to
meet its obligation of ensuring continuous protection of civilians. The remaining year
of the operation of UNAMID presents an important opportunity to engage with the
authorities and civil society on building a stronger civilian protection network and

16/19

19-08859

S/2019/445

early warning mechanisms and strengthening national capacity for monitoring and
reporting with regard to human rights violations and addressing challenges, including
through the implementation of the recommendations made in the context of the
universal periodic review mechanism of the Human Rights Council. The mission will
also continue to monitor the human rights situation in the areas of both team sites an d
the areas covered by the State liaison functions, with a view to informing
peacebuilding efforts and protection mechanisms within the United Nations country
team and contributing to the United Nations protection strategy for Darfur subsequent
to the withdrawal of UNAMID. As part of prevention efforts, the human rights
component will work closely with police and rule of law components of the State
liaison functions to maintain human rights awareness in the trainings for national
police, the judiciary and security forces. Any potential support provided to
non-United Nations security forces directly or indirectly will continue to be assessed
in line with the United Nations human rights due diligence policy.
5.

Security posture
57. With the drawdown of mission uniformed personnel and the noticeable
reduction of the mission footprint by 31 December 2019, all plans and practical
arrangements should be in place, at the latest by 31 March 2020, to facilitate the
gradual and seamless transfer of designated official functions in Darfur to the resident
coordinator.

V. Financial aspects
58. In its resolution 73/278 of 22 December 2018, the General Assembly
appropriated the amount of $715.5 million for the maintenance of UNAMID for the
period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019, inclusive of the amount of $385.7 million
previously authorized for the mission for the period from 1 July to 31 December 2018
under the terms of its resolution 72/259 B. As at 13 May 2019, unpaid assessed
contributions to the Special Account for UNAMID amounted to $160.8 million. Total
outstanding assessed contributions for all peacekeeping operations at that date
amounted to $1,989.1 million. Reimbursement of troop and formed police costs has
been made for the period up to 31 January 2019, while reimbursement of the costs of
contingent-owned equipment has been made for the period up to 31 December 2018,
in accordance with the quarterly payment schedule.

VI. Observations and recommendations
59. Over a decade ago, the African Union Peace and Security Council and the
United Nations Security Council were seized of the proposal (S/2007/307/Rev.1) of
5 June 2007 on the mandate and structure of the first ever African Union -United
Nations hybrid peacekeeping mission, UNAMID. While several conflict drivers and
grievances have yet to be addressed, the gradual improvements in the overall security
context in Darfur, and other major developments in the Sudan and the wider region,
are compelling UNAMID to adjust to new realities and proceed with its
reconfiguration and consider modalities for its exit by the end of 2020, as
recommended by the Security Council in its resolution 2429 (2018). At its inception,
UNAMID had an expansive mandate and was the largest peace operation; it has since
shifted to its current configuration, centred around the greate r Jebel Marra area. Over
the years, the mission has made major contributions to supporting the peace process,
including implementation of the Abuja Agreement and the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur, and local mediation to address intercommunal conflicts, protecting

19-08859

17/19

S/2019/445

civilians in need and facilitating the delivery of humanitarian assistance across
Darfur.
60. However, the overall situation remains challenged by the fact that, despite the
signing of the pre-negotiation agreement between the Government of the Sudan and
Darfur groups still active in the region and unilateral ceasefires extended by the
parties, a conclusive cessation of hostilities remains to be finalized. There will be no
lasting peace in Darfur without a comprehensive political solution. The events of
11 April and subsequent developments in Khartoum, including the agreement on the
transitional arrangements that sets the ambitious goal of signing a peace agreement
to end the conflicts in the Sudan during the first six months of the transition p eriod,
could provide such an opportunity. We encourage Sudanese stakeholders to abide by
those commitments and timelines and strongly believe that those events mark an
opening for the Sudan and its people, including across Darfur, to address longstanding
grievances. The African Union and the United Nations stand ready to enhance their
support to the Government and people of the Sudan at this critical juncture, to ensure
that the transition proceeds through constructive dialogue in an orderly and inclusive
fashion and that it leads to political reforms and sustainable economic recovery to the
benefit of all Sudanese people.
61. The regional environment remains fluid, in particular as armed groups in Darfur
continue to take active part in other conflicts in t he region. As UNAMID enters its
final year of operation, it is therefore imperative that regional actors remain engaged
in support of the Darfur peace process and the long -term stability of the Sudan,
including by impressing upon all national stakeholders to join the peace process, by
avoiding the proliferation of initiatives and by deterring spoilers. For our part, we
intend to develop and present to Member States in the next progress report a joint
African Union-United Nations strategy that will help to pave the way for a responsible
exit of the hybrid peacekeeping mission, identify those conflict drivers that would
require continued attention by the Government and people of the Sudan and their
regional and international partners and propose a follow-on mechanism to address
long-term political challenges and grievances in Darfur.
62. While the path to long-term stability in Darfur remains fraught with challenges,
including the continued presence of 1.8 million internally displaced persons, the
moderate impact of the recent developments in the Sudan on the political and security
situation in Darfur are an indication of the improved context, compared with that of
a decade ago, and an indication that the trajectory of the region remains immune to
major strategic reversals and therefore conductive to the pursuit of the drawdown of
UNAMID, its subsequent exit and its liquidation by the end of 2020. However, the
next phases of the drawdown must take into account possible hotspots and outstanding
conflict drivers. Accordingly, we recommend that, of the three options presented for
the Security Council’s consideration, due attention be given to option one, given that
it provides for a phased approach that would retain operational capabilities in the
Jebel Marra area and other locations affected by the recent events until the end of the
mission’s substantive mandate in June 2020. Furthermore, we appeal to the African
Union Peace and Security Council and the United Nations Security Council to give
due consideration to the proposed retention of reserve force capabilities until the
closure of the mission, to intervene in extremis for the protection of civilians in the
areas of operation of UNAMID.
63. Moving forward, in a responsible exit strategy for UNAMID, due considerat ion
will be given to the need for government institutions and their counterparts in the
United Nations country team to be properly equipped for sustaining the gains made
over the past decade in the areas of protection, rule of law, human rights and durable
solutions for internally displaced persons and local communities across Darfur.
Important steps are under way in Darfur for sustaining the gains made by UNAMID,
18/19

19-08859

S/2019/445

and we welcome the positive experience of the State liaison functions. We recommend
further investment in the transition and expansion of the State liaison functions in
Jebel Marra as an entry point for integration and for enhanced ownership by the
Government and people of the Sudan and the intensification of efforts on resource
mobilization to scale up the capacities of the United Nations country team. It is our
collective responsibility to meaningfully support the transition from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding in Darfur through the mobilization of international support, primarily
from international financial institutions. As emphasized by the recent events in the
Sudan, in the past three decades, the resilience of its social fabric and its economy
have been significantly tested, and any prospects of durable peace and successful
political transition in the country must be underpinned by immediate attention to the
country’s urgent needs in terms of economic recovery. Above all, it is imperative that
the Sudanese authorities ensure that the benchmarks for the drawdown of UNAMID
are met, including the augmentation of the United Nations human rights support
capacity in the Sudan.
64. In conclusion, we would like to express our gratitude to the African Union United Nations Joint Special Representative for Darfur, Jeremiah Mamabolo, the
mission leadership and all the personnel of UNAMID, the United Nations country
team and humanitarian partners, who continue to work collaboratively on the
transition towards the exit of the mission from Darfur. We also wish to commend the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel led by former President of South
Africa, Thabo Mbeki, for its steadfast commitment to sustainable peace and stability
in the Sudan.

19-08859

19/19
