S/PV.7003

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7003rd meeting

Wednesday, 17 July 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. DiCarlo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(United States of America)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Araud
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Sahebzada Ahmed Khan
Mr. Kim Sook
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Gasana
Mr. Kadangha-Bariki
Sir Mark Lyall Grant

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Protection of journalists
Letter dated 3 July 2013 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the United States
Mission to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2013/393)

13-39549 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1339549*

S/PV.7003

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

representatives from the world of journalism to the
Security Council today.

Adoption of the agenda

Freedom of expression is a fundamental human right
guaranteed in Article 19 of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights. It constitutes an essential pillar of
any vital society. It depends on and is nurtured by
independent and pluralistic media — the lifeblood of
democratic and informed discourse and debate.

The agenda was adopted.
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Protection of journalists
Letter dated 3 July 2013 from the Chargé
d’affaires a.i. of the United States Mission
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2013/393)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representatives
of Austria, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, the Czech Republic, Ecuador,
Greece, India, Israel, Japan, Lithuania, Malaysia, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Poland, Qatar, Senegal,
South Africa, Sweden, Switzerland, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Turkey, Ukraine and the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate
in this meeting: Ms. Kathleen Carroll, Mr. Mustafa Haji
Abdinur, Mr. Richard Engel and Mr. Ghaith AbdulAhad.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head
of the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2013/393, which contains a letter dated
3 July 2013 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the United
States Mission to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.
I welcome the Deputy Secretary-General, Mr. Jan
Eliasson, to whom I now give the floor.
The Deputy Secretary-General: I thank you,
Madam President, for convening this important
and timely debate. I also wish to commend you,
Madam, for inviting prominent and field-experienced

2

In the past decade, more than 600 journalists have
been killed while exercising their critical role in service
to society. Just 10 days ago, Somali television journalist
Liban Abdullah Farah was shot dead on his way home.
His murder drew widespread condemnation. Liban’s
assassination is not an isolated case. Today’s debate
is devoted to the protection of civilians with a special
focus on the protection of journalists in armed conflict.
But let us not forget that journalists also are at grave
risk in many non-conflict situations around the world.
In situations of armed conflict, however, these critical
representatives of the fourth estate are particularly
vulnerable. Last year in Syria, 41 journalists, including
those who use social media, were killed. In Iraq and
Afghanistan, 108 journalists have been killed since
2006. The majority of the victims are local journalists
and media staff. In many cases, murdered journalists
are covering corruption and other illegal activities. In
most cases, journalists receive threats prior to being
assassinated.
Attacks on journalists also take the forms of
abduction, hostage-taking, harassment, intimidation
and illegal arrest. Women journalists are increasingly
becoming victims of sexual harassment and rape.
Let us remember that every time a journalist is
killed by extremists, drug cartels or even Government
forces, there is one voice less to speak on behalf of the
victims of conflict, crime and human rights abuses.
Every journalist murdered or intimidated into silence is
one less observer of efforts to uphold rights and ensure
human dignity. The least we can do when a journalist
is murdered is to ensure that the death is investigated
swiftly and that justice is served. It is shocking indeed,
and unacceptable, that more than 90 per cent of the
assassinations of journalists go unpunished.
The United Nations Plan of Action on the Safety
of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity was launched
to create a free and safe environment for the media in
conflict and non-conflict situations. It was approved

13-39549

S/PV.7003

in April 2012 by the United Nations Chief Executives
Board for Coordination, with UNESCO in the lead.
The basic rationale is that protecting free media is a
prerequisite for freedom of expression and democracy.
It is also relevant to the pursuit of peace and security, as
well as development.
It should be noted that ensuring freedom of
expression and access to independent media and
information was highlighted in the report of the
Secretary-General’s High-Level Panel of Eminent
Persons on the Post-2015 Development Agenda. These
values and principles are essential if we are to ensure the
rule of law and effective institutions. Well-functioning
and honest institutions are fundamental to development
and prosperity.
The first phase of the United Nations Plan of Action
on the Safety of Journalists includes implementation in
selected countries, but let me emphasize that the need
is equally great in many other countries. The Plan of
Action is based on a multidimensional, multi-actor
approach. It relies on participation and support from
Governments, particularly through Ministries of
Information, as well as from local media, civil society
and academia. All United Nations entities are also
encouraged in the Plan of Action to submit information
that contributes towards greater safety for journalists
and media staff.
The Security Council, too, can play an important
role by reacting to and standing up against suppression
of media freedom wherever and whenever it occurs.
When journalists are killed, information about threats to
international peace and security is often buried. When
addressing situations on its agenda, the Council may
therefore wish to particularly consider the targeting of
journalists and other threats to freedom of expression.
Let me end by quoting the Secretary-General on
this year’s World Press Freedom Day in May. He said,
“All journalists, across all media, need to be able to do
their jobs. When it is safe to speak, the whole world
benefits.”
The President: I thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral for his statement.
I now give the floor to Ms. Carroll.
Ms. Carroll: I thank you, Madam, for the
opportunity to talk about an important subject — the
right of journalists around the world to work without
threat or peril.

Everyone who walks into the main newsroom at
the global headquarters of the Associated Press (AP)
here in New York passes our Wall of Honor, a softly
lit display of photographs and biographies of the
31 AP journalists who have died on assignment since
the organization was founded 167 years ago. I pass it
every morning, frequently pausing to look at the faces
of the five men killed on my watch as editor: Nazeh
Darwazeh, killed on 19 April 2003 while filming a
confrontation between Israeli soldiers and Palestinians
in the West Bank city of Nablus; Saleh Ibrahim, shot
to death on 23 April 2005 as he arrived to cover an
explosion in the Iraqi city of Mosul; Aswam Ahmed
Lutfallah, shot to death by insurgents as he filmed their
gunfight with police in Mosul on 12 December 2006;
Ahmed Hadi Naji, who left home astride his red-andwhite motorbike on the way to the AP Baghdad office
and disappeared — his body was found in a morgue six
days later, on 5 January 2007; he had been shot in the
back of the head; and Anthony Mitchell, headed home
to Kenya from a West Africa reporting trip when the
plane he was on crashed in Cameroon on 5 May 2007,
killing all aboard.
Like those five men, most of the 31 people on our
Wall died covering conflict, beginning with the 1876
Battle of the Little Big Horn in the United States.
They fell during the Spanish-American war in Cuba,
the Russo-Japanese War, the Korean conflict and the
Second World War, which claimed five AP journalists.
Another five died in Vietnam.
Many were shot to death — in an ambush, a riot or at
a checkpoint; captured, tortured and shot by the Nazis.
Two were attacked by mobs during civil unrest. Others
were mortally wounded by mortars or shells. One went
down on a warship, another on a refugee ship. Others
were lost in plane crashes or one of many helicopter
crashes, including the 1993 crash in Afghanistan that
took the life of the only woman on the Wall of Honor,
my friend Sharon Herbaugh.
We bring visitors to the Wall of Honor and it is
important to explain why this is such a special place
to us. These people are part of our professional family.
They are in my head and heart each time we send AP
journalists off into the world’s many treacherous spots.
But more often, journalists are not heading off to
an assignment in a treacherous spot. That dangerous
assignment is the country they call home, and the
threat is not from war. Indeed, most journalists who die

13-395493

S/PV.7003

today are not caught in some wartime cross-fire; they
are murdered just because of what they do. And those
murders are rarely ever solved; the killers rarely ever
punished.
The Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ)
documents the attacks on journalists each year, and
its annual accounting is grim indeed. More than
30 journalists are murdered every year, and many
are abducted and tortured first. In the overwhelming
number of cases — 90 per cent — the killers go
unpunished, free to attack and kill again. CPJ has found
that most murdered journalists — 5 in 6 — are killed in
their own hometowns covering local stories concerning
crime and corruption. They are attacked by people who
know their work, and often know them personally. The
journalists are menaced, arrested, beaten again and
again; their families or colleagues threatened.
The attacks frequently escalate and some
journalists flee their homeland for an exile’s life.
Others are jailed, sometimes for years. Some disappear
off the face of the Earth. Many — too many — turn up
dead: 12 in Somalia last year alone, five in Pakistan,
four in Brazil, three in Syria, others in Russia, Nigeria,
Cambodia, Bangladesh, Thailand, Ecuador, India and
the Philippines.
So why should the world’s leaders care about
threats against journalists? Many officials the world
over complain that journalists are headstrong and nosy.
They ask questions, they write stories and take pictures
that do not always sit well with the powerful people they
cover. They aim their cameras at things some people
do not want the world to see. Yet journalists represent
the ordinary citizen. They ask questions on behalf of
those people. They go to places the people cannot go
to, and they bear witness. An attack on a journalist is a
proxy for an attack on the ordinary citizen — an attack
on that citizen’s right to know information about their
communities and their institutions.
It is true that, today, a journalist’s tools are
readily available to those average citizens. They have
smart phones, cameras and satellite transmissions,
and many make important contributions to news
coverage. Indeed, authenticated images and reports
from deep inside Syria — some by average citizens,
some by partisans — have contributed to the world’s
understanding of the fighting in that country in the past
two years. Their work enriches what we learn about the
world every day; yet, the threat to them can be just as

4

great as the threat to professional journalists. Who will
protect them? And, closest to our hearts here, who will
protect the reporters and photographers and editors and
radio commentators and television hosts — the men and
women who swallow fear every day, who constantly
calculate the risks of simply doing their jobs, wondering
if the next breath will be their last?
The safety of journalists is not a political topic or a
professional rallying cry for me, it is deeply personal.
The journalists we have lost all left families behind,
often with young children who grow up with only
the faintest memory of a parent who will never come
home. As much as I want to, I know that I cannot
personally protect all the AP journalists at work in
every corner of the globe. But, every day, I try to do it
anyway — because there are 31 photos on the AP Wall
of Honor, and 31 pictures is enough.
The President: I thank Ms. Carroll for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Abdinur.
Mr. Abdinur: My name is Mustafa Haji Abdinur.
For the past seven years, I have been a reporter for AFP
in Somalia. Like so many others in my profession, on
the dusty streets of Mogadishu they call me a dead man
walking. Day after day, I tell stories to the world of
the people of Somalia, the troubles they face and their
hopes for the future. But today I sit here having carried
with me the stories of my comrades and colleagues,
my fellow journalists who paid the ultimate price for
reporting from those same streets.
I speak from experience as a journalist in Somalia,
but I also want to speak for all the journalists in Syria,
Brazil, Egypt, Pakistan and many other countries, great
and small, who have been killed, are missing or have
been harrassed over the years.
My story is not unique. I am here today simply
because I am lucky and because the gunmen that have
killed so many of colleagues — my friends — have not
yet found me. As a journalist, it is just a waiting game.
It is not a question of if, but of when. You report the
news, but in Somalia, all too often, it is the reporters
themselves who become the story. If we come back
home alive, we cherish that extra day with our wives
and children, and hope that luck remains for the next
day too.
Somalia’s civil war began more than two decades
ago. Since then, nearly 60 journalists have been killed
covering one of the world’s worst and longest-running

13-39549

S/PV.7003

humanitarian crises. Last year, 18 were killed. So far
this year, four have died.
Journalists face threats from all sides: there is no
single enemy. How safe is it to speak when a security
official can throw a journalist into prison simply because
he is not pleased with a story? How safe is it to speak
when a young boy armed with a pistol can walk along
your path and shoot you? There is no ordinary route to
work, you must change where you walk each day. You
wait for your turn to come, because the gunmen are out
there waiting for you.
My fellow journalists who have been killed all
knew the risks. They have paid the price because they
wanted to tell the story. They have paid the price for
telling the truth.
When I pick up my cell phone I feel sad, because
their contacts are saved there, as though I could still
dial their number and speak to them. I do not delete
their names just because their lives have been ended
by the killers. Instead, I wait for the day when justice
will be served and the guilty punished for shooting the
messenger. Sometimes, the authorities do make a few
arrests. However, rarely do they result in conviction
and punishment. The perpetrators of these grim crimes
remain free to kill again with impunity.
In such a terrible situation, it is fair to ask: “Why
become a journalist?” Indeed, why do we risk our lives
to bring news to the world?
There is no doubt that without a free press there can
be no freedom for a country. I tell the Council that we
have a higher objective for good and that by doing our
jobs we feel that we are saving lives. We need the media
for our troubled country to grow and to help inform,
provide laughter with entertainment, provide education
with information, and play our role in building peace.
We talk to all sides in the conflict, providing the
platform for the debate and political discourse that will
shape the future.
When a journalist is killed, the news dies too. A
whole society can be forgotten simply because there is
no one left to tell its stories.
The concern here is, how long can the bravery of
Somali journalists and their determination continue?
We are few remaining. What participants discuss here
today will help save lives. Action can be taken.

Rebuilding the justice system is a long-term
challenge for Somalia, but the international community
can still help. In Somalia there is no effective justice
system to protect journalists. There are concerns about
possible restrictions in a draft media law. Immediate
steps can be taken towards ensuring effective and
impartial investigations into the murders of journalists,
and the prosecution of those responsible. We need
support and training. We are citizens who want to
report the truth.
I am just one man — a reporter — but the voices of
the people I speak to and the stories I write go out on
my news wire to be read all around the world.
Many colleagues have had to leave Somalia, fleeing
the country for safer lands. I remember my friend
and colleague Mohamed Ibrahim Rageh. He fled the
country in 2008 and sought asylum in Uganda, fearing
for his life. But he was a brave man, and he changed
his mind and came back home. He once told to me,
“Perhaps I want to die telling the news.” Unfortunately,
earlier this year, they shot him dead while playing with
his daughter in front of his house.
All of my colleagues who have been killed had one
thing in common: they were committed to telling the
story of their country to the rest of the world. Sitting
here today, I want to say that we will not fail that
dream. We will never be discouraged. We will stay the
course and continue telling the world about the crises
in our country, to help save lives, and to develop peace.
But even sitting here, so far away from my home on the
other side of the world, in such a very different situation
as compared to life in Mogadishu, is not without risk.
In showing my face to the Council and the world, I
increase the threat of becoming a target when I go back
home. But I am a journalist. They may call me a dead
man walking, but I report the news.
The President: I thank Mr. Abdinur for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Engel.
Mr. Engel: My name is Richard Engel. I work for
NBC News as the chief foreign correspondent. I have
been working in this very bizzarre business of ours for
about 17 years. I usually go from one trouble spot to the
next. I know several of the people who are also speaking
today — Ghaith — and I just met Mustafa earlier. I
commend him for speaking today, because working
in Mogadishu is truly a very dangerous experience.
Hopefully, he is not a dead man walking.

13-395495

S/PV.7003

What I want to talk about today is, who is a
journalist. I want to thank the people in the Chamber
for taking up this very important cause. I know there
are a lot of important issues going on in the world.
For us in this business, this is one that is dear to our
hearts and something we think about every day. It is
really important for freedom and democracy and the
spreading of information and knowledge.
For the past 17 years, I have been going from place
to place. I have had some bad experiences. About six
months ago, I was kidnapped in Syria. In a gunfight,
we managed to escape. Some of the people who were
holding us were killed in that gunfight. I have been
detained many times by different Governments, and I
have been denied visas. I am therefore familiar with the
environment that foreign journalists work in.
I had a moment of clarity, if you will — or a
moment of confusion, I think I should say — not long
ago. I was in Turkey, covering Taksim Square. There
were ongoing clashes between the people in the Square
and the police. We were there filming the clashes and
trying to talk to the activists and to talk to the police,
who actually did speak to us, despite all the tear gas.
As I stepped back a little bit, I looked around at
the scene. There were people with big cameras, there
were people with small cameras, and there were people
with cell phones. There were some people with cell
phones who wore gas masks who were clearly part of
the conflict and of the clashes that were ongoing. There
must have been a dozen or two dozen people filming the
clashes, which involved maybe a few hundred people.
As I looked at that very confusing situation, I
thought to myself, who are all these people? Are
they all journalists? And I thought, from the police’s
perspective — which is not a perspective one would
expect journalists to think from — this must be very
confusing. They do not know who we all are; we are
wearing gas masks. Some people were wearing what
looked like professional gas masks, and some people
had just painters’ masks on. And there were people
with cell phones, and some people, as I said, had stones
and cell phones in their hands. It was very confusing.
What I want to do today is to maybe offer some
concrete ideas about protecting journalists. I think in
order to do that one has to examine the question of
who is a journalist. With that preface, let me go to my
prepared remarks.

6

Protecting journalists these days is hard, perhaps
harder than ever, because one has the tackle the question
of who is a journalist and who is an activist in way that
never existed before.
If one goes back 50 years or even just 15 years,
journalists were well known. We carried badges that
identified where we worked. We were guests on the
diplomatic scene. We dined with ambassadors in garden
courtyards in Cairo and Bombay. I did that myself many
times; it was very pleasant. We were considered a league
of special people who needed to be protected because
our jobs often upset powerful and dangerous people. We
were like diplomats in a way, posted to far-away places,
and we needed a kind of special status so we could stay
objective. Diplomats such as Council members have
immunity so that they cannot be tried in local courts,
because they will often tell Governments the kind of
information they do not want to hear. Journalists had a
more informal but generally understood status so that
we could do the same thing for our readers and our
viewers. That is the way it worked for over a century,
since the Battle of Little Bighorn.
Now, let us go back to that scene in Taksim Square.
There are bloggers. There are tweeters. There are
freelancers who see themselves as activists. There are
freelancers who actually join rebel groups, and some
of them carry guns. If the discussion today is about
protecting journalists, one must first decide who gets
that protection. Who deserves it, and who forfeits it?
Over the past couple of years, I have often spent
quite a bit of time with the opposition — the rebels — in
Syria, and many of them carry cameras. The ones who
carry the cameras call themselves journalists, but in
general they are not journalists; they are rebels with
cameras. They are part of the fight.
I have a general rule, which I think might be useful
for some here. If one cannot or will not write an article
that goes against one’s cause, then one is not a journalist
and does not deserve to be treated like one. What one
is doing should fall under the protection of free speech,
which is a much broader and an important discussion
to have. But today we are not talking about just free
speech; we are talking about protecting reporters. And
the test goes both ways.
Consider a reporter who works for a State television
station — a Syrian television station, since I used the
Syrian rebels as an example. That reporter most likely
cannot or will not write against his Government. If he

13-39549

S/PV.7003

does not, then he probably fails the test as well. He is
not a journalist either. I am not saying that these two
people — the rebel with the camera and the State
broadcaster — deserve to be mistreated, but they both
are fundamentally different from journalists.

is not recognized anymore. I think it should be. Just
as the representatives in the diplomatic community
need protection to be objective, if the international
community wants professionals who are also objective,
we need some protection as well.

This is where it gets more complicated. What about
the freelancers and activists? Consider this case. It is a
hypothetical case, but I have seen many people just like
this. There is a young activist who uses Twitter and he
gets arrested in Egypt. This theoretical writer-activist
is anti-Government, anti-police. His tweets are full of
four-letter words telling the police exactly what they
should do to themselves. This is his life, this is probably
what he does all the time.

I think it is important to pick one’s battles. Perhaps
there should be two types of campaigns: one to protect
free speech for activists who use the media in order to
advance their causes and their beliefs, whatever those
causes may be, and the other for a renewed commitment
to defend dedicated and trained professionals who
take risks to deliver the kind of information Council
members need to make their decisions.

But this activist — and here is the key difference — is
good at what he, or she, does. They get good information,
and it is usually correct, and this person has some 15,000
followers on Twitter. They have a small audience, but
they do have an audience. Then they are arrested. What
do we do? Does one consider him or her a journalist,
does one offer them the protection of a journalist? Does
one demand his release, perhaps on the grounds of free
speech or of political expression? I do not think just
because a person knows how to use Twitter he or she
is necessarily a journalist, but just because one does
use Twitter does not mean one is not a journalist. It is
a judgement call, but I think somebody needs to make
that call.
This is not just a theoretical judgement call. It has
real consequences. This why the distinctions are so
important.
These days Governments, tyrants, dictators and
even democracies seem to be happy with all of this
ambiguity because we can all be lumped into the
category of troublemakers. We are all bloggers and
punks and rebels with cameras. We are all lumped into
the same, generally negative, harmful category called
the media. There is absolutely no respect for career
journalists. We are arrested, we are detained, we are
harassed, we are kidnapped. We are killed. Before, if
a Government wanted to deport a major correspondent
from an American television network or a newspaper
or a news agency, it did so knowing there would be
consequences. Today, several Governments routinely
do that, and worse.
I think a big reason why is because we are all
just troublemakers. We are all part of the same
nebulous category, and the guild of professionals

The President: I now give the floor to Mr. AbdulAhad.
Mr. Abdul-Ahad: I feel overwhelmed by all the
speeches given here. I do not know if I can add anything.
The point is, journalists have been killed since the
beginning of conflict. The fact that one is standing
there in a conflict between two warring parties means
one is asking for trouble. One exists in that war zone.
Yet, in the past decade or maybe earlier, there has been
a systematic hunting down of journalists, who are
being killed, detained, chased, tortured and sometimes
treated as commodities. Many foreign journalists in
my country, Iraq, have been mistreated in some such
fashion just because they are foreigners.
We have lost sight of the fact that we are just
journalists, just professionals trying to tell our stories,
like doctors, like nurses, like anyone else. We have
become a way to pressure, to influence the conflict
from one side or the other. I do not mean only warlords
or rogue elements or any particular group. People
who kill, detain or capture journalists have a sense
of immunity. The helicopter pilot who kills a camera
man is never questioned; he never pays for that. The
tank commander who kills another journalist is
never captured. The officials who detain, torture and
intimidate people are never brought to trial. They are
never shamed in public, in front of the world. It creates
a sense, among us and in me, that maybe we deserve
that. Maybe we are asking for trouble by being there.
We are asked why we go there. Is it just to tell a
story, just to witness a conflict? Is it hubris? I personally
would have replaced a van full of journalists with one
nurse in Mogadishu during the famine, but we have to
be there. We are there. We are telling a story. I do not

13-395497

S/PV.7003

mean that in this era we have an exclusive right to tell
the story. Many people tell it, so we do not have that
exclusivity anymore. But why are they targeting us?
Why are they chasing us?
When I was in solitary confinement in Libya, the
jailer would come to talk to me every night and tell me:
it is you journalists who have started all these troubles,
it is you journalists who have created that. I would try
to explain to him, from behind the bars: If it was not for
your people in revolution against your dictator, if it was
not for the people, the masses, going out on the streets,
I would not be there. If it was not for your oppression in
certain States, if it was not for your killing, the famine
there, we would never go there. We would be sitting
happily in our countries and writing from behind a
desk. But the fact that there is oppression brings us into
that conflict and makes us part of it.
To go to the main point here, I think there is a sense
of immunity about killing a journalist. I know very well
that my good friend in Mogadishu is worth a bullet.
One bullet and he will be killed, and no one will be
questioned after that bullet. And it is not only us, the
foreign journalists. When I was detained in Afghanistan
I had the entire Guardian newspaper working to release
me. The United Nations was involved in releasing me
from Libya. But what about the people who work in
the conflict, the local journalists — Iraqis, Somalis,
Afghans, Egyptians, from all over the world — those are
the people we leave behind. We pay them handsomely
for their services, and we leave them to be ground
under the wheels of civil war, the wheels of famine.
Those are also people who are part of this community
of journalists, who deserve to be protected.
I think this is an amazing opportunity — to be
honest, I am really overwhelmed — for the Security
Council to make an effort to recognize journalists
as part of a humanitarian effort to tell a story. Many
participants here hate us, by the way, and I know that.
I think it is a sign that we are doing our job properly if
we have managed to piss them off. But there has to be
some sort of balance. Let us be there, let us be treated
as human beings. Just do not kill us.
The President: I thank Mr. Abdul-Ahad for his
briefing. I would like to thank all our briefers today for
their thoughtful and very moving comments.
I now give the floor to members of the Security
Council.

8

Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
you, Madam President, for holding this important
debate today. I would also like to warmly thank the
Deputy Secretary-General for his valuable briefing
and the representatives of the media — Mr. Engel,
Ms. Carroll, Mr. Abdinur and Mr. Abdul-Ahad — for
sharing their moving experiences and powerful insights
with the Security Council this morning.
Journalists help to shape our understanding of the
world by providing accurate, impartial reports of what
is happening around us. That is particularly important
in conflict areas, where access to information is
challenging and often inconsistent. Journalists often
place themselves in dangerous situations in order to
reveal the facts. They go where most of us are unable to
go in order to report and reveal. They seek out and bear
witness to human rights violations and the violation of
international laws. That is why they should have the
freedom to report the news without fear of reprisal or
being targeted.
Unfortunately, journalists, human rights defenders
and non-governmental organizations promoting
freedom of expression continue to be specifically
targeted across the world. Last year was one of the
bloodiest on record with regard to journalists’ deaths.
One hundred and twenty-one were killed and more
than 200 imprisoned. Eighteen of those killings were
in Somalia alone. And not much has changed this year.
Many here will recall the murder of the journalist
Liban Abdullahi Farah only a few weeks ago. Liban
worked for the London-based channel Kalsan TV. He
filed a series of reports on the election campaigns
in Puntland in Somalia. Liban was shot six times
in the neck and chest by three gunmen. His murder
demonstrates that exposing injustice and abuse often
takes journalists to unsafe places, where they are at
greater risk of random violence as well as intentional
targeting. In Syria, eight journalists have been killed
this year alone, and at least 39 since the conflict began.
Case after case of journalist killings around the globe
underscore that murder is the most brutal form of
censorship. It is our moral duty to protect those who
risk their lives in the name of truth, justice and human
rights.
The United Kingdom is deeply committed to
the protection of civilians in situations of conflict,
including the protection of journalists, and fully
supports resolution 1738 (2006). Deliberate targeting

13-39549

S/PV.7003

of journalists, media professionals and associated
personnel who are reporting on armed conflicts and
not directly participating in hostilities is unacceptable.
All parties to an armed conflict must comply fully
with their obligations under international law related
to the protection of civilians, including journalists,
media professionals and associated personnel. As
the Council reaffirmed in February’s presidential
statement (S/PRST/2013/2), journalists should not be
differentiated from civilians and should be respected
and protected as such under international humanitarian
law.
International journalists can and do try to mitigate
the risks of working in conflict zones, as we have
heard. Civil society plays an important role in assisting
journalists in that regard. For example, the Committee
to Protect Journalists has published a security guide
that suggests ways journalists can protect themselves
while covering armed conflict, organized crime and
corruption, including guidance on security training,
protective gear and satellite technology. Columbia
University here in New York has supported valuable
research on the psychological trauma that journalists
may face in their work and on measures to address it.
But despite heightened awareness, killings are on
the rise. Danger is compounded by the failure of States
to prosecute those who kill journalists. That culture
of impunity, which all the journalists have spoken
about today, must end. In countries where justice for
such crimes is left unaddressed, there is clear evidence
that systematic violence against the press recurs year
after year. States must do more, not only to protect
journalists but to bring to justice those who kill them.
Media outlets should also do more to develop and
sustain safety provisions for their staff.
The international community must also do its
part. Journalists provide an invaluable service to the
United Nations, particularly the Security Council, by
reporting on situations that threaten peace and security.
The United Nations has produced a plan of action on
the safety of journalists and the issue of impunity. The
United Kingdom fully supports the plan, which will
help States develop legislation and mechanisms to
allow for freedom of expression and support efforts to
implement existing international rules and principles.
We encourage all Member States to work together with
the United Nations to implement its provisions.

It is a sad irony that the deaths of journalists and
support staff are themselves underreported by the
media. The vast majority of journalists killed are local
reporters whose murders go almost entirely unnoticed.
They simply become statistics. That group often has no
access to the protection and guidance offered by large
media and civil society organizations. They are the
most at risk and the most in need of support. And as
we have heard, most of them are not killed in armed
conflict; only about one in four are killed in war zones.
The great majority are killed in their own countries in
times of peace, covering serious public-interest issues
such as corruption and crime. That is deplorable. The
murder of journalists is an attack on democracy and on
the goal of promoting free speech.
In every part of the world, during times of peace
and conflict, journalists broadcast the people’s voice.
The Council must recognize and support that goal. We
must continue to take steps to protect journalists and
enable them to report, for their reporting is one crucial
element in the difficult path towards peace.
Mr. Kadangha-Bariki (Togo) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you, Madam, for organizing this
debate on the protection of journalists in armed conflict.
I would also like to thank the four journalists who
shared their moving stories. Finally, I thank the Deputy
Secretary-General for his briefing on the situation.
Journalists work in increasingly dangerous
situations, risking their lives in war zones in their
professional capacity to report on the horrors of conflict
and violations of humanitarian law and international
human rights law. In 2012 alone, 121 journalists were
killed and more than 200 imprisoned. In 2012, the
murder of journalists in armed conflict increased by
49 per cent, by comparision with 2011.
We have seen and heard Kathleen Carroll’s long
list, which we found very touching. The story told by
Mr. Mustafa spoke eloquently about the risks taken
by journalists in armed conflict. However, ever since
the Hague Convention of 1907, journalists have been
protected by international humanitarian law. This was
followed by the 1949 Geneva Conventions and their
1997 Additional Protocols, as well as by resolution 1738
(2006), not to mention situation-specific resolutions
and presidential statements adopted by the Security
Council.
Togo welcomes the initiatives taken by regional
entities, including the African Union workshop on

13-395499

S/PV.7003

security and the protection of African journalists,
to reaffirm their dedication to defending liberty and
freedom of information, including in times of war and
danger. My delegation believes that these initiatives
should contribute to the establishment of a legally
binding regional instrument, ensuring the protection of
journalists in situations of armed conflict.
Despite their protection, attacks on media
professionals are linked to the inadequacy of their
protection, wartime practices, the very objectives of
journalism itself, and impunity. As far as the inadequacy
of protection measures is concerned, the responsibility
may lie with the decision taken in 1975 to consider
journalists as civilians, rather than according them
special status so as to avoid weakening the protection
of civilians. Progress in communications over the past
20 years has allowed information in modern conflicts
to be used as a weapon of war that belligerents either
covet or destroy, even as they target the journalists who
furnish it.
When it comes to wartime practices, belligerents
want to cover up proof of atrocities, prompting them
to intimidate and silence journalists so that they can
escape prosecution. Moreover, in order to protect
themselves, journalists sometimes bear arms or are
accompanied by armed forces, undermining the
protection from which they could benefit. As to the
objectives of journalism, journalists’ efforts to remain
impartial may be misperceived by belligerents, who
may rightly or wrongly overestimate the subjectivity
of the information provided by journalists, and thus
identify the latter as enemies.
Furthermore, in an effort to remain competitive,
news agencies may step up pressure on journalists
to take unjustifiable risks. Finally, the impunity of
perpetrators in carrying out attacks against journalists
largely explains continued violations of their protected
status in situations of armed conflict. Punishing the
perpetrators of such violations effectively would serve
as a real deterrent to non-State armed groups that
do not feel bound by international laws protecting
journalists. National armed forces may also be guilty
of such violations. They should also bear a large part of
the responsibility.
Togo feels that the protection of journalists in
situations of armed conflict goes beyond States and
requires the undivided attention of the United Nations
and the Council with a view to identifying more
protective regulations, which should be adapted to
10

modern realities. The Council should include the issue
of the protection of journalists in situations of armed
conflict on its programme of work more frequently.
Togo also recommends including modules on
the protection of journalists in armed conflict within
curriculums for training national armed forces and
soldiers in peacekeeping operations.
Mr. Li Boadong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson for his briefing. I
have listened very carefully to statements by the four
journalists.
During armed conflicts, journalists and media
professionals represent a very distinct group of people.
They are vulnerable civilians on the front lines of
conflict, providing first-hand and timely information
from the field. They often face injury, kidnapping and
even death, taking enormous risks, including with
their lives. China condemns all acts of violence against
journalists in armed conflict and calls on parties to
conflict to stop deliberate attacks against journalists
and to support the effective measures adopted by the
international community to protect journalists during
armed conflict. I should like to make four observations
in that respect.
First, the protection of journalists in armed
conflict is an important part of the protection of
civilians undertaken by the international community.
Like civilians, journalists are not involved directly in
hostilities and as such they should enjoy the protection
of international humanitarian law. The relevant
resolutions and presidential statements adopted by
the Council have established the basic principles and
frameworks for the protection of journalists in armed
conflict. The full implementation of the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council is an effective way
for the international community to protect journalists
in wartime.
Secondly, the countries concerned should assume
the primary responsibility for the protection of
journalists in conflicts. The Governments of those
countries have the primary responsibility for protecting
civilians on their territories, including journalists. By
protecting journalists in conflict, the international
community must respect the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the countries concerned. At the same time,
arties to the conflict should fulfil their obligations
under the Geneva Conventions and do their best to
prevent and stop journalists from being harmed. They

13-39549

S/PV.7003

should also investigate and punish the perpetrators
who have harmed journalists and violated international
humanitarian law. The judicial systems of the countries
concerned should play their full role in promoting the
protection of journalists.

Every year, more journalists are being killed in
bringing news and information to the public. The
majority of these victims are local media workers
covering local stories. In most cases, these killings go
unpunished, and often almost unnoticed.

Thirdly, all agencies and organs of the United
Nations should enhance their coordination and
cooperation in jointly promoting the protection of
journalists in conflict. China appreciates the efforts
of UNESCO, the Human Rights Council and other
agencies to safeguard the legitimate rights and interests
of journalists and to implement the United Nations
Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the
Issue of Impunity. We hope that in fulfilling their
respective functions, all United Nations agencies will
work in synergy to avoid duplication and improve
efficiency. Media professionals should also abide by
their professional code of conduct and the principle of
impartiality and objectivity in their coverage, and avoid
siding with one party and even fanning the violence.

Journalists in conflict situations face unique risks.
Whereas local populations may flee areas of intense
fighting, journalists are drawn towards them. For
reporters, proximity is necessary to ensure objective,
first-hand reporting of the causes and consequences of
conflict, and to challenge partisan views. Journalists
are often the first to draw attention to violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights.
History shows that the deliberate targeting of journalists
is a tactic often employed by parties to a conflict who
do not want their actions exposed; it is a precursor to a
situation spiralling out of control.

Fourthly, with a view to the peaceful resolution
of conflict, the Security Council should adopt an
integrated conflict-prevention and peacebuilding
strategy that enhances the protection of civilians,
including journalists. The Council shoulders the
weighty responsibility of maintaining international
peace and security. People around the globe have
high expectations of this organ. From my own three
years of experience in the Council, I feel deeply that
it should abide by the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter; be steadfast in promoting
cooperation, achieving common security and lasting
peace; and provide civilians with the best and most
effective protection. On the basis of these principles,
China will become more deeply involved in the work
of the Council in peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. We will work with other Member
States in enabling the Council to play a greater role in
maintaining international peace and security.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening what is obviously a very
important debate. I would also like to thank the Deputy
Secretary-General and our guest speakers for their very
compelling testimonies, each of which underscored
the indispensable role that journalists play in bearing
witness to conflict, and the extraordinary risks they
take — knowingly — to report to us. I can only hope
that our own comments do not fall too short of the
strength of the imperatives they have identified.

Journalists bring the humanitarian cost of conflict
into stark relief. News stories and images make the
consequences of our own inaction harder to ignore.
Ideally, they can compel Governments and bodies such
as the Council to take action, although this is not always
the case, as we see today in Syria. But they did, for
instance, help create the environment for the adoption
of the principle of the responsibility to protect civilians
against mass atrocity crimes.
Syria provides a tragic illustration of the impact of
conflict on journalists. It is now the most dangerous
country on Earth for journalists. Forty-one died there in
2012; some were deliberately targeted. Mali registered
the biggest fall in press freedom in 2012 after the
military coup and the takeover of the north by armed
groups.
It is not just traditional journalists who face
threats. As we have heard this morning, those engaged
in new media, citizen reporters and bloggers also
find themselves in danger. The rights of freedom of
expression, opinion and association must be respected
both online and offline. Parties to armed conflict must
uphold all applicable international laws to protect
civilians, including those that apply to journalists.
They must do their utmost to prevent violations of
international humanitarian law against journalists. The
Council acknowledged this in resolution 1738 (2006).
Our recent presidential statement on the protection of
civilians (S/PRST/2013/2) in February reiterated the
Council’s resolve in this respect.

13-3954911

S/PV.7003

We believe the Council can do more to protect
journalists in conflict situations. As the SecretaryGeneral notes in his most recent report on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict (S/2012/376), the Council
has made very few references to attacks against
journalists in situation-specific resolutions. Therefore
we welcome the inclusion in resolution 2102 (2013)
establishing the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia of a reminder to the Government of Somalia
of its obligation to protect journalists. This should be
a template.
The Council can also assist by mandating
peacekeeping missions to address the freedom and
protection of journalists in their support to rule-of-law
institutions and, as the representative of Togo has just
recommended, by ensuring the necessary training for
peacekeepers. Where it emerges that journalists have
been attacked in serious violation of international
humanitarian or human rights law, the Council must
also look at ways to act to end impunity.
We welcome the implementation strategy 20132014 for the United Nations Plan of Action on the Safety
of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity, endorsed in
February, as the Deputy Secretary-General noted, as
a strong mechanism that will help countries promote
the safety of journalists in conflict situations. With its
focus on national capacity-building, we encourage its
early implementation.
To conclude, attacks on journalists are, like all
attacks on civilians, attacks on humanity. They are also
attacks on the international community’s ability, indeed
on its need, to understand and respond effectively to
conflicts that threaten international peace and security.
Truth need not be the first casualty of war. Journalists
need not be and should not be casualties of conflict.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Madam President, for organizing this debate, the
first on this topic since the adoption of resolution 1738
(2006). I thank the Deputy Secretary-General for his
statement and the journalists for their testimony, which
allows us to better understand the challenges they face
on the ground.
All are aware of the importance France attaches
to the issue of protecting journalists. Given the
resurgence of attacks on information professionals,
especially in conflict zones, over six years ago France
and Greece together submitted a draft resolution to the
Security Council. Through resolution 1738 (2006) the

12

international community committed itself to paying
increased attention to the issue of protecting journalists
in armed conflict. The Security Council spoke with one
voice at that time. It was a decisive step.
Today, we note that, unfortunately, that step was
insufficient. Quite to the contrary, it was far from
being sufficient because 2012 was perhaps the most
murderous year. More than 120 journalists were killed
in the exercise of their profession, which was double
the figure for 2011. Several hundred others were
imprisoned and sometimes tortured. Many were subject
to intimidation, kidnappings, forced disappearances
and arbitrary detentions. Women journalists are
often the deliberately targeted victims of harassment
and sexual violence. Bloggers, be they professional
journalists or simply citizens, are also being targeted in
an increasingly systematic manner.
Yesterday in Libya and today in Syria, journalists
are subject to persecution by regimes seeking to
muzzle them. Some 100 journalists, including four
French nationals, have been killed in Syria since the
beginning of the conflict. They paid with their lives
for their resolve to show the world the reality of the
indiscriminate repression of the Syrian people. I have
special thoughts for Didier François and Edouard Elias,
French journalists who were kidnapped in Syria a
month ago and who are still being held.
In all conflict areas, it is local journalists who pay
the heaviest price for practicing their profession. That
is the case in Somalia, where journalists are regularly
targeted by armed groups. Five have been killed since
the beginning of this year. These figures clearly
show international that the challenge of protecting
journalists is one that we still have to meet. Given the
worrisome situation, I would recall that it is primarily
the responsibility of Governments to protect journalists
and to allow them to accomplish their work without
impediment and in an independent manner. That
requires, among other things, fighting impunity against
the offenders of such violence. That issue has been
mentioned both by the journalists here and by some of
my colleagues. States must systematically investigate,
apprehend and try those responsible. Currently, 90 per
cent of the killings of journalists go unpunished. It is
also up to the international community, especially the
Security Council, to consider the matter and take action
to protect journalists. Some courses of action have
already been pointed out.

13-39549

S/PV.7003

We must recall and recognize the vulnerability
of journalists in conflict situations and do what
is necessary in a more systematic manner so that
peacekeeping operations provide protection for
journalists as civilians who are under threat. Violence
against journalists is not limited just to armed conflict
situations, however. The majority of persecutions take
place in countries at peace, very often where journalists
are reporting on cases of corruption or organized crime.
In a resolution adopted in September 2012
(A/HRC/RES/21/12), the Human Rights Council
denounced that reality and proposed several courses of
action. Moreover, the work done by UNESCO should
also be commended. The Plan of Action on the Safety
of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity, developed by
UNESCO last year, is an excellent initiative to fight
impunity for the authors of violence against journalists.
We call for its full and immediate implementation.
As we are all ware, freedom of information is at
the heart of any democracy, whether when it comes
to journalists, bloggers or war correspondents and
associated personnel. They are the people who help us
to understand our world and how it is evolving. It is clear
for all to see that the knee-jerk reaction of the enemies
of freedom is to gag the press, and that independent
media are the first allies of democracy. Freedom of
expression should be respected by everyone. It is our
collective responsibility, and especially that of the
Security Council, to work to ensure that this freedom
be fully enjoyed.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We learned with interest about the initiative
of the United States delegation to return to a discussion
of one of the aspects of the issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, namely, the protection of
journalists. We would like to thank Deputy SecretaryGeneral Eliasson and the other briefers for their very
interesting statements, which are a cause of concern.
In our view, instances of violence against
journalists in armed conflict are unacceptable.
Media professionals in complex military and political
situations are providing an important function by
informing the international community of the status of
events, including humanitarian issues and the suffering
of civilian populations. In the context of continuing
armed conflicts, journalism has earned itself a
reputation as one of the most dangerous professions. It
is no coincidence that journalists, who are considered

to be civilians under international humanitarian law,
have a similar level of protection in armed conflict.
The primary responsibility in this area is borne
by the warring parties. One of the major tasks of the
international community and regional organizations is
to assist national efforts in this area. At times, opinions
are expressed about the wisdom of including additional
international legal standards on the status of journalists
and about reviewing their status. There are already
legal norms and standards in place in that regard.
Priority should be given to compliance with the relevant
standards of international humanitarian law and to
having States not yet party to existing international
legal instruments accede to them.
It is clear that all attacks on journalists are
unacceptable. Issues pertaining to the activities
of journalists are already on the agenda of various
international organizations and bodies. The topic is
among the priorities of UNESCO, which is the main
entity for considering the whole host of issues related
to the safety of journalists. The Human Rights Council
deals with the human rights element of journalistic
activity. There is active work being carried out in this
area by many regional organizations. The resulting
division of labour facilitates ensuring the effective
functioning of the relevant structures.
Against that backdrop, we believe that the task of
the Security Council is to focus on issues having to do
with ensuring the safety of journalists in the context
of protecting civilians in situations of armed conflict.
An important contribution in ensuring the safety of
media professionals in extreme conditions is resolution
1738 (2006), which is the Council’s basic document
on the topic. In spite of measures being taken by the
international community, the situation with regard to
ensuring the safety of journalists could nevertheless
be improved. Their rights are sometimes completely
ignored, and their lives and health are unjustifiably at
risk.
We saw clear violations of international law and the
needs of journalists in missile strikes in Belgrade in
1999 and Tripoli in 2011. Those strikes led to casualties
and the destruction of the equipment necessary for
journalists to carry out their professional duties.
Paragraph 3 of resolution 1738 (2006) directly states
that the equipment of the media are civilian objects, and
therefore should not be subject to attack.

13-3954913

S/PV.7003

Information from journalists concerning the actual
events in areas of armed conflict has been noted by
various United Nations bodies. Therefore, information
concerning attacks in Libya have been taken up by the
High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and have been the subject of their
investigations. Information on the matter was also
included in the most recent report of the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights to the Human
Rights Council. However, we have not yet received an
answer in that serious investigation.
We can learn a great deal from the media that is
of importance to the work of the Security Council.
In recent times, we learned a lot about the illegal
smuggling of weapons from Libya into Syria, as well
as about violations of the weapons embargo with regard
to Libya. The Sanctions Committee is aware of that
information. It is important that the work be completed.
When dealing with the protection of journalists
in situations of armed conflict, we also cannot forget
the precautionary measures that should be observed by
the representatives of the media themselves so as not
to be subject to unjustified risk for themselves, their
escorts and colleagues. We should also consider the
responsibility for observing an internal code of contact
by the correspondents and their superiors who send
into areas of hostilities. Excessive pursuit of a scoop
to the detriment of common sense in armed conflict
can be highly dangerous. Of course, journalists as well
as diplomats must comply with the laws of the host
country.
Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): Let me express
my sincere appreciation to you, Madam President, for
convening this open debate. I would also like to thank
Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson and the four
journalists for their comprehensive and informative
briefings and compelling stories.
Journalists are killed, tortured and subjected to
enforced disappearance and arbitrary detention, as well
as intimidation and harassment, during conflicts. They
reveal a clear picture of conflict situations, including
the tragic suffering of civilians and violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
That makes journalists the target of attacks by parties
to a conflict who do not want their actions exposed.
Attacks against journalists also constitute violations
of the right to freedom of opinion and expression.

14

Greater threats to journalists increases the risks of
restricting the freedom of the press through the chilling
effect of self-censorship. In that regard, my delegation
welcomes the Human Rights Council resolution on the
safety of journalists , adopted last year, and calls upon
all parties to put an end to such practices and to provide
special protection to journalists.
Despite the Council’s action on the issue, including
its historic resolution 1738 (2006) and last February’s
presidential statement on the protection of civilians
(S/PRST/2013/2), violence against journalists persists.
It is extremely disturbing that between 111 and
153 journalists reportedly have been killed during the
past 28 months in Syria. The situation is also troubling
in Somalia, where last year alone, 18 journalists were
killed. We also condemn abductions of journalists in
conflict situations. In that regard, Dutch journalist
Judith Spiegel and her husband, kidnapped by an
armed group in Yemen just over a month ago, should be
released immediately.
Against that backdrop, I would like to underline
the following points. First, those responsible for
violations against journalists should be pursued and
held accountable no matter how long it takes. It is
alarming that a huge percentage of such perpetrators
enjoys impunity around the world. Failure to undertake
effective investigations and to prosecute those
responsible for attacks will lead to further violence in
the future. The primary responsibility for protecting
journalists, investigating each violation and prosecuting
those responsible lies with Governments and State
institutions. To that end, the necessary resources should
be dedicated to preventing and investigating attacks, as
well as bringing those responsible to justice.
While the majority of victims are male journalists,
we note with concern that female journalists are also
subject to violations in conflict situations. They face
additional risks, such as those of sexual violence or
sexual abuse in detention. We believe that a gendersensitive approach is needed when considering measures
to address the issue of violence against journalists.
Secondly, my delegation would like to further
encourage coordination and cooperation among United
Nations agencies, Member States and civil society
with regard to ensuring the safety of journalists. My
delegation welcomes and fully endorses the 2012 United
Nations Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists
and the Issue of Impunity. We are also pleased that

13-39549

S/PV.7003

its implementation strategy and work plan have been
prepared, including all relevant stakeholders and United
Nations agencies such as UNESCO, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and the United Nations Development Programme.
The role of civil society is significant, given
its expertise in the field. We welcome the active
engagement of civil society in the implementation of
the United Nations Plan of Action and would like to
further encourage it. Civil society, for its part, should
strengthen its efforts to raise awareness of the risks
faced by journalists and existing international standards
to protect them.
Thirdly, the scope of journalists should not be
interpreted restrictively and protection should be
provided to a broad spectrum of journalists. The
emergence of online journalists — both professionals
and untrained so-called citizen journalists — plays
an increasingly important role in documenting and
disseminating news in real time. Online journalists
should also be afforded the same protection as offline
journalists.
Last but not least, the Council needs to be more
vigilant about the safety of journalists and consider
including specific language on the protection of
journalists in relevant documents. We welcome the fact
that the Council, in resolution 2067 (2012) on Somalia,
specifically condemned violence against journalists for
the first time, and in resolution 2093 (2013), adopted in
March, emphasized the obligation of the Government
of Somalia with respect to the protection of journalists.
We should consider the need for a similar approach in
all relevant situations.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank you, Madam President, for organizing this open
debate on the protection of journalists, media and
communication professionals and associated personnel.
On the basis of our commitment to the freedom of the
press in general, we value the possibility of addressing
the issue with specific reference to conflict and postconflict situations. We are grateful for the eloquent
presentations of Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson
and Ms. Kathleen Carroll, Mr. Mustafa Haji Abdinur,
Mr. Richard Engel and Mr. Ghaith Abdul-Ahad.
The topic of the protection of journalists is part
of a long-standing debate, accentuated in recent times
by explosive advances in information technology and
news dissemination — for good or for evil. Although

article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
has been interpreted in many circles as an unlimited
endorsement of the freedom of opinion and expression,
other voices have tried to qualify that endorsement,
invoking issues ranging from security concerns to
respect for traditions and cultural norms. Those subjects
have been amply debated in many global forums,
including the Human Rights Council, the General
Assembly, and above all UNESCO. Today’s debate is
focused on the protection of journalists in conflict and
post-conflict situations — a topic that is clearly within
the purview of the Council.
Journalists in situations of armed conflict face very
particular circumstances. First, unless they are fully
serving a party to the conflict and are perceived as
adversaries by the opposing party, they form part of the
civilian population not directly involved in the conflict
and are therefore subject to international humanitarian
law.
Secondly, they represent an especially vulnerable
segment of the civilian population, not only because,
through their exposure to the battle field, by definition
they risk involvement in potentially dangerous activity,
but also because they also risk exposure to potentially
serious human rights violations inflicted by repressive
Governments or armed militias. Either may lead to
harassment, intimidation, incarceration, kidnapping
and even violent death.
Thirdly, journalists play an especially important
role by reporting events on the ground, particularly if
they do so with objectivity and professionalism. We
have heard eloquent examples of all three situations
described by our four briefers from the profession.
As with the entire civilian population, the primary
responsibility for the protection of journalists falls to the
Government of the country in conflict, as highlighted
in resolution 1738 (2006). But the international
community can and must contribute to creating an
environment that offers incentives to Governments and
societies in conflict to respect the right of journalists
to carry out their mission of informing, while it weighs
consequences for those who seek to compromise that
right. In other words, my delegation feels totally aligned
with the aforementioned resolution, as well as with the
presidential statement (S/PRST/2013/2) adopted on
12 February, especially its reference to acts of violence
against journalists.

13-3954915

S/PV.7003

Despite the Council’s pronouncements, we note
that, according to the Committee to Protect Journalists,
the situation has not improved; rather, it has worsened.
There are alarming reports of imprisonment, beatings,
disappearances and even violent deaths. Of similar
concern are attacks against women journalists, who are
even more vulnerable during armed conflicts.
Further, as Jan Eliasson and other colleagues
have observed, the impunity rate for crimes against
journalists continues to be very high. According to
information from UNESCO, on average only one in
ten cases of crimes committed against journalists over
the past few years has led to a conviction. It should be
recalled that journalists, as civilian persons, are also
protected by international criminal law. Thus the Rome
Statute classifies grave violations of international
humanitarian law as war crimes. In the same vein,
the Assembly of State Parties to the Rome Statute
has in various resolutions acknowledged the need for
States and other parties to armed conflicts to protect
journalists as civilians, in accordance with international
humanitarian law.
Finally, we recognize the fundamental role played
by the communications media, which are exposed to
the brutal reality of war. The protection of journalists
must continue to be part of the global strategy to
promote the protection of civilians while also bringing
the horrors of war before public opinion. That is why
this Council must persist in the defence of journalists in
situations of conflict, an undertaking to which we are
fully committed.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): This is
the first time since 2006 and the adoption of resolution
1738 (2006) that the Council has met for an open debate
on the protection of journalists. I would like to thank
the American presidency for taking the initiative to
organize this debate, at a time when the number of
journalists killed in the exercise of their profession
has reached an alarming level. The testimonies we
have been offered speak volumes about the situation of
journalists in periods of conflict and about the risks to
which they are exposed. I would also like to take this
opportunity to thank Kathleen Carroll, Richard Engel,
Mustafa Haji Abdinur and Ghaith Abdul-Ahad for
sharing with us their experience on the ground. I also
thank the Deputy Secretary-General, Mr. Jan Eliasson,
for his presentation.

16

Luxembourg fully supports the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union.
In the globalized, interconnected world to which
we belong, information reigns supreme. Journalists are
its primary transmitters. A free press is always the sign
of a lively democratic society; by the same token, its
absence is a sure indicator of authoritarianism. New
technologies have multiplied the number of useful
sources of information available to journalists; they
have also accelerated the transmission of information.
In times of armed conflict, the role of journalists
takes on yet another dimension. Their work contributes
to making it possible for the world to know.
But the journalistic profession is increasingly
accompanied by mortal dangers. Last year, according
to UNESCO, 121 journalists were killed and more than
200 were jailed. Those are unprecedented numbers.
As we have already been reminded this morning,
10 days ago in Somalia the journalist Liban Abdullahi
Farah was killed on his way home from work. He was
the sixth member of the press to be killed in Somalia
this year, which makes that country one of the world’s
most dangerous for journalists. According to the
International Press Institute, 54 journalists have been
killed to date in 2013, many of them in Syria. In light
of that disturbing increase, the reports of the SecretaryGeneral on the protection of civilians should devote a
specific section to the issue of the safety and security
of journalists, as mandated by resolution 1738 (2006).
We condemn in the strongest possible terms all
attacks, physical and otherwise, that deliberately target
journalists, as well as all other forms of intimidation.
But our condemnation alone is not enough. We must act
to ensure that journalists enjoy in practice the protection
to which they are entitled by virtue of international
humanitarian law. Resolution 1738 (2006) is very
clear: journalists in periods of armed conflict must be
viewed as civilians and as such must be respected and
protected.
The Council invoked that principle in the
presidential statement it adopted on 12 February
(S/PRST/2013/2). I appeal to all parties to armed
conflicts to take all possible measures to ensure respect
for and protection of journalists in accordance with
international hunaitarian law. In cases of violation,
States are responsible for ending impunity and for
bringing to justice those responsible for violations.

13-39549

S/PV.7003

Considerable efforts have been made in recent years
in the United Nations with respect to the protection of
journalists. In April 2012, the United Nations Chief
Executives Board for Coordination adopted the United
Nations Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and
the Issue of Impunity, initiated by UNESCO. The Plan
of Action must be fully implemented.
Adequate follow-up must also be given to Human
Rights Council resolution 21/12, adopted by consensus
on 27 September 2012, on the importanace of the safety
of journalists as a fundamental element of freedom of
expression. We await with interest the compilation of
best practices that the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights was charged with compiling, in
collaboration with the Special Rapporteur on the
promotion and protection of the right to freedom of
opinion and expression. Luxembourg supported those
endeavours and will continue to do so.
We take this opportunity to encouarage greater
cooperation among Governments, international
organizations, civil society and representatives of
the media. It could also be interesting to develop
cooperation at the level of ombudsmen and national
human rights institutions, as was recommended by the
international conference on the safety of journalists
held in Warsaw on 23 and 24 April 2013.
To conclude, I insist on the need for the Security
Council to continue to give this matter all the attention
it deserves. Journalists shoulder the responsiblity for
protecting the truth. The Council should shoulder its
own responsibility by guaranteeing their protection.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): First of all, I would
like to thank the presidency for convening this open
debate on the protection of journalists in armed
conflict and for submitting a concept note on the topic
(S/2013/393, annex). We are also grateful to Deputy
Secretary-General Jan Eliasson for his briefing and to
the media representatives for their contribution to the
discussion.
Journalists play an indispensable role in informing
the public and the international community about events
in conflict areas. As the Secretary-General noted in his
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
“Journalists play a crucial role by reporting on
the treatment and suffering endured by civilians
in situations of conflict and on violations of

humanitarian law and human rights” (S/2012/376,
para. 14).
Indeed, the circumstances of armed conflict often
expose journalists exercising their profession to risks
that sometimes even exceed the level of danger normally
encountered by civilians. The need to guarantee the
safety of journalists has been repeatedly stated at the
international level, and a number of important steps
have been taken to ensure the protection of media
professionals and associated personnel in armed
conflict.
International law sets out clear provisions for
the protection of journalists. First of all, it should be
recalled that the right to the freedom of opinion and
of expression is a human right guaranteed to all,
including journalists, in accordance with the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the relevant
regional human rights instruments.
In addition, special rules of international
humanitarian law apply to journalists who are
imperiled by their professional duties in the context
of armed conflict. According to Additional Protocol I
to the 1949 Geneva Conventions, journalists engaged
in dangerous professional missions in areas of armed
conflicts shall be considered as civilians and as such
shall be respected and protected under international
humanitarian law. That norm was recalled in Security
Council resolution 1738 (2006) and the presidential
statement of 12 February (S/PRST/2013/2). It is also
widely recognized that the rule according to which
civilian journalists engaged in professional missions in
areas of armed conflict must be respected and protected
as long as they are not taking a direct part in hostilities
constitutes a norm of customary international law
applicable in both international and non-international
armed conflicts.
Furthermore, a number of other important efforts
have been undertaken recently at the international level
to address the protection of journalists in situations of
armed conflict. Among them is resolution 21/12 on the
safety of journalists, adopted in September 2012 by the
Human Rights Council, and the 2012 UNESCO report
containing the United Nations Plan of Action on the
Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.
At the same time, despite the development of
unequivocal international norms and standards and the
increased attention of the international community to

13-3954917

S/PV.7003

the protection of journalists, acts of violence against
journalists, media professionals and associated
personnel in armed conflicts — in particular deliberate
attacks in violation of international humanitarian law,
as well as impunity for such violations — remain
widespread. We condemn all such attacks against
journalists and violations of their rights.
The role of journalists as monitors of atrocious
crimes committed during armed conflicts has frequently
led to their being targets of intentional attacks by
parties to a conflict. Indeed, as is often said, the first
casualty of war is truth. We pay tribute to journalists
who, under dangerous circumstances, bravely perform
their duties to inform the broader public about threats
to international peace and security.
The increased brutality of armed conflicts and the
changing nature of warfare nowadays give rise to the
need for greater measures of protection for journalists
at the national and international levels. It is important
that the Security Council consistently maintain its
focus on the topic and systematically recall its demand
that all parties to armed conflict comply fully with
their obligations under international law related to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, including
journalists, and take all necessary measures to
prevent attacks against journalists and prosecute those
responsible for such attacks.
In conclusion, I would like once again to commend
the initiative of the United States in convening this open
debate. We are confident that our discussions today will
achieve their objective of demonstrating the Council’s
support for providing journalists with the necessary
protection and of recalling that all perpetrators of
violence against journalists must be held accountable.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): Let me begin by thanking
you, Madam President, for having organized this
important open debate on the protection of journalists
in armed conflicts.
I would like to thank the Deputy Secretary-General
Mr. Jan Eliasson for his briefing and to recognize
the presence here today of Ms. Kathleen Carroll,
Mr. Mustafa Haji Abdinur, Mr. Richard Engel and
Mr. Ghaith Abdul-Ahad. We commend their work,
done despite the challenges and risks involved, and
their dedication to ensuring that the world be informed.
Since Rwanda became a member of the Council in
January this year, we have put our time into debating

18

the protection of civilians in armed conflict, in both
thematic debates and country-specific situations.
Following the debates on the protection of civilians,
sexual violence in conflict, children and armed conflict
and specific human rights and humanitarian situations
such as Syria, today we are discussing the protection of
another group of people who are vulnerable in situations
of armed conflicts, namely, journalists.
Journalists play a critical role in informing the
world on ongoing conflicts and on our daily work in the
Council. With new technology and social media we feel
like we are living in various conflict theatres, following
every event and breaking news. By reporting on cases
of international concern, journalists provide us with
useful information inside certain points of reference. In
this context, it is always the worst news to hear when
a person who was providing others perspective on a
conflict was killed by a bomb or stray bullet or, even
worse, was assassinated in cold blood by belligerents.
At times, we hear that a well-known face was abducted
by armed groups. Most of us followed the recent ordeal
of our friend Richard Engel in Syria. In other cases,
journalists are jailed, tortured, raped or sexually
assaulted.
Rwanda is alarmed by reports of failure to comply
with humanitarian obligations to protect journalists,
including reports of deliberate killing, disappearance,
torture or other cruel, inhumane or degrading treatment
of journalists by parties to conflicts.
In addition, while recent reports indicate that the
number of abuses against journalists has declined in
some countries, it is our concern that the violence in
Syria and Somalia continues to endanger journalists
and media professionals reporting on those conflicts.
We therefore find it rational for the Security Council,
with regard to specific crisis situations, to always
recognize the particular vulnerability of journalists
in its resolutions and other outcome documents. In
those cases, the Council can consider mandating the
protection of journalists as a group of civilians under
imminent threat of physical violence. In conflict
situations with peacekeeping missions, the protection
of journalists could be included in mission mandates.
In the meantime, we urge armed groups in all conflict
situations to ensure respect and protection for the
civilian population, including journalists and their
property, and to abide by international humanitarian
law.

13-39549

S/PV.7003

We find it pertinent to speak today on the
reciprocal role of the media and journalists in engaging
in activities that ensure the protection of civilians, most
especially as catalysts of peace, rather than fueling
armed conflicts. We believe the best protection is the
prevention of armed conflicts in the first place.
It is of equal value to ensure that journalists
reporting from war zones bear the moral responsibility
to report in an accurate and balanced manner all stories
in the proper context. The 1994 genocide in Rwanda is
a stark and constant reminder that information can save
or kill. Rwanda has been on the receiving end of the
media being used in a destructive manner to perpetrate
violence and instill hatred among the people. Indeed,
in Rwanda the media proved to be a powerful tool for
escalating the conflict. For instance the infamous Radio
Télévision Libre des Mille Collines urged listeners to
pick up machetes and take to the streets to kill what
they called “cockroaches”.
It is therefore important to stress that reporting
comes with great responsibilities, and we call on all
journalists and media professionals to resolve to report
in an accurate and balanced manner.
However, the media have proved to be a powerful
instrument for peacebuilding and reconciliation. In postgenocide Rwanda, the media have played a constructive
role as bridge-builder and a tool for reconciliation.
Since implementing media reforms in Rwanda, we are
seeing growing media that have become an essential
part of development, good governance and democratic
progress, media that promote greater freedom and
responsibility among practitioners, that promote
improved public process and access to information,
contribute to greater accountability and foster diversity
and competition.
To conclude, let me play tribute again to all women
and men around the world who, armed with a pen, a
camera, a computer or a microphone, have taken the
risk of leaving the comfort of their families to inform
our own and have made the ultimate sacrifice in the
name of truth for generations to come.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French):
Madam President, I would like to begin by thanking
you for having scheduled this debate on an important
topic that is given relevance by the news every day.
We would like to thank Mr. Jan Eliasson, Deputy
Secretary-General, for his enlightening briefing, and
the journalists — Ms. Kathleen Carroll, Mr. Mustafa

Haji Abdinur, Mr. Richard Engel and Mr. Ghaith AbdulAhad — for having been willing to share with us their
experience in covering conflict situations.
In their presence, I would like to pay tribute on behalf
of my country to those journalists, media professionals
and associated personnel who devote themselves to
their task in respect for the rules of ethics in order to
enlighten public opinion on the reality of conflicts and
their consequences for civilians, particularly women
and children.
Today’s debate follows the adoption by the Security
Council of resolution 1738 (2006), which marked
the start of a new phase in the process of raising the
international community’s awareness of the challenges
weighing on the security of journalists in armed
conflict. More recently, in a presidential statement
dated 12 February (S/PRST/2013/2), the Council
demanded that the parties concerned immediately put
an end to violations of international law and reaffirmed
its readiness to adopt targeted and graduated measures
for the protection of civilians, including journalists. For
its part, the Human Rights Council adopted resolution
21/12 in September 2012, emphasizing the promotion
of a safe environment, enabling journalists to carry
out their profession in an independent manner. Finally,
UNESCO adopted the United Nations Plan of Action
on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity,
which contains several provisions.
We must note that, in spite of all those measures,
the number of victims among journalists is continuing
to grow. The year 2012 alone saw 32 deaths. We hope
that today’s debate will advance thinking on the best
ways to protect journalists in times of war, taking into
account the specificity and dangerous nature of their
work.
In a world quintessentially full of information, the
journalism profession has a vital, and unfortunately
dangerous role to play even in normal times, but even
more so in times of conflict, specifically in times of
internal conflict. The direct exposure of journalists to
the crossfire of parties to conflicts caused an African
journalist to observe that the life expectancy of a
journalist covering a conflict is a renewable 24 hours.
The coverage of conflicts is at the same time a
mission and a responsibility. First, it is a mission because
it allows journalists to bear first witness and provide
information objectively and without bias. It is also a
responsibility that requires integrity and impartiality

13-3954919

S/PV.7003

from the journalist, in order not to sacrifice journalistic
principles to the immediacy of the information or the
scoop. The protection of journalists, particularly in
times of war, is therefore an absolutely necessity, as it
embodies the respect of the freedom of expression and
the right to information.
The context of conflicts exposes journalists directly
or indirectly to every kind of danger. Competition,
exclusivity restrictions and the actions of the parties
to conflict contribute to making their mission even
more dangerous and likely to get out of hand. The
fundamental rights of journalists to life and to exercise
their profession in favourable conditions, in safety and
without constraint, must be guaranteed. Those rights
go hand in hand with the protection of their right to
freely express themselves and to have free access to all
areas where the human condition requires the presence
of journalists in order to report on the human condition
according to international standards.
We
the
Member
States,
international
non-governmental organizations and the international
human rights mechanisms are called upon to continue
to strive to ensure a free and safe environment for
journalists to be able to perform their noble mission
of informing, raising awareness and holding parties
accountable to bring about an end of conflict.
Mr. Sahebzada Ahmed Khan (Pakistan): We
would like to thank the United States for organizing
today’s important debate on an issue of great
contemporary importance and relevance. We are also
grateful to Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson and
the briefers for their useful insights on the subject.
First of all, I would like to pay tribute to and salute
the journalists who have fallen in the line of duty. They
are indeed the fallen brave.
The role and the importance of media in shaping
public opinion and moral and political choices vis-à-vis
conflict situations are becoming increasingly decisive
in the modern world. For that reason, threats to the
safety and security of journalists and associated media
personnel have increased manifoldly in recent times.
Security Council resolution 1738 (2006),
unanimously adopted by the Council more than six
years ago, strongly condemned any intentional attacks
against journalists, media professionals and associated
personnel and sent out a strong signal to the parties
to armed conflict that they should comply with their

20

obligations under international law. The resolution also
made a strong call for ending impunity in that regard.
While reiterating the provisions of that resolution,
we need to take a fresh look at contemporary threats
to journalists in armed conflicts, in view of the
increasingly complex nature of conflict situations,
increased use of terror tactics, blurring of boundaries
between warring parties in non-international armed
conflicts and between war correspondents and
independent journalists, and new and emerging trends
such as the concept of embedded journalism and use by
media of protection afforded by private armed escorts.
It is a matter of concern that despite clear provisions
of international law — in particular article 79 of
Additional Protocol I of the Geneva Conventions, which
clearly identifies journalists engaged in professional
missions in areas of armed conflict as civilians,
provided they take no action that prejudices their
civilian status — the deliberate targeting, arbitrary
detention and internment of journalists in situations of
armed conflict continue to be on the rise.
It seems that the problem is not a dearth of
international legal standards and norms, but a lack
of their understanding and implementation. It is
therefore important to engage in a well-coordinated
and comprehensive international awareness-raising
campaign that highlights the existing provisions of
international law and points out the consequences
of their violation. Furthermore, ending impunity by
bringing the perpetrators of attacks against journalist
to justice would have a significant impact on the
situation. The Security Council can play an important
role by reinforcing this message in its decisions.
To ensure the neutrality and impartiality of
journalists, such concepts as embedded journalism
need to be carefully analysed, especially with regard
to their impact on the safety and security of journalists.
Moreover, employing distinctive emblems in conflict
situations may also help.
Achieving the delicate balance between the safety
and security of journalists and media personnel with
the need for unfettered access to conflict areas is of
crucial importance. The authorities concerned must
share all information necessary to ensure the safety of
media personnel, who should in turn take their advice
into account and respect local laws and regulations.
There is a balance to be struck between personal safety
and professional prowess. Furthermore, increased

13-39549

S/PV.7003

resources must be made available to train journalists
covering situations of armed conflict, focusing on ways
to cope with the changing nature of armed conflicts and
the increasing threats of terrorism and kidnappings for
ransom.
Today’s debate is a reiteration of the strong
message of resolution 1738 (2006) that the Security
Council remains focused on the issue of the protection
of journalists in armed conflict and is willing to play
its role in this regard. We hope that we will continue to
stand united towards ensuring this end.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Mr. Eliasson for his briefing and his thoughts,
as well as each and every journalist present here today.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict is a
topic to which the international community attaches
great importance. It is therefore legitimate and
necessary for the Security Council to address it in
an ongoing manner. I should like to thank the United
States presidency for raising the issue of the protection
of journalists. This is the first time it has been discussed
in the Security Council since 2006 (see S/PV.5613),
when the Council adopted resolution 1738 (2006). My
country was a member of the Security Council at that
time, too. I thank the presidency for the concept note
it has provided for this debate (S/2013/393, annex) and
express our appreciation for the statements made by the
journalists today.
According to the Secretary-General’s 2012 report
(S/2012/376), the state of protection of civilians
remains terrible. Among violations of international
humanitarian law, it describes ongoing attacks by
combattants on non-combattants; disproportionate
attacks; displacements within and across borders;
violence against women and children, including sexual
violence; air strikes, including with unregistered
aircraft; and other actions that prevent or hinder the
provision of humanitarian assistance, such as deliberate
assaults on hospitals, schools and humanitarian
operations. In many situations on the ground, journalists
are principal victims of such violations of international
humanitarian law.
We know that journalism is a critical tool in the
exercise of the freedom of information and the press.
It is also an important instrument in post-conflict
and conflicts situations when civil society does not
not necessarily have the resources to expose serious
human rights violations or breaches of international

humanitarian law. The reports of the Secretary-General
and of the Director-General of UNESCO and other
sources all reflect the frequency and gravity of attacks
on journalists. The presidential statement adopted this
year on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/PRST/2013/2) also reflects the Council’s concern
over such attacks.
In order to guarantee the protection of civilians and
especially of journalists, we must duly consider two
elements: respect for international humanitarian law
in terms of attacks on journalists, and accountability.
The Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of
12 August 1949, and relating to the Protection of Victims
of International Armed Conflicts, to which Argentina
is a party, notes in article79 that “[j]ournalists engaged
in dangerous professional missions in areas of armed
conflict shall be considered as civilians”. This norm set
out in Protocol I simply confirms a rule of international
customary law, which holds that journalists enjoy
civilian status under international humanitarian law.
In accordance with common article 3 of the Geneva
Conventions on non-international conflicts, journalists
and associater personnel are non-combattants and must
be protected as such, along with their support staff.
The 2012 UNESCO report indicates, as other
colleagues have said, that in the biennium 2010-2011,
127 journalists and media workers were assassinated.
This figure represents an increase over the previous
biennium. The report concludes that there is a growth
trend in the number of deaths among journalists. It
therefore proposed the United Nations Plan of Action
on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity,
which was also adopted in 2012 by the United Nations
Chief Executives Board for Coordination. We hope that
the Plan of Action, the second inter-agency meeting on
which took place in late 2012, will help to strengthen
measures to protect journalists in conflict and postconflict situations, and ensure accountability.
The two issues of respect for international
humanitarian law and the fight against impunity were
also reflected in resolution 21/12 of the Human Rights
Council, adopted in October 2012. The resolution,
which was sponsored by more than 50 countries,
including Argentina, energetically condemns all
violence against journalists and expresses concern that
attacks on journalists very often go unpunished.
I should like to address one aspect of this issue that
I believe strongly promotes the lack of safety endured

13-3954921

S/PV.7003

by men and women of the press. It is often said that the
first victim of war is truth. It would appear that what we
are saying today is that its second victims are those who
are responsible for telling the truth. A 2003 report of
the International Labour Organization notes that there
was a moment in the war in Afghanistan when attacks
on reporters were more numerous than attacks on the
military.
Who is responsible for the safety of journalists in
a context where the dangers faced by members of the
press in conflict situations are growing year by year?
Economic and technological changes in the journalism
industry create even more pressure on media workers
to produce more news at greater risk and less cost.
Some communication organizations, in their zeal to
save on costs, use freelance professionals and parttime local correspondents, to the detriment of full-time
staff and highly-skilled personnel. Although there is
great variation as to how such independent workers are
defined and treated by companies, at times some lack
insurance as part of their compensation and may not
have available ready cash that could help get them out
of emergencies and foreseeable risks.
An environment of increasing informality in all
areas of the labour market, combined with the precarious
employment situation of war journalists, compounds
the risks to which men and women are exposed during
their work. A few days ago, journalist Francesca Borri
wrote in the Columbia Journalism Review how routine
it was for her to sacrifice her personal security in her
work in Aleppo in order to be able to compete with the
scarce resources offered by companies:
“[w]hether you’re writing from Aleppo or Gaza
or Rome, the editors see no difference. You are paid
the same: $70 per piece. Even in places like Syria,
where prices triple because of rampant speculation.
So, for example, sleeping in this rebel base, under
mortar fire, on a mattress on the ground, with yellow
water that gave me typhoid, costs $50 per night; a
car costs $250 per day. Not only can you not afford
insurance — it’s almost $1,000 a month — but you
cannot afford a fixer or a translator.”
Another urgent and crucial matter is putting an end
to impunity for grave violations against civilians, as part
of the civilian population. Sixty per cent of the cases
involving the 995 journalists who have been murdered
in armed conflict since 1992 have gone unpunished.

22

In conclusion, it is clear to everyone that, even
properly implementing all the necessary precautions,
war reporters practice a risky profession in which their
lives are endangered. Nevertheless, many of the attacks
against reporters and many of the deaths catalogued in
the past decade are neither necessary a condition of the
profession nor an automatic effect of war. Rather, they
are the outcome of specific working conditions that
have been transformed through technological changes,
new military strategies with regard to the press and
transformations that directly affect the working
conditions of journalists in general, thereby placing
those who work in armed conflict in particularly
vulnerable situations.
Argentina endorses two recommendations that we
have heard from numerous journalist non-governmental
organizations, namely, recognizing the special
vulnerability of journalists in conflict situations and
incorporating that perspective in the mandates of all
peacekeeping missions established by the Council.
I thank the President for organizing this debate. For
this commitment to become a reality, we must focus
our attention not only on conflict situations, in which
journalists work every day, but also on the professional,
economic and structural conditions that underpin their
work, with a view to ensuring freedom of the press,
information and expression.
I thank Ms. Kathleen Carroll, Mr. Mustafa Haji
Abdinur, Mr. Richard Engel and Mr. Ghaith AbdulAhad. I also thank Mr. Robert Cox, a journalist with
the Buenos Aires Herald, who in 1977 was illegally
detained and kidnapped under State terrorism in my
country for having been the first to publish, for the
benefit of the international community, that my country
had been systematically violating human rights by way
of kidnappings, torture, disappearences and murder.
Not only was he detained and kidnapped, but he had to
quit Argentina in 1979. I again take this opportunity to
say, never again!
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
I thank Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson for
his briefing and for his support for this issue. We also
greatly appreciate the remarks of our four briefers, who
have made a compelling case for the challenges and risks
that journalists face. Their experiences demonstrate the
indispensible role that journalists play in focusing the
world’s attention on conflict. That is why the United

13-39549

S/PV.7003

States has convened today’s open debate on protecting
journalists.
Journalists are literally our eyes and ears in every
corner of the world. They sound the warning when local
tensions threaten to erupt into war. They document the
suffering of civilians in conflict areas. And they expose
human rights violations and war crimes. Journalists are
critical to the Security Council’s ability to remain well
informed so that it may fulfil its mandate to maintain
international peace and security.
Reporting from the former Yugoslavia in the 1990s
brought attention to mass atrocities there and helped to
mobilize the response of the international community,
including support for a war crimes tribunal. More
recently, the Council relied on videos, photos and the
reported accounts of citizens to understand the events
taking place in Libya in 2011. That real-time reporting
gave us the information necessary to act quickly to
prevent even more horrific violence by the Al-Qadhafi
regime.
Tragically, this work is not without sacrifice, as
the case of journalist Mohamed Nabbous and his wife
Samra Naas demonstrated. When a sniper killed Mo
while he was broadcasting live during Al-Qadhafi’s
assault on Benghazi, Samra, pregnant with their first
child, took his place, declaring “What he has started
has got to go on, no matter what happens.”
In Syria, the Al-Assad regime continues to kill,
imprison and torture journalists. Mazen Darwish,
head of the Syrian Center for Media and Freedom of
Expression, the only Syria-based non-governmental
organization accredited to the United Nations, has been
held incommunicado since February 2012, and was
reported to have been tortured by the Al-Assad regime.
His so-called crime, like so many of his colleagues, was
to exercise his universal right to freedom of expression
to show the world the regime’s atrocities.
As others have noted, resolution 1738 (2006)
reminds us that journalists operating in armed conflict
are protected under international humanitarian law.
Given the invaluable contribution of journalists to
our work, the Council must do all it can to ensure
their protection. Therefore, we ask the SecretaryGeneral to increase his focus on the safety and security
of journalists, media professionals and associated
personnel in his reports on the protection of civilians
and in his reports on peacekeeping missions whose
mandates include civilian protection.

Furthermore, we urge Member States, especially
those that contribute troops and police to United
Nations peacekeeping missions, to ensure that their
judicial officials, law enforcement officers and military
personnel know their obligations under international
human rights law and international humanitarian law
as regards the safety of journalists.
Impunity for violence against journalists must
end. The United States endorses fully the 2012 United
Nations Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and
the Issue of Impunity. We encourage Member States to
enact its provisions and put in place voluntary protection
programmes for journalists operating in conflict areas.
We also underscore the specific risks faced by
women journalists, including sexual and genderbased violence. A gender-sensitive approach is needed
when considering measures to address the safety of
journalists.
New and emerging forms of twenty-first century
communication technologies, including various
Internet forums, blogging, texting and other social
media platforms, have transformed the way journalists,
including citizen journalists, work. Those new forms
of communication have allowed wider and more rapid
dissemination of information from conflicts across the
globe. We call on all Member States to maintain and
safeguard the infrastructure that enables the work of
journalists in situations of conflict.
In conclusion, recognizing the value of the work
of journalists reporting on conflict, the Council has an
obligation to help protect those who provide us with so
much vital information. We thank journalists around
the world who risk their lives to seek the truth and shine
light on the darkness for the entire world to see. The
Security Council could not do its job without them.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I wish to remind speakers to limit their statements
to no more than four minutes in order to enable the
Council to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations
with lengthy statements are kindly requested to
circulate the texts in writing and to deliver a condensed
version when speaking in the Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Machado (Brazil): The case for protecting
media professionals in armed conflict is both

13-3954923

S/PV.7003

humanitarian and political. As civilians, they are
protected under the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and
its Additional Protocols. In addition, resolution 1738
(2006) urges parties to armed conflicts to do their utmost
to prevent violations of international humanitarian law
against journalists, media professionals and associated
personnel.
The political dimension of the issue derives from
the fact that unbiased media reports dispatched from
conflict zones often serve a fundamental public
interest. In many cases, reliable and independent media
coverage brings to the attention of the international
community, including the Council, the many horrors of
armed conflict, and prompts us to show the political
will needed to stop violence and restore peace.
In that regard, protecting journalists in armed
conflict is equal to protecting and promoting their
fundamental role in helping to build sustainable peace.
Brazil
therefore
stresses
our
collective
responsibility to protect media professionals in armed
conflict and firmly repudiates the killing, harassment,
intimidation and kidnapping of journalists, as well as
any other violence against them in such situations.
States must promote the right to freedom of
expression, not only during armed conflicts but also
in their aftermath. That right is an important tool to
empower the people to participate fully in the political
life of post-conflict countries. Its respect is key to
peacebuilding and national reconciliation.
The Brazilian Government has been actively
engaged in the protection of media professionals in
general, as shown in our participation in the ongoing
pertinent discussions in the Human Rights Council, as
a member of the core group on the safety of journalists
and on the promotion, protection and enjoyment of
human rights on the Internet, and in UNESCO.
Protecting journalists in armed conflict also
requires fully respecting their right to privacy in
their professional communications, including over the
telephone and the Internet. Arbitrary surveillance of
private exchanges and conversations by journalists may
easily put them at greater risk, since they themselves
must safeguard the privacy, security and anonymity of
their sources. In some cases, for those who report on
armed conflict from the field, inadvertently exposing
their sources may mean the difference between life and
death or may put at risk their very ability to continue

24

to do their work. In addition, the illegal surveillance of
journalists’ communications by parties and non-parties
to conflicts runs counter to declared commitments to
democracy and the rule of law.
We therefore highlight the importance of the
promotion, protection and enjoyment of the right
to privacy on all electronic media. Democratic and
transparent multilateral governance of the Internet
is essential for the full and appropriate utilization of
that powerful tool without fears of undue and illegal
interference by both private entities and public
institutions. In that context, secret surveillance
programmes are a source of grave concern, as they
may violate the human rights of individuals. As stated
by United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, Ms. Navanethem Pillay, the “alleged large-scale
violations of the right of privacy by surveillance
programmes raise a number of important international
human rights issues that need to be addressed”.
Secret surveillance programmes are also a violation
of the sovereignty of States. In that regard, the members
of the Common Market of the South have decided to
take a number of measures, including at the United
Nations, with a view to raising the issue and seeking the
adoption of multilateral rules for Internet governance
that ensure the protection of communication, the
privacy of individuals and respect for State sovereignty.
As I indicated earlier, the protection of journalists
in armed conflict is both a humanitarian and a
political task. Such a task is permanent and, in some
quarters, urgent. Brazil fully supports all efforts by the
Council, consistent with its Charter responsibilities, to
successfully address that challenge.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): We welcome your
initiative, Madam President, in bringing truly relevant
and innovative briefers to the Security Council.
Journalists reporting on situations of armed conflict,
like the briefers we have heard today, deserve credit
for bringing to Headquarters the grim reality of armed
conflict.
Together with the United Nations own reporting,
news media form part of the international community’s
decision-making matrix, as has already been made clear
by a number of Council members, not least in respect
of the decisions made by the Council itself. Media

13-39549

S/PV.7003

can also help transform and resolve conflicts, as the
work of professional and citizen journalists disperses
information, discloses wrongdoing and sheds light
on atrocities. Indeed, the presence of an independent
media is essential to stress-test other reports of what
is happening in conflict areas, and is an important
check on the so-called official line, whether it be from
host Governments, interested stakeholders or even the
United Nations itself.
We have been reminded several times in this debate
that truth is often the first casualty of war. In speaking
truth to power, journalists in conflict situations can
help right that wrong. The flow of information and
the exposé of war crimes are crucial mechanisms for
combatting impunity in respect of war crimes.
Many of the important points that might be raised
in relation to this topic are also, more generally, relevant
to the protection of civilians. But today we should focus
on aspects relating to the special characteristics of
journalists themselves.
On reviewing the list of the many media personnel
killed in Syria over the past year, it is striking
how many are not affiliated with traditional media
organizations. International humanitarian law protects
new media, such as Internet media, bloggers, online
videos and other digital news sources, all now so
ubiquitous in this digital age. But this democratization
of content also means that, unlike traditional media,
new media journalists and other practitioners may not
have the same level of awareness of, and training in,
respect of their rights or of the practical, protective
actions they might take in conflict zones. We therefore
strongly commend initiatives taken by the International
Committee of the Red Cross and by non-governmental
organizations such as Reporters Without Borders to fill
that knowledge gap.
Media deaths, sadly, do not correspond to the
intensity of combat. The large number of deaths in Syria
and Somalia compared to those in other conflict zones
emphasizes that different conflicts require different,
tailored responses to protect journalists — an issue
that should now be addressed by the Security Council
at the country-specific level, for which we encourage
the inclusion of specific language on the topic in
the relevant Council mandates. It is not sufficient
anymore that this issue be addressed only through a
resolution that is now six and a half years old; it must be
operationalized in the field, allowing journalists access

to their sources and, as the representative of Brazil has
just stressed, allowing them to protect those sources
and, in particular, to protect them from harm.
Above all, journalists can play an important role
in conflict prevention, horizon-scanning and early
warning. In the absence of peacekeeping or observer
operations and political missions, the international
community relies on the media to inform and alert it
to situations that are at risk of deteriorating into armed
conflict, and that, I know, can be particularly helpful
to the Council’s elected members. We must all support
the media as important actors that enable the United
Nations and the Security Council to act in preventive
mode.
It is inherent in journalists’ work that in war zones
they assume a task that exposes them to danger. Indeed,
they often seek it out, and, paradoxically, we benefit
from that proximity. The challenge for the international
community is to ensure that, in performing their
essential function of speaking truth to power,
journalists are not also exposed to deliberate, targeted
acts of violence. That, I suggest, is the task — indeed,
the responsibility — we should reaffirm today.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): Thank you, Madam President,
for convening this debate and bringing awareness and
attention to an important subject. Ambassador DiCarlo,
may I also add, on a personal note, that it is my distinct
pleasure to give this statement while you are presiding
over this meeting.
So far this year, 26 journalists have been killed and
175 imprisoned trying to do their job. Instead of telling
the story, journalists are increasingly becoming the
story itself. We must be united in our condemnation of
those who seek to silence the press and hide the truth.
As we speak, the Middle East is in flames. From the
Straits of Gibraltar to the Straits of Hormuz, people are
crying out for democratic reforms and freedoms. The
facade of the so-called Arab Spring has fallen away.
In its place remain the repression, chaos and confusion
that have long defined the region. Attacks on the media
are increasing all over the world, but nowhere is it more
dangerous to be a journalist than in the Middle East.
Every day, people all over the globe turn on
televisions, open newspapers and browse the Internet
to follow events unfolding in the Middle East. That

13-3954925

S/PV.7003

information comes to us from the brave men and women
who put their lives on the line to document the bloody
insurgencies and revolutions erupting throughout the
region. Not only do journalists have to contend with
censorship, intimidation and abduction, they are now
becoming the deliberate targets of violence. From
Baghdad to Damascus and from Tehran to Khartoum,
journalists are being beaten, raped, tortured and killed.
Journalism is the public loudspeaker for the
brave men and women who have taken to the streets
demanding to be heard. Yet, in much of the Middle East
their voices and stories are being stifled. By restricting
those voices, the Arab States are restricting their ability
to develop their societies and improve the lives of their
citizens. The scrutiny that goes hand in hand with an
independent media is essential to holding Governments
accountable to their citizens. Every voice must have the
chance to be heard, especially the voices of dissident
and marginalized members of society.
In Israel, freedom of the press is woven into the
very fabric of our democratic society. As the Council
knows, we have no shortage of media outlets that report
on every facet of society and very often make demands
of our Government and our leaders. Our commitment to
the free exchange of ideas has made Israel a destination
of choice for many reporters. Journalists in Israel do
not have to fear the arbitrary arrests, imprisonment and
executions common in the totalitarian States that make
up the rest of our region. The very liberties that Israel
provides are both a blessing and a curse. While we are
immensely proud of our democratic institutions, they
often result in the burden of condemnation falling on
Israel. After all, foreign journalists would much sooner
face news cameras in Tel Aviv than bullets in Damascus
or torture in Tehran. Some reporters choose to focus
their scrutiny on the Middle East’s only real democracy.
Rather than risking their safety, they flock to Israel
in the knowledge there will be few repercussions and
quite possibly a Pulitzer Prize for their efforts.
But despite all the challenges that go hand in hand
with an independent media, there is no doubt in my
mind that the benefits outweigh the costs. As Thomas
Jefferson said, “Our liberty depends on the freedom
of the press, and that cannot be limited without being
lost”. Freedom, democracy and tolerance are a heavy
burden, and Israel is very proud to carry them. With
more reporters and human rights activists per capita
than anywhere on the planet, Israel understands that a
society cannot truly be free until its citizens have the

26

right to ask questions, challenge the status quo and
openly speak their minds.
Democracy, with all its drawbacks, is worth far more
than any dehumanizing and destructive dictatorship.
Attacks on journalists are not simply attacks on
individuals; they are attacks on freedom — on freedom
of speech, freedom of expression and freedom of the
press. Those who try to silence journalists are in fact
trying to silence the voices of millions of people whose
stories deserve to be told.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank the United States delegation for
organizing this debate, which covers an area that
brings together the right to freedom of expression,
enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, and international humanitarian law,
enshrined in the Geneva Conventions. As the Human
Rights Council has affirmed, the right to freedom of
expression “constitutes one of the essential foundations
of a democratic society and one of the basic conditions
for its progress and development” (A/HRC/RES/21/12).
For his part, the Secretary-General has highlighted the
crucial role that journalists play in denouncing their
own treatment and the suffering of civilians in conflict
situations, as well as violations of humanitarian law
and human rights. For the first time in a decision by
the Security Council, resolution 1738 (2006), adopted
on 23 December 2006, on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict, considered journalists, media
professionals and associated personnel as subject to
civilian protection.
Journalists doing their job in situations of armed
conflict face the dual problems of insecurity and
impunity. Indeed, in 2012 alone, according to the
International Federation of Journalists, 121 journalists
lost their lives while carrying out their professional
functions. The Federation also estimates that only
one in 10 cases where journalists are assassinated is
investigated.
In accordance with international law, the primary
responsibility for the protection of civilians, including
journalists and media professionals, rests with the States.
That responsibility also falls to non-State actors, such as
terrorist groups and criminal organizations. Combating
impunity for those who are responsible for war crimes,

13-39549

S/PV.7003

genocide, crimes against humanity and serious
violations of international humanitarian law continues
to be one of the main challenges for the international
community in protecting civilians in armed conflict.
That includes journalists and professionals in the
communications media. From a broader perspective,
it becomes necessary, as recommended by Special
Rapporteurs on the situation of human rights. for
States to investigate and criminally prosecute crimes
committed against the freedom of expression.
My country supports the United Nations Plan of
Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of
Impunity, drafted under UNESCO. We believe that
Plan of Action should be the cornerstone of a strategy to
protect journalists and communications professionals.
Of course, we understand that the protection of
journalists includes protecting their sources. We also
support the work of the Human Rights Council in that
regard, which goes beyond armed conflict situations.
The international community has adequate
standards for protecting civilian populations and
journalists and communications media professionals.
Those standards are contained in universal treaties and
United Nations resolutions. It is therefore not necessary
to develop new international standards. Rather, it is
time urgently to move on to an era of implementation
of those standards. The Security Council should call for
the implementation of those standards. States should
implement the standards through legislative and other
measures that involve the relevant actors, such as the
judiciary, the police and civil society. There is a large
space to promote regional and international cooperation
to benefit the security and safety of journalists and
other communication media professionals.
All of this has one objective, namely, to create
an environment that is conducive to journalists and
communications media professionals to achieve their
valuable mission to report in a safe, independent and
timely fashion.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lithuania.
Ms. Murmokaité (Lithuania): Let me thank the
United States presidency of the Security Council for the
month of July for organizing today’s debate. Given the
alarming trends regarding journalist deaths in conflictrelated zones this is a timely debate, indeed. I would
also like thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson

for his briefing, and the journalists for their moving
testimonies.
In addition to the following comments, Lithuania
associates itself with the statement to be made on behalf
of the European Union.
We depend on the media to satisfy our right to the
freedom of information and freedom of opinion. The
work that journalists, media professionals and bloggers
do upholding that freedom is fundamental. In conflict
zones in particular, they are the world’s eyes and ears
for countless victims whose suffering and death would
otherwise go barely noticed. We should not and must
not fail those who are doing this essential work.
Yet, 2012 was the second-worst year on record for
journalists, with a 49 per cent increase in deaths from
the year 2011. More than half of the victims were killed
in situations of which the Security Council is seized.
Combat-related crossfire was responsible for more than
one-third of journalist fatalities worldwide in 2012,
which is about twice the historical average. Internet
journalists were hit harder than ever, and the number
of freelancer deaths has also surpassed the historical
average. Sadly, impunity reigns as far as journalist
deaths are concerned. As noted earlier by the Deputy
Secretary-General and Ms. Carroll, journalistss killers
walk free in nine out of ten cases.
The international community must act in support
of the relevant provisions regarding the protection of
journalists contained in international humanitarian law.
We shouuld also keep in mind that the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court defines intentional
attacks against civilians as a war crime. Lithuania
calls on all States to ensure the security and safety of
civilians, including journalists, to end impunity and to
pursue accountability for the crimes committed against
civilian populations.
In 2011, as the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Chair-in-Office, the
Lithuanian Foreign Minister brought the issue of the
safety and security of journalists to the top of OSCE
agenda. As noted by our Chair-in-Office,
“Physical violence directed at journalists is a gross
and fundamental violation of human rights. It is
totally unacceptable. Violence against journalists
rightfully draws our attention and our anger”.
He made those comments as he and the OSCE
representative on the freedom of the media spearheaded

13-3954927

S/PV.7003

the publication of the OSCE Safety of Journalists
Guidebook. Our experience with the OSCE has
strengthened our belief in the importance of regional
organizations in addressing media freedom, the safety
of journalists and promoting accountability, as regional
efforts facilitate translating global commitments into
actions on the ground.
My delegation encourages the Council to continue
to address the issue of the safety and security of
journalists in line with the provisions of resolution 1738
(2006), both in the thematic debates on the protection
of civilians and in country-specific situations, as well
as through reporting requirements for peacekeeping
missions. We would also welcome the inclusion by
the Secretary-General of the issue of the protection of
journalists in armed conflicts in his regular reports on
the protection of civilians and other relevant reports.
In today’s world, where millions of civilians are
stranded in conflict, threatened, abused and persecuted,
and where the world’s attention may be their last hope
for survival, strengthening the international response
to attacks on journalists and tackling impunity for
such attacks are essential, as is the lead of the Security
Council on the matter.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour of
speaking on behalf of the European Union and its now
28 member States. The candidate countries Turkey, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro
and Serbia; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania
and Bosnia and Herzegovina; the European Free Trade
Association country Liechtenstein, member of the
European Economic Area; as well as Ukraine, Armenia
and Georgia, align themselves with this statement.
We thank the presidency for bringing this issue
back to the Council after the landmark resolution 1738
(2006). Let me also thank Deputy Secretary-General
Eliasson for his briefing and the journalists for their
impressive testimonies.
The year 2012 saw the highest number of journalists
killed while carrying out their vital task. The first
part of 2013 is very worrying in that regard as well.
That situation obliges the international community to
reflect on how to best protect journalists in conflict

28

and on how to better use the array of existing legal and
political means to that end. This debate should serve
as a reminder of the increasingly heavy price paid for
information.
We are deeply concerned about the worrying trend
of increased violence against journalists, including
bloggers and journalistic sources, both in conflict and
non-conflict situations, including by non-State actors.
The violence includes torture, extrajudicial killings,
enforced disappearance and arbitrary detention,
harassment and the killing of journalists and media
workers. We are also alarmed by the restrictions to press
freedom and to the use of the Internet and the increasing
level of intimidation, violence and censorship that
journalists, including bloggers, face in many countries.
At the same time, we should also remember that female
journalists are more often subject to harassment and
sexual violence. We have repeatedly condemned these
trends, which must be urgently addressed.
A free, independent and vibrant press is a
cornerstone of any democratic society. The freedom
of opinion and expression is a fundamental right and
an inherent part of human dignity. It is also enshrined
in many international and regional human rights
instruments.
The freedom of expression also extends to the
Internet and any other media. The European Union is
firmly opposed to any unjustified or disproportional
restrictions of access to its use. The European Union
is developing guidelines on the freedom of expression
online and offline, including the protection journalists,
including bloggers, in order to react coherently and
efficiently to violations of the right to freedom of
expression.
The European Union is determined to continue
standing up for press freedom worldwide. We call
on all Governments to promote a safe and enabling
environment in which journalists can perform their
work independently, without undue interference and
without fear of censorship, persecution or prosecution.
We also call on States to ensure accountability by
investigating attacks against journalists, including
bloggers, bringing perpetrators to justice, and providing
adequate remedies for victims.
We look forward to the report of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights on good practices
regarding the protection of journalists, the prevention
of attacks and the fight against impunity for attacks

13-39549

S/PV.7003

committed against journalists. Ending impunity would
be a very effective measure to guarantee the safety of
journalists in the long term.

increase the professional capacities of journalists,
provide urgent protection and promote freedom of
expression in law and in practice.

We call upon all Governments to respect the
freedoms and rights of journalists and protect them
especially in dangerous professional missions in areas
of armed conflict, and call on all parties to armed
conflict to respect their obligations under international
human rights law and international humanitarian law,
including the Geneva Conventions and their Additional
Protocols. We further call on all parties to conflict to
allow, within the framework of applicable rules and
procedures, media access and coverage, as appropriate,
in situations of international and non-international
armed conflict.

Let me finish by expressing the European Union’s
tribute to and support for all those who fight for the
respect of freedom of expression and for free, pluralistic
press and other media. The creation of a free and safe
environment for journalists will undoubtedly strengthen
peace, democracy and development worldwide.

In that context we wish to recall the presidential
statement adopted by the Security Council in February,
which clearly states that
“journalists, media professionals and associated
personnel engaged in dangerous professional
missions in areas of armed conflict shall be
considered as civilians and shall be respected and
protected as such” (S/PRST/2013/2).
We encourage the Secretary-General to continue
including the issue of protection of journalists in
armed conflict in his reports on the protection of
civilians. We also encourage the Security Council to
address the protection of journalists in situations of
armed conflict, including through public statements,
reporting requirements for peacekeeping missions or
the Secretariat, and the strengthening of mandates.
It is also important to underline the work of
the Human Rights Council, which last September
adopted resolution 21/12 on the safety of journalists,
as well as that of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and UNESCO
in protecting the freedom of expression and safety of
journalists. The United Nations Plan of Action on the
Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity, led by
UNESCO and aiming at greater cooperation among
United Nations organizations, is a key document in this
debate.
We pay tribute to civil society organizations and
journalist networks for their work, highlighting and
exposing killings and detentions of and attacks on
journalists and press premises. The European Union
lends its support to civil society organizations to

The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Canada.
Mr. Husain (Canada) (spoke in French): We
thank the United States for having organized today’s
debate and the journalists who shared their personal
experiences.
Too often, journalists can find themselves in harm’s
way due to their profession. Today’s debate serves to
remind us of that reality. Cases involving Canadian
journalists include Michelle Lang and Zahra Kazemi.
In 2009, Canadian journalist Michelle Lang, of The
Calgary Herald, was killed by an improvised explosive
device in Afghanistan alongside four members of
the Canadian Armed Forces. In 2003, Canadian
photojournalist Zahra Kazemi died as a result of the
injuries she sustained while in custody in the Evin
Prison in Iran, after having been arrested for taking
photos outside that prison in Tehran.
Looking at the current situation in Syria, the
Syrian Journalists Association has documented the
deaths of 153 professional or citizen journalists since
the uprising began. We condemn the intentional
targeting of journalists, media professionals and
associated personnel, and recall that media equipment
and installations constitute civilian assets under
international law, as affirmed by resolution 1738 (2006).
We must pursue our efforts to bring the perpetrators
of such heinous acts to justice. Those who deliberately
target civilians must be held to account.
(spoke in English)
Each State needs to ensure a safe and enabling
environment in which journalists can perform their
work independently and without fear of violence. The
burden, however, does not rest solely on States, as
non-State actors such as terrorist groups and criminal
organizations pose an ever-growing threat. Journalists,
too, have responsibilities in this regard. They
must ensure that they report events without taking

13-3954929

S/PV.7003

unnecessary risks to themselves or to other civilians.
They must be responsible and take safety precautions.
Canada has worked with independent media groups
to provide security skills training to journalists so that
they can protect themselves. We have also contributed
funding towards training Syrian activists and journalists
to document violations against media activists in Syria,
so that one day the perpetrators of these crimes can be
brought to justice. We will continue to work with key
partners in an effort to support freedom of expression
around the world.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Austria.
Mr. Thallinger (Austria): First, I would like to
express Austria’s appreciation to the United States for
organizing today’s thematic debate. By adopting the
landmark resolution 1738 (2006), the Security Council
recognized the importance of protecting journalists
and media professionals in situations of armed conflict.
Press freedom and the right to freedom of expression
are pillars of democratic societies and the rule of law,
and the Council in its own work depends on independent
and accurate information from conflict zones.
Although we have witnessed an increase in targeted
killings of journalists in recent years, both in conflict
situations and in times of peace, the Security Council
has not been consistent in addressing these threats.
We therefore think that today’s debate is very timely
and were pleased to hear from the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, as well as from journalists sharing their
experiences and ideas. We fully align our remarks
with the statement just made on behalf of the European
Union.
While Syria has, sadly, been leading the charts of
deadliest countries for journalists this year and in 2012,
data show that the majority of attacks against journalists
take place in situations that cannot be qualified
as traditional or typical armed conflict situations.
Journalists reporting, for example, on organized crime,
corruption, the activities of drug cartels, protests and
popular uprisings can easily become targets of assault,
arbitrary arrest, harassment or intimidation. It is against
that background that Austria has defined the protection
of journalists as one of its priorities during its current
membership of the Human Rights Council.
Together with a cross-regional group of Member
States, we introduced a resolution in the Human Rights

30

Council in September 2012, the objective of which is
to ensure accountability for attacks against journalists
and to promote a safe and enabling environment in
which journalists can work independently. Time and
again, impunity for those responsible for attacks has
been recognized as the biggest obstacle to the effective
protection of journalists. Therefore, we also introduced
the issue in the Commission on Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice at the United Nations Office in Vienna
earlier this year. We recall that the Security Council has
not only reaffirmed its strong opposition to impunity
for attacks against civilians, but also underlined its own
role in ending it, including in resolution 1894 (2009), on
the protection of civilians.
We commend the leadership of UNESCO DirectorGeneral Bokova, who consistently advocates for press
freedom and calls for the thorough investigation of
attacks. Human Rights Council resolution 21/12,
adopted by consensus, requests the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights to prepare
a compilation of good practices in the protection of
journalists, the prevention of attacks and the fight
against impunity. The compilation will be presented to
Member States in September, and Austria will continue
its work on the issue in the Human Rights Council.
Let me further highlight the important work done
by the United Nations in that field. The elaboration,
under UNESCO’s leadership, of the United Nations
Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue
of Impunity provides an important tool for ensuring the
coherence of United Nations measures and will lead to
new synergies. At the same time, I would underline the
important continuing contribution made in that regard
by several of the Human Rights Council’s special
procedures, and in particular Frank La Rue, who — in
his capacity as Special Rapporteur on the promotion
and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and
expression — has devoted considerable work and
attention to journalists, including citizen journalists,
and has made a number of interesting recommendations.
We are of the view that the Council could benefit
from the expertise and information provided by relevant
Special Rapporteurs, such as Frank La Rue, including
by inviting them to participate in discussions like
today’s. The Special Rapporteur has also emphasized
the responsibility of news organizations and journalists
themselves in enhancing safety, and we note that
a number of media organizations have formulated
guidelines and useful recommendations to that end.

13-39549

S/PV.7003

Last but not least, let me express Austria’s hope
that the Secretary-General will include more detailed
information on the situation of and threats against
journalists, both in his next report on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, due in November this year,
and in country-specific reporting. The provision of
timely and accurate information on threats to journalists
in conflict situations is an essential prerequisite for the
Council to address the topic in a more coherent manner,
not only in thematic statements and resolutions but
also in country-specific deliberations, including on
peacekeeping operations.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Costa Rica.
Mr. Ulibarri (spoke in Spanish): Costa Rica
attaches great importance to this debate. We thank the
United States for convening it, and Deputy SecretaryGeneral Jan Eliasson and the four invited journalists
for their presentations. The Security Council can derive
great benefit from the knowledge and experience of
professionals like them and other members of civil
society. We urge the Council to strengthen this kind of
interaction.
When journalists and other media professionals
work in situations of conflict, they not only face the
collateral risks arising therefrom, but are increasingly
subject to deliberate aggression by the warring parties,
be they despotic regimes, sectarian groups, terrorists
or the perpetrators of organized crime. Such aggression
frequently extends to their information sources and to
the integrity and privacy of their communications.
Violence against journalists does not aim solely
at impeding their individual ability to exercise the
right to freedom of expression that they share with
all citizens. The abuse, kidnapping, torture or murder
of journalists seeks above all to hinder society from
accessing independent information about conflicts
or other realities that some may wish to keep hidden.
Journalists are also often targeted in a form of revenge
designed to make an example of them in order to instil
fear in other journalists and in the civilian population
as a whole — a perverse method of represson that is
both reactive and pre-emptive.
The greater and more complex are the conflicts,
the greater is the need for external voices capable of
providing serious, rigorous information, led by strong
ethical and quality standards. This is the vital social
task of professional journalists and media, particularly

in situations that, by their very nature, threaten
international peace and security. The international
community therefore has the responsibility to protect
journalists and hold their aggressors accountable.
That is why the Security Council should pursue its
involvement in this issue. The responsibility also
extends to the entire United Nations system and, in
particular, to its Member States.
In undertaking this task, we already rely on
important support tools. One of the most important
such tools is the promotion of respect and achievement
of international humanitarian law regarding the
protection of civilians in international armed conflicts
or internal conflicts. That includes the specific norm
of Additional Protocol I of the Geneva Conventions
of 1949 regarding methods of protecting journalists.
The Security Council’s resolutions on the protection
of civilians — particularly resolution 1738 (2006)
regarding the protection of journalists — and paragraph
16 of the presidential statement contained in document
S/PRST/2013/2, add important guidelines. Additionally,
the parameters found in regulations and resolutions
relative to the protection of humanitarian assistance
personnel should be extended to journalists.
From a more operational perspective, the
implementation strategy and national application of
the United Nations Plan of Action on the Safety of
Journalists and the Issue of Impunity is of particular
importance. We highlight the role of UNESCO in
designing and implementing these initiatives.
Furthermore, the international community must
strive even harder to develop national capacities to
guarantee accountability for violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights. It must endeavour
to improve security and justice, and to consistently recur
to international justice when necessary. In addition, a
permanent incentive should exist to support the efforts
of professional organizations and other civil society
entities that promote the protection of journalists, their
sources and communications.
Costa Rica is committed to that cause. In line
with this commitment, from 2 to 4 May our country
hosted UNESCO’s celebration of World Press Freedom
Day, which included the international conference
“Speak without Risk: For the safe exercise of freedom
of expression in all media”. Today’s debate is along
the same lines, but there is much more to do, and we
should maintain our efforts in order to continue moving
forward.

13-3954931

S/PV.7003

The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mrs. Anđelić (Bosnia and Heerzegovina): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Madam, for organizing
this important and timely debate in order to address
issues related to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, with a special emphasis on the protection of
journalists. I am also grateful to Deputy SecretaryGeneral Jan Eliasson and representatives of media for
their briefings.
Bosnia and Herzegovina aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union.
Every single day, the United Nations undertakes
very tough and hard work to ensure due protection from
the scourge of war. The most desirable approach in
situations of conflict would be the peaceful resolution
of disputes through diplomatic efforts. Unfortunately,
armed conflicts still occur and civilians in those
situations still need protection. Today, the United
Nations endeavours represent important landmarks in
the global efforts to better protect civilians in armed
conflicts. We cannot doubt that there is a need for the
United Nations, and especially for the Security Council,
to further work on improving planning, preparedness
and policies aimed at reducing the vulnerability of
innocent civilians in conflicts. We would like to
reaffirm our commitment to the protection of civilians
in armed conflict, and to the continuing and full
implementation of all relevant resolutions.
The trend of the unlawful targeting of
civilians — including women, children, the elderly,
humanitarian workers and journalists — is of great
concern to us. There is no justification for armed
groups to attack civilians. Therefore, we emphasize
the responsibility of all parties to conflict to ensure
the security of civilians and to comply strictly with the
norms of international humanitarian and human rights
law.
The protection of the right to freedom of opinion
and expression, including the right to receive and
express opinions and impart information, is crucial in
all societies. However, journalists and the media have
often been subjected to various forms of pressure,
blackmail and even physical attacks. It is quite clear
that attacks on journalists weaken and endanger the
freedom of every citizen.

32

The fact today is that an increasing number
of journalists, media professionals and associated
personnel are killed or injured while reporting from
conflict situations, even though they are considered
to be civilians and should be respected and protected
as such. While we express our deep concern regarding
this issue, we would like to remind all parties to armed
conflicts of their legal obligations with regard to the
protection of journalists. Furthermore, it is essential
to emphasize the obligation of States to prevent such
attacks and the need to bring to justice those responsible.
Efforts must be enhanced to support the fight against
impunity, at the national and international levels alike.
Sanctions and other targeted measures play an
important role in overall efforts as well as in initiatives
to improve compliance with the law by non-State armed
groups.
Although the primary responsibility for the
protection of civilians lies with States, the United
Nations plays a crucial role through its systematic
approach to the protection of civilians, which is at the
forefront of global efforts. We support the provision of
more comprehensive and detailed information on the
protection of civilians in country-specific situations, as
well as on measuring progress in the implementation of
peacekeeping mandates related to the protection of all
civilians, including journalists.
We need to ensure the protection of the right to
the freedom of expression and, at the same time, to
punish unethical behaviour by journalists or the media.
Unverified or even fabricated information is often
used as a weapon in situations of peace and of conflict
alike. Bosnia and Herzegovina has experienced the
worst effects of hate speech in the past, which was not
an issue of freedom of speech, but speech that incited
ethnic hatred and killings. In that regard, we are of
the view that all journalists have to hold themselves
to high ethical standards at all times and under all
circumstances. Preventing and fighting against the
encouragement, representation or profiling of ethnic,
national or religious intolerance, hatred and violence
are of vital interest for the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
We condemn all incitement to violence against
civilians in situations of armed conflict. We further
reaffirm the need to bring to justice, in accordance
with the applicable international law, individuals
who incite such violence. Mandating peacekeeping

13-39549

S/PV.7003

missions to protect civilians remains one of the most
significant actions taken by the Security Council
to enhance protection. The United Nations and the
Security Council need to indicate their willingness,
when authorizing missions on the ground in conflict
situations, to consider, where appropriate, steps to
respond to all violence against journalists and media
professionals. At the same time, it is crucial to consider
steps to respond to media broadcasts inciting crimes
against humanity and serious violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law.
The objective and impartial work of journalists
in armed conflict is, on the one hand, appreciated
and necessary, but, on the other hand, it is adversely
affected by high risk. We are half way through 2013
and already a significant number of journalists have
lost their lives reporting on various conflicts. We must
also note that journalist causalities have dramatically

risen, making the job of reporting on conflict areas
one of the most dangerous jobs in the world. We also
believe that today’s meeting of the Security Council
could provide additional impetus in our efforts to fight
for truth and objectivity, to set mechanisms to address
the root causes of violence against journalists and to
combat impunity.
In conclusion, we pay tribute to all those journalists
who have lost their lives carrying out their work for the
benefit of all citizens to realize their right to receive
reliable information.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers remaining on my list for this meeting. Given
the lateness of the hour, I intend, with the concurrence
of the members of the Council, to suspend the meeting
until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.20 p.m.

13-3954933
