32

General AHembly-Eleventh Seuion

(a) The Administering Authority should declare
that the aim of its policy is to develop that Territory
into a democratic State,
( b) As an interim measure for the near future, the
Constitution of the Territory should be so amended
as to introduce parity of representation for Africans
on the one hand, and non-Africans on the other,
( c) U niversal suffrage on a common roll should be
introduced in the Territory,
Having studied that part of the Trusteeship Council's report which deals with Tanganyika, 24
Having noted that the Trusteeship Council has expressed the hope that the Administering Authority will
.:ontinue with all possible speed the process of developing the Territory to the end that an integrated society
will be established in which Africans will play their
due part,
1. Draws the attention of the Administering Authority and the Trusteeship Council to the views expressed
by the President of the Tanganyika African National
Union and to the relevant debates in the Fourth Committee;
2. Recommends to the Administering Authority that
it should consider making a statement on the policy it
proposes to follow in Tanganyika and should, inter
alia, include therein the principle that, in accordance
with the objectives of the International Trusteeship
System, the Territory shall be guided towards selfgovernment or independence and shall become a democratic State in which al! inhabitants have equal rights;
3. Recommends to the Trusteeship Council that it
instruct its periodic visiting mission which will visit
the Trust Territories in East Africa in 1957, to study
in particular the question of Tanganyika's political
development, in the light of such relevant information
as it obtains from the Administering Authority and
from representatives of the population of the Trust
Territory;

and suggestions made in the course of the discussion
of the report at the eleventh session of the General
Assembly.
661 st plenary meeting,
26 February 1957.

4. Recommends that the Trusteeship Council include in its next reports, in the framework both of its
examination of conditions in the Territory and of the
question of the attainment by the Trust Territories of
the ?bjective of self-government or independence, a
spec1al study of the Territory's political development,
in the light of the visiting mission's report and the
~nformation obtained from the Administering Author1ty.
661st plenary meeting,
26 February 1957.

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 392 (V) of 15 December
1950, 854 (IX) of 14 December 1954 and 947 (X)
of 15 December 1955,

1066 (XI). Report of the Trusteeship Council
covering the period from 23 July 1955 to
14 August 1956

The General Assembly,
H aving e.zamined the report of the Trusteeship Council covering the period from 23 July 1955 to 14 August
1956, 20
1. Takes note of the report of the Trusteeship
Council;
2. Recommends that the Trusteeship Council, in
its future deliberations, take into account the comments
"'Ibid., Eleventh Session, Supplement No. 4 (A/3170), part
Il, chapter 1.
• Ibid., Sunlement No. 4 ( A/3170).

1067 (XI). Hearings of petitioners from the
Trust Territory of the Cameroons under
French administration

•

The General Assembly,
Having granted, in the Fourth Committee, hearings
to petitioners representing organizations in the. rrust
Territory of the Cameroons under French adm1mstration,
H aving studied that part of the Trusteeship Council's report which deals with the Trust Territory of
the Cameroons under French administration, 26
l. Takes note of the statements of the petitioners
and transmits them to the Trusteeship Council for
further study;
2. Expresses the hope that the Administering Authority will take all necessary measures to restore political activity to normal conditions and to bring to an
end the tension which have characterized the political
life of the Trust Territory of the Cameroons under
French administration;
3. Recommends to the Trusteeship Council that it
continue to pay attention to the matters dealt with in
the present resolution and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its twelfth session.

661st plenary meeting,
26 February 1957.
1068 (XI). Question of the frontier between the
Trust Territory of Somaliland under Italian
administration and Ethiopia

Taking note of the reports transmitted to the General Assembly by the GovernmeITl:s of•Ethiopiall'I' and
Italy 28 in accordance with th~ reqllest contained in
resolution 947 (X),

•

Taking further note of the efforts ~xerted by both
Governments to expedi te their ' curi-ent direct negotiations in accordance with the recommendation contained in resolution 947 (X),
Noting further that, so far, only the northern sector
of the frontier between the Trust Territory of Somaliland under Italian administration and Ethiopia has
been discussed,
Recalling that the Trusteeship Agreement will cease
to be in force on 2 December 1960, when the Trust
Territory shall become an independent sovereign State,
Recalling also that, in accordance with the Trusteeship Agreement, the Administering Authority is re• Ibid., Supplement No. 4 (A/3170), part Il, chapter V.
.. Ibid., Eleventh Session, Annexes, agenda item 40, document
A/3502.
• Ibid., document A/3463.

IS

Reeolutiona adopted on the reporta of the Fomtla Committee

progress of their negotiations to the General Assembly
at its twelfth session;
2. Expresses the opinion that, if the negotiations
should fail to achieve substantial results by the twelfth
session of the General Assembly, it will be necessary
for the Governments of Ethiopia and Italy, in the interests of achieving a final settlement of this question
before the independence of Somaliland, to avail themselves of the procedure laid down in General Assembly
resolution 392 (V) of 15 December 1950.

quired to submit to the Trusteeship Council, before
2 June 1959, a plan for the orderly transfer of all
functions of government to a duly constituted independent Government of the Territory,
Considering the increasing importance of achieving
a final settlement of the frontier question without
delay,
1. Recommends that the Governments of Ethiopia
and Italy continue and complete negotiations on the entire frontier between the Trust Territory of Somaliland
under Italian administration and Ethiopia, including
those sectors not yet discussed, and report on the

*

661st plenary meeting,
26 February 1957.

*

*

NOTE
Election to fi.li vacancie8 in the membermip of the Committee
on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories ( item 36)
At its 630th meeting on 11 February 1957, the Fourth Committee, acting on
behalf of the General Assembly, in accordance with the terms of resolutions 332
(V) and 646 (VII) of 2 December 1949 and 10 December 1952, elected two
members to the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories to fill the vacancies created by the expiration of the terms of office of Burma
and Guatemala.
The following States were elected for a three-year period: CEYLON and
GUATEMALA.
