General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

120

1. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the steps he has taken to mobilize assistance to Sao
Tome and Principe;
2. Endorses fully the assessment and recommendations
contained in the annex to the report of the Secretary-General;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
and international organizations which have contributed assistance to Sao Tome and Principe;
4. Renews its appeal to Member States, the appropriate
organs, organizations and programmes of the United Nations system, regional and interregional organizations and
other intergovernmental bodies and non-governmental organizations, as well as international financial institutions,
to assist in the development of Sao Tome and Principe
through bilateral and multilateral channels, as appropriate;
5. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To keep the situation in Sao Tome and Principe
under constant review and to apprise the Economic and
Social Council, at its second regular session of 1984, of the
current status of the special economic assistance for Sao
Tome and Principe;
(b) To report on the progress made in the economic
situation of Sao Tome and Principe and in organizing and
implementing the special programme of economic assistance
for that country in time for the matter to be considered by
the General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session.
109th plenary meeting
17 December I 982

37/147.

Assistance to the drought-stricken areas of Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, the Sudan
and Uganda

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 35/90 and 35/91 of 5 December
1980 and 36/221 of 17 December 1981 on the question of
assistance to the drought-stricken areas of Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, the Sudan and Uganda,
Concerned about the continued adverse effects of drought
on the economic and social development of those countries,
Noting the reports of the Secretary-General on Djibouti,
Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, the Sudan and Uganda, 41
Bearing in mind the ongoing consultations between the
countries concerned to establish the intergovernmental body
recommended by the General Assembly in its resolution
35/90,
1. Reaffirms its resolution 36/221 on assistance to the
drought-stricken areas of Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, the Sudan and Uganda;
2. Endorses the recommendations made by the multiagency mission to Ethiopia; 42
3. Takes note of the ongoing consultations between the
Governments concerned on the establishment of the intergovernmental body to combat the effects of drought and
other natural disasters and urges them to finalize, as soon
as possible, the necessary arrangements for the establishment of that body;
4. Notes that the Secretary-General has made arrangements with the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme, subject to the availability of funds,
for a unit within the programmes administered by the Administrator to be assigned responsibility for assisting the
41

42

N37/122 and A/37/198.
See A/37/198, annex.

affected countries in the region and for co-ordinating the
activities of the United Nations system in support of recov ·
ery and rehabilitation in those countries;
5. Appeals to Member States to provide the Secretary
General with the resources required to meet the operational
costs of such a unit as soon as the intergovernmental hody
is established;
6. Requests the Secretary-General, in close co-ordina
tion with the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme and the appropriate specialized agencies
and other organizations of the United Nations system, to
continue to extend all necessary assistance to thrn,e countries
in their efforts to combat the effects of drought on the hasis
of the recommendations of various multi-agency missions.
pending the establishment of the intergovernmental body:
7. Also requests the Secretary-General, in close co
ordination with the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme and the appropriate specialized
agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, to assist the Governments of the region, at their request.
in establishing or improving national machinery to rnmbal
the effects of drought and other natural disasters and to
report to the Economic and Social Council, at its second
regular session of I 983, and to the General Assembly at its
thirty-eighth session on the progress achieved in the implc
mentation of the present resolution.

109th plenary mel'ting
17 Decemher /9~2

37/148.

Assistance to Botswana

The General Assembly.
Recalling Security Council resolutions 403 ( 1977) ut
14 January 1977 and 406 (1977) of 25 May 1977, which
concerned the complaint by the Government of Botswana
regarding acts of aggression committed against its terrilor)
by the illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 460 ( 1979) ol
21 December 1979, in which all Member States and spe
cialized agencies were called upon to provide urgent assist
ance to Zimbabwe and the front-line States,
Recalling its resolutions 32/97 of 13 December 1977, .BI
130 of 19 December 1978 and 34/ 125 of 14 December 1979,
in which the General Assembly, inter alia, recognized the
special economic hardship confronting Botswana as a result
of diverting funds from development projects to effective
arrangements for security against attacks and threats by
Southern Rhodesia, and endorsed the assessments and rec·
ommendations contained in the notes of the Secretary.
General dated 28 March l 977 4 ~ and 26 October 1977 44 and
in his reports of 7 July 197845 and 28 August I979, 40
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General ot
16 August 1982, 47 to which was annexed the report of the
mission which he sent to Botswana in response to General
Assembly resolution 36/222 of 17 December 1981 ,
Taking into account the fact that Botswana's economic
situation has been further aggravated by a serious drought
and a sharp fall in export earnings,

43
Official Record., of the Security Council. J'/1irn• ..,e, ,md !'ear. \111'
plement for January, February and March 1977. document S 1 12307
44
Ibid., Supplement for October, November and Deamha /977. dol·
ument Sil 2421.
"'A/33/166 and Corr. I
46
A/341419-S/13506.
47
A/37/132-S/1531 I

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Noting the need of the Government of Botswana to rehabilitate and develop effective road, rail and air communications, both internally and with the rest of the world, in
view of the uncertain political situation in the region, Botswana's vulnerability as a land-locked country and its dependence on externally controlled railway systems for the
transport of its principal exports and imports,
Noting with appreciation Botswana's desire to establish
its own railway system,
Noting also the urgent need to complete speedily the
projects that have been identified in the annex to the report
of the Secretary-General,
l. Notes with satisfaction the efforts of Botswana in
implementing its development projects;
2. Endorses fully the revised programme of assistance
contained in the annex to the report of the Secretary-General47
and calls the attention of the international community to the
outstanding needs for assistance identified therein;
3. Notes that, while the response from some Member
States and international organizations to the appeals of the
Secretary-General has been encouraging, there is an urgent
need to maintain the flow of contributions to carry out the
remainder of the emergency programme, the implementation of parts of which remains a critical necessity;
4. Draws the attention of States and international and
intergovernmental organizations particularly to the projects
in the field of transport and communications, as well as to
the priority requirements to rehabilitate the border areas
most adversely affected by the war, in accordance with the
recommendations contained in the annex to the report of
the Secretary-General;
5. Reiterates its appeal to all States and intergovernmental organizations to provide generous assistance to enable Botswana to carry out the remainder of its planned
development projects, as well as those made necessary by
the current political and economic situation;
6. Appeals to all Member States, regional and interregional organizations and other intergovernmental bodies to
provide financial, material and technical assistance to Botswana to enable it to carry out is planned development
programme without interruption;
1. Urges Member States and organizations which are
already implementing or are negotiating assistance programmes for Botswana to expand them, wherever possible;
8. Invites the United Nations Development Programme,
the United Nations Children's Fund, the World Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization, the World Bank and
the International Fund for Agricultural Development to bring
to the attention of their governing bodies, for their consideration, the assistance they are rendering to Botswana, for
which the General Assembly has requested the SecretaryGeneral to implement a special economic assistance programme, and to report on the results of that assistance and
on their decisions to the Secretary-General in time for consideration by the Assembly at its thirty-eighth session;
9. Appeals to the international community to contribute
to the special account established by the Secretary-General
for the purpose of facilitating the channelling of contributions to Botswana;
10. Requests the appropriate specialized agencies and
other organizations of the United Nations system to cooperate closely with the Secretary-General for the purpose
of facilitating the channelling of contributions to Botswana;
11. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical
and material assistance to Botswana;

121

(b) To keep the situation in Botswana under constant
review, to maintain close contact with Member States, regional and other intergovernmental organizations, the specialized agencies and the international financial institutions
concerned, and to apprise the Economic and Social Council,
at its second regular session of 1983, of the current status
of the special programme of economic assistance for
Botswana;
(c) To report on the progress made in the economic
situation of Botswana and in organizing and implementing
the special economic assistance programme for that country
in time for the matter to be considered by the General
Assembly at its thirty-eighth session.
109th plenary meeting
17 December 1982

37/149.

Assistance for the development of Liberia

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 36/207 of 17 December 1981, in
which it appealed to all Member States, the specialized
agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system and international financial and development institutions
to provide all possible assistance for the reconstruction,
rehabilitation and development of Liberia,
Noting the statement made by the representative of Liberia
before the Second Committee on 4 November 1982, 48 describing his country's serious economic and financial
situation,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General, 49
to which was annexed the report of the inter-agency mission
he dispatched to Liberia in March 1982 to consult with the
Government on the additional assistance needed for the reconstruction, rehabilitation and development of the country,
Noting from the report the serious economic and financial
problems that confront Liberia, which arise primarily from
the weak and underdeveloped state of the economic and
social infrastructure,
Noting also that the budgetary situation in Liberia, according to the report, makes it impossible for the Government to embark on a development programme without
sufficient external financial aid,
Particularly concerned that the Government of Liberia is
unable to provide the population with adequate health, educational and other essential social and public services because of an acute shortage of financial and material resources,
especially so in the wake of the recent national disaster
arising from the landslide and floods which caused the loss
of lives,
Taking note of the recommended programme of assistance
to Liberia, drawn up by the inter-agency mission in consultation with the Government, 50
Aware of the intention of the Government of Liberia to
organize, with the assistance of the United Nations Development Programme, a round-table conference of donors
in 1983 to discuss the country's development needs and to
consider ways and means of helping the Government in its
efforts to meet those needs,
Noting that the Government of Liberia, with the assistance
of the United Nations Secretariat, has prepared and submitted to the Committee for Development Planning, for
48
Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-seventh Session.
Second Committee, 30th meeting, paras. 33-36.
49
A/37/123.
0
'
See A/37/123, annex.
