94

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

dependence of all peoples still under colonial and foreign domination and alien subjugation, notably the
peoples of Africa and the Palestinian people;
9. Strongly condemns the massacres of innocent
and defenceless people, including women and children,
by the racist minority regimes of southern Africa in
their desperate attempt to thwart the legitimate demands
of the people;
10. Demands full respect for the basic human rights
of all individuals detained or imprisoned as a result
of their struggle for self-determination and independence, and strict respect for article 5 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights under which no one shall
be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment, 4 and their immediate release;
11. Notes with appreciation the material and other
forms of assistance that peoples under colonial and alien
regimes continue to receive from Governments, United
Nations agencies and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and calls for a maximization
of this assistance;
12. Keenly awaits the conclusion of the following
studies by the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities:
(a) Historical and current development of the right
to self-determination on the basis of the Charter of the
United Nations and other instruments adopted by
United Nations organs, with particular reference to the
promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
(b) Implementation of United Nations resolutions
relating to the right of peoples under colonial and alien
domination to self-determination;
13. Decides to remain seized of this item at its
thirty-second session on the basis of reports that Governments, United Nations agencies and intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations are requested to
submit concerning the strengthening of assistance to
colonial Territories and peoples under alien domination
and foreign subjugation.
83rd plenary meeting
30 November 1976
31/35.

Report of the United Nations High Com•
missioner for Refugees

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, 5 transmitted by the
Economic and Social Council under its resolution 2011
(LXI) of 2 August 1976, and having heard his statement,6
Recalling its resolutions 3454 (XXX) and 3455
(XXX) of 9 December 1975 relating to the activities
of the High Commissioner for the benefit of refugees
and displaced persons,
Recognizing the importance of the essential humanitarian tasks which the High Commissioner is called
4 Resolution 217 A (III).
5 Official Records of the General Assembly,

Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/31/12), Supplement No. 12A
(A/31/12/A?d.1) and Supplement No. 12B (A/31/12/Add.2).
6
lbtd., Th1rty-fir~t. Sessio1;, Third C?mmittee,. 49th meeting,
paras. 1-12; and 1b1d., Third Committee, Sesswnal Fascicle
corrigendum.
'

upon to perform and for which his Office has acquired
particular expertise and experience,
Bearing in mind the increasingly useful co-operation
between the High Commissioner and other members of
the United Nations system, resulting in better co-ordination of action and greater efficiency,
Recognizing the need for further strengthening the
international protection of refugees,
l. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution 2011 (LXI) on the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees;
2. Commends the High Commissioner and his staff
for the efficient manner in which they continue to discharge their manifold activities on behalf of refugees
and displaced persons;
3. Requests the High Commissioner to intensify
his efforts, in co-operation with Governments, United
Nations bodies and voluntary agencies, to promote permanent and speedy solutions to the problems facing his
Office through voluntary repatriation and assistance in
rehabilitation of returnees, integration in countries of
asylum or resettlement in other countries as needed;
4. Further requests the High Commissioner to continue his humanitarian assistance on behalf of refugees
and displaced persons in Africa and urges the fullest
co-operation of all concerned for this purpose;
5. Urges Governments to strengthen further their
support for the humanitarian activities which the High
Commissioner is carrying out in accordance with pertinent resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council by:
(a) Facilitating his efforts in the field of international protection by means of accession to international instruments relating to refugees and respect for
the rights of refugees;
(b) Co-operating in the promotion of permanent
and speedy solutions to the problems faced by his
Office;
( c) Providing the necessary financial means to attain the objectives of his humanitarian assistance programmes.
83rd plenary meeting
30 November 1976
31/36.

Question of the establishment, in accordance with the Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness, of a body to which
persons claiming the benefit of the Convention may apply

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3274 (XXIX) of 10 December 1974,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
High CoI?mission~r for Refugees: on the question of
the establishment, m accordance with the Convention on
the Reduction of Statelessness of 1961, 8 of a body to
which persons claiming the benefit of the Convention
may apply,
Noting_ that th~ High Commissioner is carrying out
the fu1;1ct1?ns r_equ_rred under the Convention without any
financial 1mphcat10ns for the United Nations
7 Ibid.,

'

Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 12B (A/31/12/

Add.2).
s A/CONF.9/15, 1961.

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Requests the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees to continue to perform these functions.
83rd plenary meeting
30 November 1976

31/37.

National experience in promoting the cooperative movement

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2459 (XXIII) of 20 December 1968 and 3273 (XXIX) of 10 December 1974
and Economic and Social Council resolution 1668 (LII)
of 1 June 1972,
Recalling the objective expressed in Article 55 of the
Charter of the United Nations to promote higher standards of living, full employment and conditions of economic and social progress and development for the
purpose of favourably influencing the welfare of peoples
as well as the peaceful and friendly relations among
nations,
Recalling the Declaration and the Programme of
Action for the Establishment of a New International
Economic Order9 and the Charter of Economic Rights
and Duties of States,10
Recognizing that the expansion of the co-operative
movement in the promotion of social and economic
progress is closely linked to structural and institutional
reforms which, inter alia, aim at equitable distribution
of income, popular participation in the development
process and equality of opportunity to contribute to
and benefit from the fruits of development,
Underlining the appeal to States contained in article 6 of the Declaration on Social Progress and Development11 that social progress and development require the participation of all members of society in
productive and socially useful labour and the establishment, in conformity with human rights and fundamental
freedoms and with the principles of justice and the
social function of property, of forms of ownership of
land and of the means of production which preclude
any kind of exploitation of man, ensure equal rights
to property for all and create conditions leading to
genuine equality among people,
Welcoming the recommendation contained in the
Programme of Action12 adopted by the Tripartite World
Conference on Employment, Income Distribution, Social Progress and the International Division of Labour,
held at Geneva from 4 to 17 June 1976, that greater
importance should be given to the development of cooperatives within the framework of national measures,
Taking note of the progress made by the co-operative
movement, both in developed and developing countries, and the contribution made by it in promoting
collective self-reliance and mutually beneficial interdependence,
Recognizing the social and economic benefits accruing from producers', consumers', credit, multipurpose
and other kinds of co-operatives to all sections of society
and, more particularly, to the middle-income and lowincome groups,
3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI).
3281 (XXIX).
11 Resolution 2542 (XXIV).
12 See E/5857.

Stressing the need to assist the rapid development
of the multipurpose co-operative movement, particularly
in the agricultural and allied rural sectors of economic
and social life in the developing countries,
Drawing attention to the lasting benefits enjoyed by
large sections of society in urban and rural areas in
many parts of the world owing to the noteworthy expansion in co-operative housing projects in the last three
decades, and the considerable potential for further activity in this field,
Bearing in mind the positive experience which many
countries have already gained in implementing agrarian
reforms and in promoting the co-operative movement
and which would be conducive to the establishment of
the new international economic order and to the realization of the objectives of the Second United Nations
Development Decade, 18
l. Recognizes the necessity to pay due attention
to the international exchange of experience in the growth
and further development and diversification of the cooperative movement;
2. Invites Governments and relevant specialized
agencies to report to the Secretary-General on their experience in promoting the co-operative movement and
in building the necessary socio-economic infrastructure
for it;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with Member States, to submit to the General Assembly
at its thirty-third session, through the Economic and
Social Council, a report on their national experience in
promoting the co-operative movement and on the results
so far achieved by international co-operation in this
field;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-third session the item entitled "National experience in achieving far-reaching social and economic
changes for the purpose of social progress" and to consider under this item the report of the Secretary-General
on national experience in promoting the co-operative
movement.
83rd plenary meeting
30 November 1976
31/38.

National experience in achieving far.
reaching social and economic changes for
the purpose of social progress

The General Assembly,
. Guided by the desire to promote a better quality of
hfe, full employment and other conditions for social
and economic development,
Recalling the Declaration on Social Progress and
Development,
Mindful of the provisions of the Declaration and the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order 14 as well as the Charter
of Economic Rights and Duties of States, 15
Bearing in mind resolutions 1581 A (L) of 21 May
1971, 1667 (LII) of I June 1972 and 1746 (LIV)
of 16 May 1973, in which the Economic and Social
Council emphasized the importance of fundamental

9 Resolutions

10 Resolution

95

13 See

E/5597.
Resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI).
w Resolution 3281 (XXIX).

14
