Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

Having considered the special report of the Trusteeship Council on its thirteenth special session, 11
1. Notes the formal announcement by the Administering Authority that, following the resumed talks between representatives of the Nauruan people and of
the Administering Authority, it was agreed that Nauru
should accede to independence on 31 January 1968 ;12
2. Welcomes the statement made in the Fourth Committee by the representatives of the Governments of
Australia. New Zealand and the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland as the Administering Authority that the Administering Authority has
complied with the request of the representatives of the
Nauruan people for full and unqualified independence;
3. Resolves accordingly, in agreement with the Administering Authority, that the Trusteeship Agreement
for the Territory of Nauru approved by the General
Assembly on 1 November 1947 shall cease to be in force
upon the accession of Nauru to independence on 31
January 1968;
4. Calls upon all States to respect the independence
and the territorial integrity of the independent State of
Nauru;
5. Urges the organs of the United Nations concerned
and the specialized agencies to render all possible assistance to the people of Nauru in their endeavour to
build a new nation.
1641st plenary meeting,
19 December 1967.

•

*

•

Pursuant to Article 86 of the Charter of the United Nations,
cease to be a member of the Trusteeship
Council on the accession of Nauru to independmce on 31
//Jfluary 1968. As from that date the Council will therefore be
c<>mposed of the following Member States: AUSTRAUA, CHINA,
NEW ZEALAND will

FRANCE, LIBERIA, UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS,
UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND
and UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

2348 (XXII). Question of Papua and the Trust
Territory of New Guinea

The General Assembly,
Recalling the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations and General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV)
of 14 December 1960,
Recalling further its resolutions 2112 (XX) of 21
December 1965 and 2227 (XXI) of 20 December 1966,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Papua and New Guinea to self-determination and independence in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) ;
2. Reaffirms its previous position as set forth in General Assembly resolutions 2112 (XX) and 2227 (XXI);
3. Calls upon the administering Power to take the
necessary measures to implement without delay the
provisions of the above-mentioned resolutions.
1641st plenary meeting,
19 December 1967.
11 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenfy-.serond
Session, Annexes, agenda item 13, document A/6926.
12 Jbid., document A/6903.

51

2349 (XXII). Question of the consolidation and
integration of the sp~ial educational and
training programmes for South West Africa,
the sp~ial training programme for Territories under Portuguese administration and
the educational and training programme for
South Africans

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2235 (XXI) of 20 December
1966 concerning the question of the consolidation and
integration of the special educational and training programmes for South West Africa, the special training
programme for Territories under Portuguese administration and the educational and training programme
for South Africans,
Taking note with appreci-ation of the report submitted
by the Secretary-General in accordance with paragraph 1 of the said resolution, 13
Considering that a consolidation and integration of
the programmes is desirable as a basis for the further
development and expansion of assistance for education
and training,
Taking note of the recommendations of the Conference on African Refugee Problems, held at Addis Ababa
in October 1967, and in particular its recommendation
for the establishment within the Organization of African
Unity of a bureau for the placement and education of
refugees,
1. Decides to integrate the special educational and
training programmes for South West Africa, the special
training programme for Territories under Portuguese
administration and the educational and training programme for South Africans ;
2. Decides further to include in the United Nations
Training and Educational Programme assistance to
persons from Southern Rhodesia, provided that this is
done only in so far as it does not interfere with existing United Nations schemes for educational assistance
for such persons and that it is done with due regard
to Security Council resolutions 216 ( 1965) of 12 November 1965 and 217 ( 1965) of 20 November 1965
relating to non-recognition of the illegal regime in
Southern Rhodesia;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
study the means of promoting the further development
and expansion of the Programme and, to this end, to
continue his consultations with the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, the Director-General
of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the heads of other appropriate
agencies and organs, and the Administrative SecretaryGeneral of the Organization of African Unity ;
4. Decides that in the implementation of the present
resolution the United Nations shall co-operate closely
with the bureau for the placement and education of
refugees that is being set up within the Organization
of African Unity ;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to include in the
Programme the granting of subventions to educational
and training institutions in Africa in order to enable
those institutions to provide places for persons who
come under the Programme and to make it possible
for those persons to be trained in Africa as far as
practicable;
18 Ibid.,

agenda items 65, 67 and 68, document A/6890.

52

General Assembly-Twenty-second Session

6. Requests the President of the General _Assembly
to nominate seven Member States, each of which should
appoint a representative to serve on a committee _which
will advise the Secretary-General on the granting of
such subventions ;14
7. Decides that the Programme shall be financed
from a trust fund made up of voluntary contributions
atid that, at least initially, those contributions shall be
used entirely for the operational costs of the Programme;
8. Authorizes the Secretary-General to appeal to
States Members of the United Nations and members
of the specialized agencies for funds to achieve a target
of $US 3 million for the three-year period from 1968
to 1970;
9. Decides that, as a transitional measure, provision
shall be made under section 12 of the regular budget
for the year 1968 to ensure the continuity of the Programme pending the receipt of adequate voluntary
contributions ;
10. Requests the Secr~tary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-third session on the
progress of the Programme.
1641st plenary meeting,
19 December 1967.
2350 (XXII). Question of Fiji
The General Assembly,
Having examined the question of Fiji,
Having considered the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to Fiji,1~
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960,
Recalling further earlier resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Special Committee relating to Fiji,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Fiji to self-determination and independence, in accordance with the Declaration on the Granting of I ndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples ;
2. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
Fiji and endorses the conclusions and recommendations
contained therein ;
3. Reaffirms the provisions of resolutions 1951
(XVIII) of 11 December 1963, 2068 (XX) of 16 December 1965 and 2185 (XXI) of 12 December 1966
concerning Fiji;
4. Reaffirms the necessity of sending a visiting mission to Fiji for the purpose of studying at first hand
the situation in the Territory;
5. Regrets the refusal of the administering Power
to receive the visiting mission in Fiji and urgently
appeals to it to reconsider its decision ;
1' For the composition of the Advisory Committee on the
Granting of Subventions for the United Nations Training and
Educational Programme, see A/7062.
1~ Official Records of the Ce-nnal Assembly, Twenty-second
Session Annexes, addendum to agenda item 23 (A/6700/
Rev.l),' chapter VIL

--6. Requests the Special Committee to continue its
examination of the question of Fiji and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its twenty-third
session;
7. Decides to maintain this item on its agenda.
1641st plenary meeting,
19 December 1967.

2351 (XXD). Information from Non-Sell-Governing Territories transmitted under Article
73 e of the Charter of the United Nation&
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1970 ( XVIII) of 16 December 1963, in which it requested the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples to study the information transmitted to the Secretary-General in accordance with Article 73 e of the Charter of the United
Nations and to take it fully into account in examining
the situation with regard to the implementation of the
Declaration.
Recalling also its resolutions 2109 (XX) of 21 December 1965 and 2233 (XXI) of 20 December 1966,
in which it, inter alia, approved the procedures adopted
by the Special Cllmmittee 16 for the discharge of the
functions entrusted to it under resolution 1970 (XVIII)
and requested the Special Committee to continue to
di,scharge those functions in accordance with the said
procedures,
Ilaving studied the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee dealing with the transmittal of
information under Article 73 e of the Charter and the
action taken by it in respect of that information, 17
Having also examined the report of the SecretaryGeneral on this information, 18
J. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to the information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of
the United Nations;
2. Deplores the fact that, despite the repeated recommendations of the General Assembly, the most recent
of which is contained in resolution 2233 (XXI), some
Member States having responsibilities for the administration of Non-Self-Governing Territories still have
not seen fit to transmit information under Article 73 e
of the Charter, have transmitted insufficient information
or have transmitted information too late;
3. Once again urges all Member States which have
or which assume responsibilities for the administration
of Territories whose peoples have not yet attained a
full measure of self-government to transmit, or continue
to transmit, to the Secretary-General the information
prescribed in Article 73 e of the Charter, as well as
the fullest possible information on political and constitutional development in the Territories concerned;
16 [bid., Nineteenth Session, Annexes, annex No. 8 (part I)
( A/5800/Rev.l), chapter II, appendix I.
11 Ibid.,
Twenty-second Session, A"nexes, addendum to
agenda item 23 (A/6700/Rev.1), chapter XXIV.
18 [bid .. agenda items 63 and 71, document A/6958.
