S/2018/867

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 September 2018
Original: English

United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
Report of the Secretary-General
I. Introduction
1.
The present report provides an account of the activities of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) for the period from 24 May to
14 September 2018, pursuant to the mandate set out in Security Council resolution
350 (1974) and extended in subsequent Council resolutions, most recently resolution
2426 (2018).

II. Situation in the area of operations and activities of the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
2.
During the reporting period, the ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian Arab
Republic was maintained, albeit in a volatile environment owing to the ongoing
conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic, and notwithstanding a number of violations of
the Agreement on Disengagement between Israeli and Syrian Forces (Disengagement
of Forces Agreement) of 1974, which are described below. Following an offensive
launched in late June and early July 2018 by the Syrian armed forces in south -western
Syrian Arab Republic, the security situation in the UNDOF area of operations evolved
rapidly, with a spike in fighting between the Syrian armed forces against non -State
armed opposition groups and other armed groups, including the listed terrorist groups
Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham (formerly Jabhat Fath al-Sham and the Nusrah Front) and the
Khalid ibn al-Walid Army, which have pledged allegiance to Islamic State of Iraq and
the Levant. After heavy artillery and aerial bombardments on the Bravo side, the
situation in the UNDOF area of operations changed considerably, with the Syrian
Government regaining control of parts of the areas of separation and limitation on the
Bravo side that had previously been under the control of various armed groups. As
underscored again by the Security Council in its resolution 2426 (2018), there should
be no military activity of any kind in the area of operations.
3.
In employing its best efforts to maintain the ceasefire and see that it is
scrupulously observed, as prescribed in the Disengagement of Forces Agreement,
UNDOF reports all breaches of the ceasefire line that it observes. All incidents of
firing into the area of separation and across the ceasefire line, as well as the crossing
of the ceasefire line by individuals, are violations of the Agreement. In its regular
interaction with both sides, the leadership of UNDOF continued to call upon both

18-15381 (E)

280918

*1815381*

S/2018/867

parties to exercise restraint and prevent any miscalculation that might lead to an
escalation of the situation. That was particularly the case when the Mission responded
to incidents of spillover and retaliatory fire.
4.
During the reporting period, UNDOF observed an escalation of tension between
Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic in the area of operations. On 27 and 28 May,
United Nations personnel at observation post 53 saw Israel Defense Forces soldiers
fire single shots from small arms into the area of separation.
5.
On 11 July, United Nations personnel at observation post 73 observed the Israel
Defense Forces fire three rockets into the area of separation in the vicinity of vacated
United Nations observation post 71. On the same day, the Permanent Representative
of Israel submitted a letter to the Secretary-General and the President of the Security
Council reporting that the Israel Defense Forces had intercepted an “unmanned aerial
vehicle (UAV) that had been launched from Syria into Israel ”. Unidentified
individuals continued to be present at observation post 71 until 2 August, after which
they were no longer seen at the post.
6.
According to open sources, on 13 July the Israel Defense Forces launched a
missile towards a Syrian unmanned aerial vehicle over the area of separation. On
24 July, the Israel Defense Forces reported to UNDOF that earlier that day, they had
used a missile to intercept a Syrian fighter jet that had entered 2 km into Israeli
airspace. That same day, the Syrian authorities informed UNDOF that a Syrian aircraft
had been shot down by Israel and that the aircraft had been flying in Syrian airspace.
Around the time of the reported incident, UNDOF observed burning debris falling
from an aircraft, approximately 10 km south-east of observation post 54, in the area
of limitation on the Bravo side. UNDOF liaised with both parties to de -escalate the
situation.
7.
During a Syrian armed forces offensive on 30 July in south-western Syrian Arab
Republic, United Nations personnel at observation post 55 observed artillery fire
impact inside the area of separation close to vacated United Nations position 80A.
UNDOF was not in a position to determine the point of origin of the artillery fire.
8.
Transborder movements through Mount Hermon by unidentified individuals
crossing between Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic continued during the
reporting period. On 16, 24 and 28 May, 6 and 26 June and 6 July, UNDOF observed
unidentified individuals, some of them armed, with mules moving between the Bravo
side and Lebanon. On 31 May, four unidentified individuals with mules approached
the Hermon South position of the United Nations and requested food and water, which
the UNDOF personnel were not in a position to provide. The group of individuals left
the location and was later observed by UNDOF personnel firing nine single shots
from small arms and 16 bursts of small arms fire at the perimeter of the Hermon South
position.
9.
Throughout June and July, UNDOF observed the daily crossing of the ceasefire
line by unidentified individuals from the Bravo to the Alpha side. In the vicinity of
observation post 54, in the southern part of the area of separatio n, groups of
individuals from the Bravo side, ranging from 10 to 40 per day, were observed
crossing the ceasefire line on foot and entering a building on the Alpha side. The
Israel Defense Forces had previously informed UNDOF that a hospital located
adjacent to their position in the area was providing humanitarian assistance to
civilians from the Bravo side. Those groups of individuals were observed leaving the
building, crossing the ceasefire line and moving back towards Mu ‘allaqah on the
Bravo side. On 3 August, the Israel Defense Forces stated that they had begun closing
and dismantling the hospital.

2/8

18-15381

S/2018/867

10. In the context of the Syrian conflict, the northern parts of the areas of separation
and limitation were subjected to low levels of fighting. Sporadic e xchanges of fire,
which UNDOF deemed to be of low intensity, occurred between the Syrian armed
forces, supported by pro-Government armed elements, against non-State armed
groups. During the first two weeks of July, there was an increase in fighting in the
vicinity of Jubbata al-Khashab, Turunjah and Ufaniyah, in particular between
13 and 15 July, after which the fighting subsided. On 31 July, open sources reported
that the Syrian armed forces had entered the area of Jubbata al -Khashab and that
arrangements had been made with local armed groups to surrender.
11. The fighting between the Syrian armed forces along with pro -Government
armed elements against non-State armed groups in the central parts of the areas of
separation and limitation increased to high levels of intensity during the month of
July. A short period of high intensity bombardment was followed by the advance of
the Syrian armed forces towards and their taking control of Tall Masharah on 17 July,
Qunaytirah on 20 July and Hamadiyah al-Jadidah on 26 July. By the end of July, no
kinetic activity was observed in those areas. Open sources reported that arrangements
had been made with members of armed groups in Qunaytirah and Hamadiyah
al-Jadidah, who chose to reconcile with the Syrian Government, a nd those who opted
instead to relocate from the area with their families. UNDOF observed some
non-State armed opposition groups decommissioning and destroying military
equipment and ammunition in Qunaytirah and Hamadiyah al -Jadidah.
12. In the southern parts of the areas of separation and limitation on the Bravo side,
heavy fighting was reported in July, with high-explosive rounds and bursts of heavy
machine gun fire routinely heard at United Nations observation post 54 and position
80. The Syrian armed forces concentrated their initial offensive on Tall al-Harrah,
Jasim, Nawa, Tasil and Tafas in the southern part of the area of limitation on the Bravo
side, and, by 21 July, had gained control of those areas. By 31 July, the Syrian armed
forces also had gained control of the area that had been held by the Khalid ibn
al-Walid Army in the south-western part of the areas of separation and limitation.
13. UNDOF determined that, as of the beginning of August, the area of separation
was under the control of the Syrian Government.
14. Throughout the reporting period, the Syrian armed forces, supported by
pro-Government armed elements, maintained positions in the area of separation, in
particular in the vicinity of Ba‘th and Khan Arnabah, as well as along the main road
connecting Qunaytirah to Damascus. On 12 occasions, UNDOF personnel observed
155-mm artillery pieces on the Bravo side within 10 km of the ceasefire line. Between
14 and 17 August, one armoured personnel carrier belonging to the Syrian armed
forces was observed in the vicinity of United Nations position 85 in the southern part
of the area of separation and was removed on 17 August after UNDOF protested to
the Syrian authorities. During the reporting period, UNDOF also noted the occasional
temporary presence of Russian military police in the area of separation.
15. The military violations on the Alpha side included the presence of 155 -mm
artillery pieces within 10 km of the ceasefire line. In addition, missile carriers, which
are considered unauthorized military equipment in the area of limitation pursuant to
the terms of the Disengagement of Forces Agreement, were observed within the
25 km zone of the area of limitation.
16. UNDOF protested to both parties all violations of the Disengagement of Force s
Agreement that it had observed, including the crossing of the ceasefire line by
civilians from the Bravo side, the presence of unauthorized equipment and armed
individuals in the area of separation, as well as the firing into the area of separation
and across the ceasefire line.

18-15381

3/8

S/2018/867

17. The offensive by the Syrian armed forces in the area of limitation on the Bravo
side in June and July resulted in a significant displacement of the civilian population
towards the area of separation. From 26 June to 25 July, United Nations personnel
observed internally displaced persons moving to locations ins ide the area of
separation, specifically in the areas of Rafid and Burayqah, and establishing a number
of camps, some of which were located close to United Nations position 80 and
observation post 54. At the peak of the inflow of internally displaced perso ns,
UNDOF observed 2,552 tents, which were housing approximately 17,055 persons.
On 4, 8 and 9 July, groups of 50 to 400 internally displaced persons in the area of
separation staged three protests near position 80, demanding an end to the conflict
and the provision of food and water. In late July, there was a significant reduction in
the number of internally displaced persons living in the area of separation. As at
17 August, UNDOF observed that there were approximately 120 internally displaced
persons still living in tents located in the area of separation. Owing to the closure of
the established crossing point at Qunaytirah between the Alpha and Bravo sides since
late August 2014, UNDOF remained unable to facilitate humanitarian crossings
between the two sides, including for students, in cooperation with the International
Committee of the Red Cross.
18. Since its temporary relocation from a number of positions in September 2014,
and pending its full return to the area of separation, UNDOF continued to maintain
visibility, albeit limited, of the area of separation and the ceasefire line from its
positions on Mount Hermon, Camp Faouar, position 80, in the southern part of the
area of separation, and position 22, on the Alpha side. UNDOF operations continued
to be supported by the military observers of the United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization (UNTSO) in Observer Group Golan, who have been under the
operational control of UNDOF and have maintained five fixed and three temporary
observation posts along the ceasefire line, as well as four temporary observation posts
on Mount Hermon. The focus of Observer Group Golan has been on continuous static
observation and situational awareness.
19. Through Observer Group Golan, UNDOF continued to carry out fortnigh tly
inspections of equipment and force levels in the area of limitation on the Alpha side.
Liaison officers from the Alpha side accompanied the inspection teams. Inspections
in the area of limitation on the Bravo side were suspended because of the security
situation and did not resume.
20. Engagement between UNDOF and the Israel Defense Forces continued, with a
view to addressing restrictions on movement and access to United Nations positions
in the area of separation and to reduce the delays and challenge s experienced by
United Nations personnel in crossing the technical fence to observation posts and
positions. The Head of Mission and Force Commander of UNDOF continued to
remind the parties of their obligation to scrupulously abide by the terms of the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement, to ensure the safety and security of United
Nations personnel on the ground, and to extend all cooperation to UNDOF in the
fulfilment of the tasks under its mandate.
21. UNDOF, in consultation with both parties, continued to review the situation in
the area of separation in order to assess whether the conditions on the ground would
permit the return to vacated positions in the area of separation. UNDOF conducted
assessment visits and continuously monitored the prevailing security situation.
22. Since the resumption of patrolling on the Bravo side in February 2018, the
UNDOF mechanized infantry company has conducted in excess of 50 protected
patrols on the four designated routes in the northern and central parts of the areas of
separation and limitation. It is envisaged that UNDOF will include protected patrols
to observation posts 71 and 72 and to position 32 in the near future.
4/8

18-15381

S/2018/867

23. On 2 and 9 August, UNDOF conducted reconnaissance patrols to the Bravo gate
in the area of separation. The purpose of those patrols was to ascertain the state of the
Bravo and Charlie gates, and to specifically assess the condition of the structures at
the Charlie gate, with a view to commencing the necessary reconstruction. UNDOF
found that the structures at the Charlie gate had been damaged, and that the entire
area around the gate required clearance of possible mines, unexploded ordnance and
explosive remnants of war. UNDOF also determined th at main supply road 7 from
Camp Faouar to the Bravo gate was in sufficiently good condition for future use by
UNDOF vehicles, in particular heavy vehicles.
24. During the reporting period, UNDOF made progress towards the limited return
to Bravo side operations, in line with the phased UNDOF plan (see S/2018/550).
Pursuant to phase 2 of the plan, UNDOF continued to develop the infrastructure of
and improve the living conditions at Camp Faouar. UNDOF has continu ously
rehearsed exercises to ensure the security and defence of the Camp, and all deployed
elements have been integrated into a cohesive and effective component, with clear
command and control mechanisms.
25. Phase 2 of the UNDOF plan also includes the refurbishment of facilities and the
security infrastructure of selected observation posts in the northern part of the area of
separation, with a view to reoccupying observation posts 56, 71 and 72 in phase 3 of
the incremental return to the Bravo side operations, conditions permitting. UNDOF
continued to assess the security situation in the southern part of the area of separation
and to ascertain the capabilities that would be appropriate for deployment in that area,
conditions permitting. Observer Group Golan will not be deployed at observation
posts in the area of separation on a permanent basis until such time as the security
conditions permit, when adequate accommodation and appropriate force protection
measures are in place.
26. The UNDOF Force Reserve Company commenced its phased re-deployment
from the Alpha side to the Bravo side on 13 August, with the final group completing
the move on 4 September. The UNDOF quick reaction force on the Alpha side
achieved full operational capability on 6 August.
27. In accordance with the provisions of Council resolution 2426 (2018) and the
UNDOF operational concept, UNDOF continued its efforts to deploy appropriate
technology to ensure the safety and security of UND OF personnel and equipment. A
surveillance trailer remained deployed on the Alpha side at Camp Ziouani and
position 22, while another was maintained at Camp Faouar. In addition, between
8 and 24 July, UNDOF deployed a surveillance trailer to position 80.
28. UNDOF continued to resupply its positions on Mount Hermon and at Camp
Faouar from Damascus. UNDOF convoys between Damascus and the United Nations
positions were conducted almost daily, using main supply route 7 and Salam highway,
with an UNDOF security escort and accompanied by a liaison officer from the office
of the Senior Syrian Arab Delegate. UNDOF continuously monitored the situation
and took the necessary precautionary measures in planning and conducting its
convoys. UNDOF continued to conduct and update its contingency planning for the
reinforcement and evacuation of United Nations positions and observation posts on
both the Alpha and Bravo sides, as well as in Damascus. UNDOF conducted regular
rehearsals, exercises and training for identified contingencies. Risk mitigation
measures, including force protection measures, continued to be developed at
observation posts, positions and operational bases at Camp Ziouani and Camp Faouar.
29. As at 17 August 2018, UNDOF comprised 975 troops, including 38 women.
Troops were deployed from Bhutan (3), Czechia (2), Ghana (12), Fiji (305), India
(192), Ireland (136), Nepal (323) and the Netherlands (2). In addition, 70 military

18-15381

5/8

S/2018/867

observers from UNTSO Observer Group Golan, including 8 women, assisted UNDOF
in carrying out its tasks.

III. Implementation of Security Council Resolution 338 (1973)
30. In its resolution 2426 (2018), the Security Council called upon the parties
concerned to immediately implement its resolution 338 (1973). It decided to renew
the mandate of UNDOF for a period of six months, until 31 December 2018, and
requested the Secretary-General to report every 90 days on developments in the
situation and the measures taken to implement resolution 338 (1973). The search for
a peaceful settlement of the conflict in the Middle East, in particular the efforts made
at various levels to implement resolution 338 (1973), was addressed in my report on
the situation in the Middle East (A/73/322), submitted pursuant to General Assembly
resolutions 72/15 on Jerusalem and 72/16 on the Syrian Golan.
31. Since the discontinuation of indirect peace talks in December 2008, there have
been no negotiations between the parties. The Syrian conflict further reduces the
prospects for their resumption and for progress towards peace between Israel and the
Syrian Arab Republic. I look forward to a peaceful resolution of the conflict in the
Syrian Arab Republic and the resumption of efforts towards a comprehensive, just
and durable peace settlement, as called for by the Security Council in its resolution
338 (1973) and other relevant resolutions.

IV. Observations
32. I am deeply concerned by the military activity that occurred in the UNDOF area
of operations during the reporting period. The heavy artillery and aerial bombardment
on the Bravo side that spiked in July, along with the firing of missiles and rockets
from the Alpha side into the area of separation on 3, 13 and 24 July, have jeopardized
the Disengagement of Forces Agreement. I urge the parties to exercise maximum
restraint at all times. I encourage the members of the Security Council to support
efforts to sensitize both parties and regional stakeholders to the risks of escalation
and the need to preserve the long-standing ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian
Arab Republic.
33. It remains critical that the parties maintain their liaison with UNDOF to prevent
any escalation of the situation across the ceasefire line. All violations of the ceasefire
line increase tensions between the signatories to the Disengagement of Forces
Agreement and undermine progress towards stability in the area.
34. I note the cessation of military activity of the Syrian armed forces and armed
groups, and between various armed groups, including listed terrorist groups, in the
UNDOF area of operations. Noting the continued presence of the Syrian armed forces
in the area of separation, I reiterate that there should be no military forces in the area
of separation other than those of UNDOF. I urge all parties to the Syrian conflict to
cease military actions throughout the country and to remove all military equipment
and personnel from the area of separation.
35. The Israel Defense Forces should refrain from firing across the ceasefire line.
The continued presence of unauthorized weapons and equipment in the area of
limitation on the Alpha side is of concern.
36. As UNDOF continues to consolidate its presence at Camp Faouar and maintains
its efforts to intensify its operations in the area of separation, it remains critical that
the safety and security of United Nations personnel be assured. The circumstances
under which the troops and military observers are operating continue to require
6/8

18-15381

S/2018/867

vigilance and risk mitigation measures. I renew my call upon the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic to fulfil its primary responsibility for the safety and security of
United Nations personnel on the Bravo side.
37. In calling for a return to vacated positions in the area of separation, both Israel
and the Syrian Arab Republic have stated their continued commitment to the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement and support for the presence of UNDOF. The
full return of UNDOF to the area of separation remains a priority for the Mission,
conditions permitting. I count on the continued cooperation of both parties to
facilitate the advancement of the Mission’s plans for an incremental return to
operations and positions in the area of separation and to ensure that the Mission can
implement its mandate. It is critical that UNDOF be able to deploy the technology
and equipment necessary to enhance its observation of the area of separation and the
ceasefire line and to augment force protection. In that regard, the support and
cooperation of both Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic in ensuring that the
deployment of the necessary technology and equipment occurs seamlessly and
expeditiously are essential. At the same time, the parties must continue to support the
enhancement of the liaison function of UNDOF.
38. It is equally important that the Security Council continue to bring to bear its
influence on the parties concerned to ensure that UNDOF is accorded the ability to
operate in a safe and secure manner and is allowed to operate freely in accordance
with the Disengagement of Forces Agreement. The reopening of the regular
Qunaytirah crossing point would benefit the ability of UNDOF to implement its
mandate. The support of the parties in facilitating the clearance of mines, unexploded
ordnance and remnants of war at the crossing is crucial. It is also necessary for
UNDOF to continue to have at its disposal all means and resources necessary for it to
return fully to the area of separation, conditions permitting.
39. The confidence and commitment of troop-contributing countries in UNDOF
remain key factors in the Mission’s ability to carry out its mandate. I continue to count
on the support of troop-contributing countries as UNDOF proceeds with the
implementation of its agreed plan to increase operations in the area of separation. I
am grateful to the Governments of Bhutan, Czechia, Fiji, Ghana, India, Ireland, Nepal
and the Netherlands for their contributions, commitment, resolve and consummate
professionalism. I am also thankful to the Member States that have contributed
military observers to UNTSO.
40. In conclusion, I wish to express my appreciation to the Head of Mission and
Force Commander, Major General Francis Vib-Sanziri, and the military and civilian
personnel serving under his leadership, who continue to perform the important tasks
assigned to them by the Security Council with efficiency and commitment under
challenging circumstances.

18-15381

7/8

S/2018/867

8/8

18-15381
