92

G.m.eral Assembly-Thirtieth Sea■ion

ARTICLE 11
Where it is proved that an act of torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment has been committed by or at the instigation of a public official, the victim
shall be afforded redress and compensation in accordance with
national law.
ARTICLE 12
Any statement which is established to have been made as a
result of torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment may not be invoked as evidence against
the person concerned or against any other person in any
proceedings.

3453 (XXX). Torture and other cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment or punishment in relation to detention and imprisonment
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the rejection, in its resolutions 3059
(XXVIII) of 2 November 1973 and 3218 (XXIX) of

6 November 1974 of any form of torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
Reiterating its conviction expressed in resolution 3218
(XXIX) ,that, because of the increase in the number of
alarming reports on torture, further and sustained efforts
are necessary to protect under all circumstances the
basic human right to be free from torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
Welcoming resolution 4 (XXVIII) adopted by the
Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and
Protection of Minorities on 10 September 1975,32
Having considered the report of the Secretary-Gen-''
eral33 containing an analytical summary of the information received under paragraph 1 of resolution 3218
(XXIX),
Recalling its request to the Fifth United Nations
Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders that it consider steps to be taken for

the protection of all persons subjected to any form of
detention or imprisonment against torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
thirtieth session,
Noting the working paper entitled "Health aspects
of avoidable maltreatment of prisoners and detainees"3• submitted by the World Health Organization to
the Fifth United Nations Congress on the Prevention
of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders,
Noting with appreciation the report of the SecretaryGeneral prepared under paragraph 4 of resolution 3218
(XXIX),811
Taking into account that the Fifth United Nations
Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treat-

ment of Offenders expressed the opinion that, on the
matter of elaborating an international code of police
• ethics, there should be further expert consideration,
Having adopted the Declaration on the Protection
of All Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, annexed to resolution 3452 (XXX) of 9 December 1975,
Believing that further international efforts are needed
to ensure adequate protection for all against torture and
82 See E/CN.4/1180, chap. XXI, sect. A.
31 A/10158 and Corr.I and Add.1.

H A/CONF.56/9.
Ill A/10260.

other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Fifth United
Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the
Treatment of Offenders for the elaboration of the Declaration on the Protection of all Persons from Being
Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment;
2. Requests the Commission on Human Rights at
its thirty-second session to study the question of torture
and any necessary steps for:
(a) Ensuring .the effeotive observance of the Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from Being
Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment;
( b) The formulation of a body of principles for the
protection of all persons under any form ->f detention
or imprisonment on the basis of the Study of the Right
of Everyone to be Free from Arbitrary Arrest, Detention and Exile3 6 and the draft principles on freedom
from arbitrary arrest and detention contained therein;
3. Requests the Commit~ on Crime Prevention
and Control to elaborate, on the basis of, inter alia,
the proposals submitted to and conclusions arrived at
by the Fifth United Nations Congress on the Prevention
of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, a draft code
of conduct for law enforcement officials and to submit
this draft code to the General Assembly at its thirtysecond session, through the Commission for Social Development and the Economic and Social Council;
4. Invites the World Health Organization to give
further attention to the study and elaboration of principles of medical ethics relevant to the protection of
persons subjected to any form of detention or imprisonment against torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-first session an item entitled "Torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment" for the purpose of reviewing the progress
achieved in accordance with the present resolution.
2433rd plenary meeting
9 December 1975

3454 (XXX).

Report of the United Nations
High Commiuioner for Refugees

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations.
High Commissioner for Refugees on the activities of

his Office87 and having heard his statement,88
Noting with appreciation the efforts of the High Commissioner in carrying out his duties for those of concern
to his Office as well as the special humanitarian tasks
which he is called upon to undertake,
Reaffirming the eminently humanitarian character of
the activities of the High CommiS&oner for the benefit
of refugees and displaced persons,
36 United Nations publication, Sales No. 65.xIV.2.
87 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth

Seasion, Supplement No. 12 (A/10012) and Supplement No. 12A.
(A/10012/Add.1).
ss Ibid., Thirtieth Session, Third Committee, 2161st meeting,
paras. 1-10.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Sharing the grave concern expressed by the High
Commissioner regarding the increasing need to protect
the basic rights of refugees,
Commending the increasing number of Governments
contributing to the High Commissioner's programmes
of assistance and noting in this connexion, the decision
of the Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme89 that the responsibility for providing
the financial and other resources required by his Office
should be shared by all members of the international
community,
Recognizing the need for further accessions to the
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees of
1951,40 the Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees·
of 196741 and other relevant instruments,

1. Expresses its deep satisfaction at the efficient
manner in which the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and his staff continue to accomplish
their humanitarian tasks;
2. Requests the High Commissioner to continue his
efforts, in co-operation with Governments, United
Nations bodies and voluntary agencies, to promote permanent and speedy solutions to the problems facing his
Office through voluntary repatriation and assistance in
rehabilitation, integration in countries of asylum or resettlement in other countries as needed;
3. Further requests the High Commissioner to intensify his efforts on behalf of refugees in Africa,

notably those returning to their countries following independence, and urges the fullest co-operation of all
concerned for this purpose;

4. Urges Governments to strengthen further their
support for the humanitarian aotivities of the High
Commissioner by:

93

manitarian assistance resulting from events in the IndoChinese peninsula, 43
Endorses that view of the Executive Committee of
the High Commissioner's Programme and ur~es the
international community further to strengthen its support of the efforts of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in this regard.
2433rd plenary meeting
9 December 1975

3456 (XXX). Elaboration of a draft Convention
on Territorial Asylum
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3272 (XXIX) of 10 December 197 4 relating to the elaboration of a draft
Convention on Territorial Asylum,
Noting that the Group of Experts on the Draft Convention on Territorial Asylum, constituted in accordance with paragraph 2 of the aforementioned resolution, has reviewed the text of the draft Convention and
has submitted its report thereon,44
Noting the view reiterated by the Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme that a
conference of plenipotentiaries on territorial asylum
should be convened to consider the draft Convention
on Territorial Asylum,411
1. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, to convene a conference of plenipotentiaries on
territorial asylum from 10 January to 4 February 1977
to consider and adopt a Convention on Territorial
Asylum;

in the field of international protection;

2. Decides that the cost for holding the conference
of plenipotentiaries on territorial asylum should be met
by voluntary contributions;

( b) Co-operating in the promotion of permanent
solutions to the problems faced by his Office;

3. Authorizes the High Commissioner to seek such
funds;
·

(c) Providing the necessary financial means to attain the objectives of his assistance programmes.

4. Requests the Secretary-General to refer the report of the Group of Experts on the Draft Convention
on Territorial Asylum to Member States for any observations and comments that they may wish to make
before the conference of plenipotentiaries.

(a) Facilitating the accomplishment of his tasks

2433rd plenary meeting
9 December 1975

2433rd plenary meeting
9 December 1975

3455 (XXX). Humanitarian asmtance to the
lndo-Chinese displaced persons
The General Assembly,
Noting the information provided by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees42 on the
assistance being given by his Office to the Indo-Chinese
displaced persons,
Noting further that the members of the Executive
Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme
unanimously recognized the need for continued huau Ibid., Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. I2A. (A/10012/
Add.I), para. 129.
40 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545, p. 137.
41 Ibid., vol. 606, No. 8791, p. 267.
.
42 See Official Records of the Gen~al Assembly, Thirtieth
$ession, Supplement No. 12A. (A/10012/Add.1), chap. IV; and
Ibid., Thirtieth Session, Third Committee, 2161st meeting,
paras. 1-10.

3518 (XXX). Expression of appreciation to the
Government and people of •exico
·
The General Assembly,
Considering the significance and positive results of
the World Conference of the International Women's
Year,46 held at Mexico City from 19 June to 2 July
1975, which is the first world conference sponsored by
the United Nations on women's issues,
411 Ibid., Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 12.A. (A/10012/
Add.I), para. 121.
44 See A/10177 and Corr.I.
411 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth
Session, Supplement No. 12A. (A/10012/Add.1), para. 69.
48 See Report of the World Conference of the International
Women's Year (United Nations publication, · Sales No.
E.76.IV.1).
