A/56/PV.93

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-sixth session

93

rd plenary meeting
Thursday, 31 January 2002, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Han Seung-soo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The meeting was called to order at 10.45 a.m.
Volcano eruption in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo
The President: Before turning to the items on
our agenda for this morning, may I, on behalf of the
members of the General Assembly, extend to the
Government and the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo our deepest sympathy for the
tragic loss of lives and the extensive material damage
resulting from the recent volcano eruption in that
country. May I also express the hope that the
international community will demonstrate its solidarity
by responding promptly and generously to any request
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo for
assistance in its present plight.
Agenda item 125 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/56/780 and Add.1)
The President: I invite the attention of the
General Assembly to documents A/56/780 and
A/56/780/Add.1, containing two letters from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
General Assembly. In document A/56/780 the
Secretary-General informs the General Assembly that
25 Member States are in arrears in the payment of their
financial contributions to the United Nations within the
terms of Article 19 of the Charter.

(Republic of Korea)

In document A/56/780/Add.1 the SecretaryGeneral informs the General Assembly that since the
issuance of his communication contained in document
A/56/780 Armenia has made the necessary payment to
reduce its arrears below the amount specified in Article
19 of the Charter.
May I remind delegations that under Article 19 of
the Charter
“A Member of the United Nations which is
in arrears in the payment of its financial
contributions to the Organization shall have no
vote in the General Assembly if the amount of its
arrears equals or exceeds the amount of the
contributions due from it for the preceding two
full years.”
May I take it that the General Assembly duly
takes note of the information contained in documents
A/56/780 and A/56/780/Add.1?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 12 (continued)
Report of the Economic and Social Council
Draft resolution (A/56/L.68/Rev.1)
The President: I call on the representative of
Venezuela
to
introduce
draft
resolution
A/56/L.68/Rev.1.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

02-23755 (E)

*0223755*

A/56/PV.93

Ms. Pulido (Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I am
honoured, on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, to
introduce draft resolution A/56/L.68/Rev.1, by which
the Assembly would decide to convene a meeting of
the General Assembly devoted to information and
communication technologies for development. The
Group of 77 attaches great importance to the convening
such a meeting, because it will address issues of
information and communication technologies from the
perspective of development with a view to considering
ways to close the digital divide and to promoting
digital opportunities in the context of the globalization
process in the emerging information society.
We view it also as an opportunity to discuss this
item in order to make a contribution to the two phases
of the World Summit on the Information Society, to be
held in 2003 and 2005 respectively. Further, we believe
that the meeting will make a contribution to the World
Summit on Sustainable Development, to be held at
Johannesburg in September 2002.
The draft resolution, initiated by the Group of 77,
was considered by interested parties in the course of
two rounds of informal consultations convened by His
Excellency
Ambassador
Alexandru
Niculescu,
Permanent Representative of Romania. We thank him
for his efforts in concluding the draft text which we are
today submitting to the General Assembly for its
consideration.
I wish to announce that the Republic of Korea has
become a sponsor of the draft resolution.
Let me mention that the latest version of the draft
resolution, contained in document A/56/L.68/Rev.1,
now before the Assembly, includes an eighth
preambular paragraph making reference to the
extension of the mandate of the Ad Hoc Open-ended
Working Group on Informatics.
I thank all those who participated in the
preparation of the draft resolution, and I express the
hope that the text will be adopted by consensus.
Mr. Niculescu (Romania): I wish to make a few
comments on draft resolution A/56/L.68/Rev.1, entitled
“Meeting of the General Assembly devoted to
information and communication technologies for
development”, which was just introduced so ably by
the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the Group
of 77 and China. In my capacity as facilitator of the
draft resolution, as designated by you, Mr. President, I

2

held two rounds of open-ended informal consultations
with Member States, on 22 and 24 January
respectively. These produced the agreed revised text
now before the Assembly. I express my sincere thanks
to all representatives who participated in that process
for the contributions they made in a spirit of
partnership and constructive compromise.
I want to confirm the general understanding that
the meeting of the General Assembly, consisting of
three plenary meetings and, in parallel, separate
informal panels, will be held within the span of two
days.
I now join the call for the unanimous adoption of
this very important draft resolution.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/56/L.68/Rev.1.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Chen (Under-Secretary-General for General
Assembly Affairs and Conference Services): I would
like to inform members that, under operative
paragraphs 1 and 2 of draft resolution A/56/L.68/Rev.1,
the General Assembly would decide to convene a
meeting of the General Assembly consisting of three
plenary meetings devoted to the issue of bridging the
digital divide and promoting digital opportunities in the
emerging information society during the fifty-sixth
session of the General Assembly; and would also
decide that, in parallel with the plenary meetings,
separate informal panels would be organized that
would include the participation of non-governmental
organizations, academia and the business sector.
The meetings of the informal panels are not
included in the calendar of conferences and meetings
of the United Nations for year 2002 approved by
General Assembly resolution 56/242, of 24 December
2001. The related additional conference servicing
requirements under the regular budget, at full cost, are
estimated at $13,100.
Should the Assembly adopt draft resolution
A/56/L.68/Rev.1, the meetings of the informal panels
would constitute an addition to the 2002 calendar of
conferences and meetings of the United Nations. Any
actual additional requirements arising from these new
meetings would be reported to the Assembly in the
context of the first performance report for the biennium
2002-2003.

A/56/PV.93

The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/56/L.68/Rev.1, entitled
“Meeting of the General Assembly devoted to
information and communication technologies for
development”.
I call on the representative of the United States of
America on a point of order.
Ms. Serwer (United States): Throughout the
discussions on this draft resolution, it was my
delegation’s understanding that there would be no
additional costs and no programme budget implications
attached to this draft resolution.
The President: I give
representative of the Secretariat.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Chen (Under-Secretary-General for General
Assembly Affairs and Conference Services): I think the
understanding of the representative of the United States
is correct. The stated amount could be absorbed within
existing resources allocated to the Department.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/56/L.68/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/56/L.68/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 56/258).
The President: We have thus concluded this
stage of our consideration of agenda item 12.
Agenda item 23 (continued)
Building a peaceful and better world through sport
and the Olympic ideal
Solemn appeal made by the President of the
General Assembly on 25 January 2002 in
connection with the observance of the Olympic
Truce (A/56/795)
The President: I will now read the solemn
appeal.
“On 11 December 2001, the General
Assembly adopted resolution 56/75, in which it
requested Member States to observe the Olympic
Truce during the XIX Olympic Winter Games to
be held in Salt Lake City, United States of
America, from 8 to 24 February 2002, by
ensuring the safe passage and participation of
athletes at the Games.

“The Olympic Truce, the Greek tradition of
ekecheiria, was born in the eighth century B.C.,
serving as a hallowed principle of the Olympic
Games. In 1992, the International Olympic
Committee renewed this tradition by calling upon
all nations to observe the Olympic Truce.
“The General Assembly, recognizing the
Olympic Truce as contributing to the international
understanding and the maintenance of peace,
adopted the landmark resolution 48/11, of 25
October 1993, in which the Assembly urged
Member States to observe the Olympic Truce.
Furthermore, the United Nations Millennium
Declaration, adopted on 8 September 2000,
includes the same appeal.
“The Olympic movement aspires to
contribute to a peaceful future for humankind
through the educational value of sport. It brings
together the athletes of the world in the greatest
international sports festival, the Olympic Games,
and promotes world peace, friendship, solidarity
and fairness, for which the United Nations also
stands.
“Based on these shared goals, in 1998 the
International Olympic Committee decided to fly
the United Nations flag at all competition sites of
the Olympic Games, and the United Nations
system, in particular through the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
is expanding its cooperation with the
International Olympic Committee in various
fields, such as development, humanitarian
assistance, education and the fight against
HIV/AIDS.
“However, the terrorist attacks of 11
September 2001 pose a grave challenge to
humanity, the ideal of the United Nations and the
spirit of the Olympic Games. The international
community has shown strong unity and is
cooperating closely to address the challenge. As
the XIX Olympic Winter Games approach, even
more concerted efforts and cooperation on the
part of the world community are needed to ensure
that the XIX Olympic Winter Games are safely
and peacefully conducted.
“I, therefore, solemnly appeal to all States
to demonstrate their commitment to the Olympic
Truce and to take appropriate measures to ensure

3

A/56/PV.93

the safe passage and participation of athletes at
the Salt Lake City Winter Games.” (A/56/795)
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
take note of the solemn appeal in connection with the
observance of the Olympic Truce?
It was so decided.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 23?

documents A/56/L.69 and A/56/L.70, may I take it that
the General Assembly wishes to consider agenda item
110 directly in plenary meeting?
It was so decided.
The President: May I further take it that the
Assembly agrees to proceed immediately to the
consideration of agenda item 110?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 110

It was so decided.

Crime prevention and criminal justice

Agenda item 26 (continued)
Follow-up to the outcome of the special session on
children
Draft resolution (A/56/L.71)

Draft resolutions (A/56/L.69 and A/56/L.70)
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft
resolutions
A/56/L.69
and
A/56/L.70,
recommended by the Economic and Social Council.

The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/56/L.71, entitled “Schedule for the
plenary meetings and round tables of the special
session of the General Assembly on children”.

The Assembly will first take a decision on draft
resolution A/56/L.69, entitled “Terms of reference for
the negotiation of an international legal instrument
against corruption”.

May I take it that the General Assembly decides
to adopt draft resolution A/56/L.71?

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/56/L.69?

Draft resolution A/56/L.71
(resolution 56/259).

was

adopted

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 26.
Agenda item 8 (continued)
Adoption of the agenda, allocation of the items and
organization of work
The President: Members will recall that, at its
3rd plenary meeting on 19 September 2001, the
General Assembly decided to allocate agenda item 110
to the Third Committee and that agenda item 110
remained open for consideration during the fifty-sixth
session.
In order for the General Assembly to proceed
expeditiously with the recommendations of the
Economic and Social Council on this item, contained in

4

Draft resolution A/56/L.69
(resolution 56/260).

was

adopted

The President: The Assembly will next take a
decision on draft resolution A/56/L.70, entitled “Plans
of action for the implementation of the Vienna
Declaration on Crime and Justice: Meeting the
Challenges of the Twenty-first Century”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/56/L.70?
Draft resolution A/56/L.70
(resolution 56/261).

was

adopted

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 110?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 11.05 a.m.
