S/2020/951

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 September 2020
Original: English

Implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Region
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 52 of Security Council
resolution 2502 (2019), in which the Council requested me to report to it every si x
months on the implementation of the commitments under the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region. 1
It provides an overview of peace and security developments in the Great Lakes region
since the issuance of my previous report (S/2020/272) and covers the period from
16 March to 15 September 2020.

II. Major developments
A.

Spread and implications of the coronavirus disease pandemic
2.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has continued to have
significant consequences on the Great Lakes region. As at 15 September 2020, the 13
signatory countries of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework reported a
total of 749,442 confirmed cases and 17,913 fatalities, according to the World Health
Organization. Since August, the region has seen a slowdown in the percentage
increase in new reported cases.
3.
Most countries acted early to prevent the spread of the disease, including by
temporarily imposing movement restrictions and travel bans, enforcing curfews,
closing borders (except for cargo transfers), prohibiting mass gatherings and shutting
down schools and places of worship. Countries and regional organizations also
endeavoured to strengthen coordination and response mechanisms to alleviate the

__________________
1

20-12709 (E)

In this context, the region refers to the 13 signatory countries of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework, namely, Angola, Burundi, the Central African Republic, the Congo, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kenya, Rwanda, South Africa, South Sudan, the Sudan,
Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia. In addition, the following four
intergovernmental organizations act as witnesses/guarantors of the Framework: the African
Union, the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, the Southern African
Development Community and the United Nations.

121020

*2012709*

S/2020/951

socioeconomic impact of the pandemic. Despite the continued increase in confirmed
cases, almost all countries in the region recently started to ease restrictions.
4.
Since the outbreak of the pandemic, the countries of the region have focused
their attention on curbing the spread of the virus and mitigating its socioeconomic
impact. Efforts to respond to the pandemic led to a reduction in economic activity in
several countries, which had a negative impact on vulnerable populations, in
particular those working in the informal sector, which represents a significant
percentage of employment across the region. In addition, unforeseen public expenses
related to the COVID-19 response, coupled with a decrease in the ability of countries
to mobilize domestic resources, further deepened the economic slowdown, affecting
countries of the region to varying degrees. According to the Economic Commission
for Africa (ECA), economic recovery in the region could commenc e as early as 2021
if the pandemic is curbed effectively. Furthermore, some initiatives pertaining to the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework also experienced
some slowdowns as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, such as the convening of the
tenth meeting of the Regional Oversight Mechanism, which was once again
postponed.

B.

Security situation
5.
On 23 March, I launched an appeal for a global ceasefire to focus our fight on
the common enemy of COVID-19, which was favourably received by several Member
States in the region. While the security situation remained relatively stable, cross border security incidents continued to be reported. Compared with the previous
reporting period, there was an increase in allegations related to the presence of foreign
troops on the territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. To address this issue,
the countries concerned used diplomatic channels and existing regional mechanisms.
6.
An example of this trend was the decision by the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Zambia to resort to diplomatic channels to resolve a long -standing border
dispute, which in March had led to incidents involving the armed forces of both
countries at Kibanga/Chibanga, along their common border. Following bilateral
consultations, both countries referred the border dispute to the Organ on Politics,
Defence and Security Cooperation of the Southern African Development Community
(SADC), which succeeded in defusing the tensions.
7.
On 27 June, an unidentified armed group reportedly comprising about 100
fighters attacked a Rwandan army base at the Yanze internally displaced persons
model village in Nyaruguru district, along the border with Rwanda. The Rwanda
Defence Force (RDF) confirmed the attack and stated that it h ad killed four of the
attackers and captured three others, while three soldiers had been injured. RDF further
claimed that the attackers had come from Cibitoke Province in Burundi and retreated
there following the attack. In an official press release issued on the same day, the
National Defence Force of Burundi stated that “Burundian soil cannot be the
sanctuary for armed elements that disrupt the security of neighbouring countries”. In
a separate incident on 7 May, Rwandan and Burundian soldiers exchanged fire at Lake
Rweru, reportedly over fishing. Neither Government issued an official statement on
the incident.
8.
On 14 April, the vice-president and spokesperson of the civil society coalition
of North Kivu Province raised concern over the alleged presence of RDF troops near
the provincial capital, Goma. The Governments of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Rwanda both rejected the report. In the same vein, on 16 April, civil
society groups in South Kivu Province alleged movements by elements of the

2/17

20-12709

S/2020/951

Burundian army south of Uvira town, followed subsequently by media reports
alleging that the Burundian troops had retreated to Burundi.
9.
Incursions into Congolese territory by troops from Angola and the Central
African Republic were also reported. On 29 May, Angolan and Congolese troops
reportedly exchanged fire in Kabuakala, Kasai Province, after Angolan soldiers
allegedly crossed the border. On 17 July, Congolese authorities alleged the presence
of Angolan soldiers at the Matungulu camp in Kasai Province. These incidents were
addressed through the revived Joint Border Commission. Furthermore, incursions by
Central African troops into Nord-Ubangi Province were reported, purportedly to track
down anti-balaka elements operating in the area.
10. Incidents involving South Sudanese troops were reported in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Uganda. In Ituri Province, members of the
South Sudanese army were accused by the Congolese authorities of looting and
burning houses between April and June. A bilateral meeting between the concerned
security services after the incident resulted in the release of a Congolese hostage and
the return of looted goods by the South Sudanese authorities. The Uganda People’s
Defence Forces (UPDF) reported that on 1 June four South Sudanese soldiers had
been shot dead in a clash with UPDF in Moyo district after illegally crossing into
Ugandan territory. On 5 July, two South Sudanese citizens – one soldier and one
civilian – were reportedly arrested in Amuru district, Uganda, after allegedly
attacking UPDF soldiers patrolling border entry points.
11. On 9 April, UPDF exchanged fire with soldiers of the Forces armées de la
République démocratique du Congo (FARDC) on Lake Albert after the latter had
allegedly entered Ugandan territory. Two FARDC soldiers were reportedly killed
while two others were injured and arrested. Following the incident, Congolese and
Ugandan officials met and resolved the issue.
12. During the night of 23 to 24 August, the National Defence Force of Burundi
reportedly clashed with the Résistance pour un État de droit au Burundi following an
attack claimed by the armed group on Bugarama in Rumonge Province. The attack
reportedly caused approximately 15 deaths and population displacement.
13. In the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, armed groups continued to
perpetrate attacks on civilians, despite continuing military operations by FARDC and
the resultant weakening of some foreign and local armed groups. The Allied
Democratic Forces (ADF) extended their activities into Ituri, while attempting to
regain positions in North Kivu that they had lost during FARDC operations in October
2019. Between 14 May and 22 June, ADF killed over 60 civilians and four soldiers,
mainly in Irumu and Djugu territories in Ituri, while over 40 people, including a
United Nations peacekeeper, were killed by suspected ADF elements between 5 April
and 23 June in North Kivu.
14. FARDC operations targeting a main stronghold of the Forces démocratiques de
libération du Rwanda-Forces combattantes abacunguzi (FDLR-FOCA) in Kazaroho,
in North Kivu, further weakened the group. This development followed the killing or
arrest of some leaders of Rwandan armed groups. FDLR-FOCA is believed, however,
to have retained operational capacity and influence with local militias, as exemplified
by an attack on 24 April by suspected FDLR elements in Virunga National Park,
which killed 13 game park rangers and four civilians.
15. Attacks by armed groups against several FARDC positions in North Ki vu were
reported between 13 and 22 July, resulting in the death of FARDC soldiers. The
Expanded Joint Verification Mechanism of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region (ICGLR) and some civil society groups attributed these attacks to
former Mouvement du 23 mars (M23) members. The leadership of the group rejected
20-12709

3/17

S/2020/951

the accusation but acknowledged the presence of former M23 elements in Rutshuru
territory in North Kivu.
16. The Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) remained active in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the Central African Republic and South Sudan. In April and May, the
group allegedly abducted at least six civilians and temporarily detained 92 others
captured during roadside ambushes and attacks on communities. Most attacks
occurred in Bas-Uélé Province in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
17. Local armed groups remained agents of instability, causing widespread
violations of human rights and insecurity in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Continued violence was observed in Ituri and South Kivu, with cross-border
implications for regional peace and security. In Ituri, a loosely defined group of
elements based in the Djugu territory, including the Coopérative de Développement
du Congo, an armed movement claiming to defend the Walendu ethnic group,
launched several attacks on civilians, including members of the Wahema ethnic group.
In South Kivu, clashes between FARDC and local armed groups, and inter-communal
violence, were recorded, despite a ceasefire agreement signed betwee n the
communities on 13 March. There were also allegations that local militias in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo might have received support from armed groups,
notably from former M23 combatants.

C.

Political developments
18. Regional cooperation and diplomatic initiatives led by the leaders of the region
continued during the reporting period and involved the activation of regional
mechanisms, notably in the context of efforts to address the COVID -19 pandemic.
Electoral processes, including the general elections in Burundi and preparations for
forthcoming elections in Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania, proceeded on
schedule. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the situation was dominated by
continuing efforts by the Government to pursue its reform agenda, amid growing
tensions within the ruling coalition.
19. Consultations in the context of the quadripartite process to normalize relations
between Rwanda and Uganda, facilitated by Angola and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, proceeded with the fourth meeting of the ad hoc ministerial commission
on implementation, held at the level of foreign ministers on 4 June via
videoconference. On 8 and 9 June, Uganda released and handed over to Rwanda 130
Rwandan citizens who had been detained in Uganda. Uganda released another 12
Rwandan citizens on 7 July.
20. Burundi and Rwanda demonstrated continued resolve to peacefully address
security concerns, following cross-border incidents on 7 May and 27 June. Moreover,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Rwanda, Vincent Biruta, expressed his country’s
willingness to turn a new page in its bilateral relationship with Burundi. This position
was subsequently confirmed by President Paul Kagame during interviews in June and
July, improving prospects for the normalization of relations following the elections
in Burundi. For his part, President Evariste Ndayishimiye of Burundi, during his
inauguration speech on 18 June, indicated openness to establishing partnerships with
all countries that wished to cooperate with Burundi.
21. Following clashes along the border between the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Zambia in March, diplomatic engagements between the respective
Ministers for Foreign Affairs contributed to easing the tensions and resulted in a j oint
request to Zimbabwe, as Chair of the Organ on Politics, Defence and Security
Cooperation of SADC, to facilitate a diplomatic resolution of the border dispute.
From 23 to 29 July, technical experts from Botswana, the Democratic Republic of the

4/17

20-12709

S/2020/951

Congo, Zambia and Zimbabwe were deployed to the affected border areas. As a result
of the mission, a common approach to demarcating the border was adopted. In support
of these efforts, the President of the Congo, Denis Sassou Nguesso, the ICGLR Chair,
dispatched his Foreign Minister to Lusaka, Kinshasa and Harare in May to offer
support for the peaceful resolution of the matter. During a meeting from 14 to
16 September in Luanda, Angola and the Democratic Republic of the Congo agreed
to revive the permanent joint commission on defence and security issues.
22. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Government continued to
implement its programme, with a focus on fighting corruption and strengthening the
rule of law. Tensions grew within the ruling coalition of Cap pour le changement and
Front commun pour le Congo (FCC) following the designation by the National
Assembly of a new president of the Independent National Electoral Commission and
a move by FCC members to reform the judiciary. These developments trigger ed
demonstrations by some political parties and civil society organizations in Kinshasa
and across the country. Tensions were further heightened following appointments
made by President Félix Tshisekedi on 17 July to civilian, military and judicial bodies,
including of the first female judge to the Constitutional Court, a move which was
described by FCC as unconstitutional as it allegedly did not follow defined
procedures.
23. In Burundi, presidential and legislative elections were held on 20 May,
following a campaign period that featured complaints by the opposition and civil
society actors about incidents of violence and harassment and the arrest of candidates
and supporters of the main opposition party, the Congrès national pour la liberté
(CNL). The opposition also denounced the exclusion of its representatives from
various polling stations. On 25 May, the Independent National Electoral Commission
announced that retired General Evariste Ndayishimiye, candidate of the ruling
Conseil national pour la défense de la démocratie-Forces de défense de la démocratie
(CNDD-FDD), had won the presidential elections with 68 per cent of the vote. In the
legislative elections, CNDD-FDD won 72 of 100 National Assembly seats.
Presidential candidate and CNL leader Agathon Rwasa rejected the provisional
results, citing widespread fraud and irregularities, and filed an appeal at the
Constitutional Court on 28 May. The appeal was dismissed on 4 June.
24. Accordingly, President-elect Ndayishimiye was sworn in on 18 June following
the death of President Pierre Nkurunziza on 8 June. During his inaugural speech, the
President called for cooperation with the international community based on mutual
respect and with a focus on the environment, economic development, regional
integration and infrastructure development. Regarding domestic priorities, he stressed
the need for dialogue with the opposition in the country, the return of refugees and
other Burundians in exile, the fight against graft and the improvement of justice and
governance to pave the way for sustainable development. President Ndayishimiye
also called upon Burundians to take all necessary measures to contain the spread of
COVID-19 throughout the country. A new cabinet led by Alain Guillaume Bunyoni
as Prime Minister was sworn in on 30 June.
25. Preparations for elections continued in Uganda and the United Republic of
Tanzania. In the latter country, the Parliament was dissolved on 15 June, ahead of the
presidential and legislative elections scheduled for 28 October. The ruling party,
Chama Cha Mapinduzi, endorsed incumbent President John Magufuli on 11 July to
contest the elections. In Uganda, on 16 June, the Electoral Commission released a
revised road map for the presidential and parliamentary elections scheduled for early
2021 to limit risks associated with the COVID-19 pandemic during the campaign
period. On 28 July, incumbent President Yoweri Museveni was nominated by his
party, the National Resistance Movement, as its candidate to run for a sixth term.

20-12709

5/17

S/2020/951

D.

Humanitarian situation
26. The humanitarian situation in the region continued to be marked by population
displacement as a result of violence, notably in eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, as well as natural disasters, and was further aggravated by the consequences
of the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition to the 4.5 million internally displaced persons
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, over 919,000 Congolese refugees were
being hosted in other countries of the region as at August 20 20. Uganda hosted the
most Congolese refugees (415,472), followed by Burundi (77,757), the United
Republic of Tanzania (77,051), Rwanda (77,017), Zambia (52,773), Angola (23,258)
and the Congo (20,687). The Democratic Republic of the Congo also continued to
host over 528,000 refugees from Burundi, the Central African Republic, Rwanda and
South Sudan. A total of 328,727 Burundian refugees were hosted by countries in the
Great Lakes region; the largest group (160,297) remains in the United Republic of
Tanzania.
27. Despite some tensions ahead of the elections in Burundi, there was no major
forced displacement within or from the country. After the suspension of the voluntary
repatriation of refugees during the electoral period, the technical working group of
the Tripartite Commission for the Voluntary Repatriation of Burundian Refugees,
bringing together the Governments of Burundi and the United Republic of Tanzania
and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
met from 22 to 24 July in Kigoma, United Republic of Tanzania, and refugee returns
from the United Republic of Tanzania resumed in August, facilitated by UNHCR. As
at 31 August 2020, over 7,500 Burundian refugees in the United Republic of Tanzania
had been registered for voluntary repatriation and a total of 11,961 refugees had been
assisted to return home in the first eight months of 2020. In addition, some Burundian
refugees in the Mahama camp in Rwanda asked to return to Burundi in an open letter
dated 26 July. A technical meeting between the Governments of Burundi and Rwanda
and UNHCR on 13 August led to an agreement to revitalize the 2005 Tripartite
Agreement for the Voluntary Repatriation of Burundian refugees. Facilitated
voluntary repatriation from Rwanda to Burundi started on 27 August and a total of
993 Burundian refugees were repatriated in two convoys.
28. The COVID-19 pandemic increased the vulnerability of displaced persons, in
part as a result of the temporary closure of borders, which affected the admission of
new asylum seekers. For example, in June, displaced persons fleeing clashes between
militia groups in Ituri in the Democratic Republic of the Congo were stranded at the
Ugandan border, with 3,000 of them eventually received in Uganda when the border
crossing was temporarily reopened from 1 to 3 July.

E.

Human rights and rule of law
29. The region has made progress in the fight against impunity. However, reports of
human rights violations continued. Offences include violations committed by armed
groups and other actors in areas with weak State authority and porous borders, as well
as areas where access to justice is limited. Restrictions on fundamental rights and
freedoms have been reported, including in pre-electoral contexts. Human rights
violations, including sexual and gender-based violence, were also reported in
connection to lockdowns and other measures taken in the context of COVID -19
responses.
30. On 20 June, the Gombe tribunal in Kinshasa found Vital Kamerhe, President
Tshisekedi’s Chief of Staff, and two co-defendants guilty of corruption and
embezzlement in relation to the 100-day programme launched by President

6/17

20-12709

S/2020/951

Tshisekedi upon assuming office. The defendants’ lawyers appealed the verdict on
24 June.
31. On 7 June, Sudanese Janjaweed militia leader Ali
Muhammad Ali
Abd-Al-Rahman (formerly referred to in International Criminal Court (ICC)
documents as “Ali Kushayb”), under an ICC arrest warrant, surrendered to Central
African Republic authorities and was transferred to ICC on 8 June.
32. Armed groups in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo continued to
perpetrate serious human rights violations. A report released by the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) in July indicated that, between 1 February and 30 June, over 170 human
rights abuses had been perpetrated by ADF, affecting at least 570 victims. The report
also detailed violations committed by FARDC and the Congolese National Police
during security operations, which had affected 109 and 137 victims, respectively.
33. In Burundi, the pre-electoral period was marked by reports of human rights
violations, including reports of enforced disappearances and arbitrary arrests, as well
as acts of violence, including clashes between members of rival political parties.
34. In Uganda, between March and June, opposition leaders Kizza Besigye and
Robert Kyagulanyi complained of being denied access to radio or TV shows, notably
by military officers. In the United Republic of Tanzania, some op position and civil
society figures denounced restrictions on political space, including on the freedoms
of media, assembly and expression.
35. Human rights violations by State actors were reported in the context of
COVID-19 preventive measures, including incidents of killings and maiming and
allegations of arbitrary arrests in several countries of the region. Relevant national
authorities and civil society organizations also denounced a reported significant
increase in sexual and gender-based violence, linked to the lockdowns in response to
the pandemic.

III. Implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework
A.

Commitments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
36. The Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo has continued to
implement its national commitments under the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework. To further consolidate State authority, the Government renewed the
national stabilization and reconstruction programme for areas emerging from armed
conflict. The Government and MONUSCO also pursued community-level dialogue in
Ituri, in the context of the implementation of the agreement signed with the Front de
résistance patriotique de l’Ituri (FRPI) on 28 February for its disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration. On 1 July, the national stabilization and
reconstruction programme and MONUSCO, together with the International
Organization for Migration and local and international non-governmental
organizations, launched two projects to support the reinteg ration of FRPI elements
through dialogue and economic recovery activities and the reintegration of 900 FRPI
ex-combatants, their dependants and 600 host community members. Further steps
were taken by the monitoring committee of the national stabilization a nd
reconstruction programme to advance the implementation of the agreement with
FRPI, including the preparation of relevant draft laws and budgetary submissions.
37. To advance reconciliation and strengthen stability, President Tshisekedi, during
a meeting of the Council of Ministers held on 19 June, directed that firm action be

20-12709

7/17

S/2020/951

taken to address the growing number of incidents of hate speech and ethnic division
in the country. On 17 July, the President appointed civil magistrates to the country’s
higher courts, including two women: one as President of the Conseil d’État and
another as the first-ever female member of the Constitutional Court. On 7 August,
during another meeting of the Council of Ministers, the President stressed the
importance of supporting transitional justice mechanisms for victims of serious crime
as part of the fight against impunity. On 31 August, President Tshisekedi chaired a
meeting on peace and security in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo,
including on the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process. At the
meeting, the governors of Ituri and North and South Kivu advocated for a community centred disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme.
38. Although the activities of the National Oversight Mechanism were affected by
the COVID-19 pandemic, the leadership of the Mechanism reached out to armed
groups to persuade them to lay down their weapons. It also conducted activities to
promote stability and development in the eastern provinces. Leaders of the
Mechanism further expressed support for the Government’s commitment to restore
peace in the eastern part of the country and encouraged the adoption of additional
measures to strengthen cooperation between security services and the population.

B.

Commitments of the region
39. Despite the constraints imposed by the pandemic, the leaders of the region
remained engaged through bilateral and multilateral efforts to strengthen relations and
defuse tensions, as evidenced by the continued engagement of An gola and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo through the quadripartite process for the
normalization of relations between Rwanda and Uganda. Leaders of the region also
made progress through the efforts of SADC, with the support of the African Union
and ICGLR, to find a peaceful resolution for the border dispute between the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Zambia, in line with their commitments under
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework.
40. The African Union, SADC and ICGLR, along with the East African Community
and countries in the region, remained engaged in the support of peaceful elections and
political transition in Burundi.
41. The leaders of the region also expressed their support for peace and security in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. During the fortieth ordinary summit of Heads
of State and Government of SADC, held virtually on 17 August, the leaders reiterated
the continued support of SADC for the Democratic Republic of the Congo, including
through its contribution to the Force Intervention Brigade of MONUSCO, and
commended the Governments of the Democratic Republic of Congo and Zambia on
their commitment to resolve their border dispute amicably.
42. Subregional organizations and mechanisms took steps to facilitate cross -border
coordination on measures to contain the COVID-19 pandemic. On 6 April, the
Council of Ministers of SADC adopted regional guidelines to harmonize and facilitate
the movement of critical goods and services across the region. A meeting with the
Presidents of Kenya, South Sudan and Uganda, convened on 12 May by President
Paul Kagame of Rwanda in his capacity as Chair of the East African Community,
culminated in an agreement on a harmonized system to certify COVID -19 test results
and a digital tracking system for drivers crossing borders. A meeting of ministers of
health of ICGLR member States, held on 10 July, yielded an agreement to establish a
ministerial coordination committee, supported by a network of health experts, to share
best practices in tackling the pandemic. On 29 July, a joint meeting of the Council of
Ministers of the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa, the East African

8/17

20-12709

S/2020/951

Community and SADC adopted harmonized guidelines on the facilitation of trade and
transport during the pandemic.
43. Countries in the region also endeavoured to address challenges linked to their
response to the COVID-19 pandemic. On 14 April, Burundi reopened its borders with
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda, which had been closed since
15 March to curb the spread of the virus, for vehicles transporting merchandise. On
15 May, 22 May and 19 June, respectively, Rwanda, Kenya and Uganda reached
agreements with the United Republic of Tanzania on the cross -border movement of
goods and services, with specific measures to be implemented for the testing and
certification of truck drivers.
44. In the area of security cooperation, President Tshisekedi and President Museveni
agreed, following an exchange in June, to strengthen cooperation against ADF. This
led to an agreement on 20 July to establish a joint task force bringing together the
security services of both countries.
45. In another positive development, the chiefs of the military intelligence services
of Burundi and Rwanda met on 26 August at the Nemba border p ost, along their
common border. At that meeting, which was facilitated by the Expanded Joint
Verification Mechanism of ICGLR, the chiefs called on the authorities of both
countries to resolve the long-standing issue of refugees and political exiles,
encouraged the defence forces to contain and neutralize foreign armed groups
operating along the border, committed to regional efforts to implement non -military
measures to help neutralize foreign armed groups in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo and agreed to appoint liaison officers to facilitate regular exchanges.
46. Additional progress in the implementation of the regional commitments of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework was hampered by the outbreak of the
COVID-19 pandemic. This was most noticeable in the disruption of the meetings of
the governance mechanisms of the Framework. Neither the Technical Support
Committee nor the Regional Oversight Mechanism was convened, owing to travel
restrictions. Meanwhile, my Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region continued to
undertake consultations aimed at organizing the tenth meeting of the Mechanism as
soon as possible.

C.

International commitments
47. During the reporting period, international partners focused their attention on
developments in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the electoral process in
Burundi and ways to support the region in meeting challenges linked to the
COVID-19 pandemic. In this context, the International Contact Group for the Great
Lakes Region, during its virtual meetings held on 13 May and 28 May, welcomed
progress in neutralizing armed groups and, in particular, lauded the commitment by
the signatory States to improve security cooperation on non-military measures to
achieve that objective. The Group also noted the slow implementation of reforms in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, compounded by rising tensions within the
ruling coalition. On Burundi, the group called for a peaceful electoral process.
48. During an ambassadorial meeting on the Great Lakes region held on 11 June,
the Peacebuilding Commission offered its full support for regional efforts to improve
economic cooperation, development and peacebuilding in the region. The
Commission noted that the COVID-19 pandemic could lead to the deterioration of
regional macroeconomic prospects, the disruption of economic activities and
increased pressure on national budgets, thereby affecting the countries’ capacities to
address peace and security challenges. The Commission also emphasized the
importance of improved governance and management of natural resources to leverage

20-12709

9/17

S/2020/951

the socioeconomic opportunities for the Great Lakes region. Accordingly, it expressed
readiness to support post-COVID-19 socioeconomic recovery and development
efforts and committed to support the preparations for the Great Lakes Investment and
Trade Conference. Addressing the meeting, my Special Envoy stressed the
importance of regional and cross-border initiatives to sustain peace and development
and highlighted relevant contributions of the Peacebuilding Fund, including ongoing
projects between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda on cross -border
trade and food security, as well as in support of the reintegration of former
combatants.
49. With regard to the Great Lakes Regional Strategic Framework established in
2016 to align United Nations regional development presences to support the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, an inter-agency
working group was established in June by the Office of the Special Envoy to review
the governance structure of the Framework, as well as the funding and functioning of
its secretariat, with a view to enhancing the impact of United Nations programmatic
actions in the region.

IV. Implementation of the road map of my Special Envoy
A.

Good offices of the Secretary-General
50. Despite the operational limitations imposed by COVID -19, my Special Envoy
for the Great Lakes Region continued to actively engage with key stakeholders in the
region, the co-guarantors of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework,
international partners and other actors on ways to consolidate the gains achieved in
the implementation of the Framework and promote regional cooperation to address
challenges to peace and sustainable development in the region.
51. In this regard, my Special Envoy supported national and regional efforts to
facilitate dialogue and build confidence between countries in the region. He
conducted periodic virtual consultations with senior government representatives from
Angola, Burundi, the Congo, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kenya, Rwanda,
Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania to, inter alia, support ongoing processes
to facilitate dialogue and build confidence, including the quadripar tite process and
efforts to peacefully resolve the border dispute between the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Zambia. He also consulted separately with the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of Burundi and Rwanda to discuss opportunities to improve bilater al relations
between the two countries.
52. My Special Envoy encouraged signatory countries to continue to pursue
confidence-building initiatives and cooperation, particularly on the neutralization of
foreign armed groups, the illegal exploitation and trade of natural resources and
economic integration. The promotion of judicial cooperation to fight impunity and
uphold human rights, the promotion of women’s participation and equal
representation in peace, security and development, and the engagement of youn g
people for inclusive development also remain at the centre of my Special Envoy’s
engagement.
53. In the context of the elections in Burundi, my Special Envoy engaged national,
regional and international stakeholders to promote dialogue and international support
for a peaceful, credible and inclusive electoral process. Together with my Special
Representative for Central Africa and Head of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa, my Special Representative to the African Union, the Assistant
Secretary-General for Africa, the Resident Coordinator and the Office of the Special
Envoy for Burundi, he elaborated a plan to engage Burundian stakeholders prior to,

10/17

20-12709

S/2020/951

during and after the elections, emphasizing the readiness of the United Nations to
support Burundi in its efforts towards peace, reconciliation and sustainable
development.
54. To address the crisis resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and in response to
requests by countries of the region, my Special Envoy advocated for a coordinated
regional response and steadfast support by the international community, including
multilateral financial institutions. During a meeting convened by my Special Envoy
on 2 April, representatives of the co-guarantor institutions of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework discussed the impact of COVID-19 and the prospects for
political engagement with countries in the region. Through his engagement with civil
society organizations, non-governmental organizations and other stakeholders, my
Special Envoy called attention to the impact of the pandemic, especially on the
elderly, women, children and youth. In addition, he advocated support within the
region for my call for a global ceasefire and for Security Council resolution 2532
(2020).

B.

Support for the neutralization of negative forces
55. The confidence-building process involving the intelligence and security services
of Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Uganda and the United
Republic of Tanzania, and efforts to start implementing the recommendations from
this process regarding complementary non-military measures to neutralize foreign
armed groups, were slowed down by the postponement of the tenth meeting of the
Regional Oversight Mechanism. Nevertheless, my Special Envoy, together with the
co-guarantor institutions, continued to engage the countries concerned to promote
their sustained commitment to the process and their participation in follow -up
meetings of intelligence and security services.

C.

Advancing women and peace and security
56. Promoting the empowerment of women as agents of change for socioeconomic
transformation and the consolidation of peace and security in the region remained a
key priority for my Special Envoy. Since the outbreak of COVID-19, he has engaged
regional civil society organizations to assess the pandemic’s impact on the women
and peace and security agenda. A joint technical coordination team, led by the Office
of the Special Envoy and ICGLR, with the participation of regional women’s civil
society organizations, held weekly meetings to share information and identify specific
concerns and needs of women and girls in terms of prevention and protection in the
context of the COVID-19 pandemic.
57. Following my call on 6 April for measures to address the global surge in
domestic violence directed towards women and girls, which is linked to the
lockdowns, my Special Envoy engaged the signatory countries of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework, requesting them to consider specific actions to address
gender-based violence. He stressed the need to increase investment that would cater
for the special needs of women affected by the lockdowns, and to create safe channels
for women to seek support in the event of abuse.
58. The twelfth meeting of the Advisory Board of the Women’s Platform for the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, held via videoconference on 12 May
under the auspices of my Special Envoy, examined the impact of COVID -19 on
women, girls and other vulnerable groups in the region. The Board proposed that
priority measures be taken to economically cushion and protect women from the most
severe impacts of the pandemic and called on all stakeholders to engage in

20-12709

11/17

S/2020/951

constructive support for civil society in the region, particularly women involved in
small-scale businesses and in the agricultural sector. Discussing gender-based
violence, the Board further called on ICGLR member States to take measures to
ensure that monitoring, reporting and legal recourse systems continued to function
during the pandemic.
59. My Special Envoy, in consultation with relevant stakeholders, organized three
virtual round tables, on 28 July, 11 August and 20 August, bringing together women
leaders, entrepreneurs, experts, civil society organizations, United Nations entities
and international partners. The round tables focused on key areas of resolution 1325
(2000), including women as promoters of social and economic transformation, the
prevention of all forms of violence against women and effective measures to
guarantee the meaningful political participation of women and their contribution to
peacebuilding. Recommendations developed during the round tables inclu ded the
strengthening of women’s networks to step up the exchange of information on best
practices, targeted capacity-building initiatives through requisite legal frameworks at
the national and regional levels and gender-sensitive budgeting, and enhanced
resource mobilization efforts through better coordination and advocacy at the highest
levels. The conclusions will be presented at a forthcoming dedicated meeting of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

D.

Judicial cooperation
60. My Special Envoy continued to support the fight against impunity and the
promotion of the rule of law to prevent conflict and build trust among the countries
in the region. While the prosecution of cases identified through the Great Lakes
Judicial Cooperation Network was slowed down due to COVID-19-related
restrictions, the Office of the Special Envoy facilitated capacity -building initiatives
with partners, to the benefit of the focal points of the Network. Virtual workshops,
organized in July by the International Institute for Justic e and the Rule of Law on
remote access to judicial proceedings in terrorism cases and the development of
standardized guidelines for mutual legal assistance in criminal matters in East Africa,
enabled the judiciaries of the signatory States to deepen their collaboration, despite
the restrictions imposed by the pandemic.
61. To support countries in the region in their implementation of the Nairobi
Declaration on Justice and Good Governance, adopted in May 2019, my Special
Envoy, together with the ICGLR secretariat, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) and the Network of African National
Human Rights Institutions, organized a capacity-building workshop for national
human rights institutions and other stakeholders on 22 and 23 July. The workshop
developed strategies and proposed actions to enhance the effectiveness of these
institutions, including their response to human rights concerns linked to the
COVID-19 pandemic.

E.

Management of natural resources
62. My Special Envoy remained engaged with relevant stakeholders on the critical
issue of addressing the illicit exploitation of and trade in natural resources in the
region, a main driver of instability and violence in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo and a source of mistrust and tensions between countries in the region.
Pursuant to Security Council resolutions 2389 (2017) and 2502 (2019), and to support
the implementation of the ICGLR Regional Initiative on Natural Resources, he
consulted the countries of the region, subregional organizations, development

12/17

20-12709

S/2020/951

partners and resource-importing countries, advocating for a holistic approach
involving national, regional and international stakeholders. During the virtual
“Mining Week” conference organized by the Democratic Republic of the Congo from
17 to 19 June, my Special Envoy called for broader regional cooperation, including
between mining industries and artisanal miners to tackle the illegal exploitation and
smuggling of minerals.
63. On 15 July, my Special Envoy briefed the Arria formula meeting of the Security
Council on the illegal exploitation of natural resources in the region. He called for
increased support by development partners for regional efforts and highlighted
options for conflict prevention and peacebuilding related to artisanal and industrial
mining in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
64. Furthermore, preparations have been launched to convene a workshop with
ICGLR on the transparent management of natural resources. It is envisaged that the
workshop will be held before the end of the year, circumstances related to COVID -19
permitting.

F.

Economic cooperation
65. To explore options to reduce the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic,
my Special Envoy convened on 18 June a virtual round table on collective actions,
which he co-chaired with the Executive Secretary of ECA. The meeting brought
together representatives from Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Rwanda and Uganda. Participants included multilateral and regional financial
institutions, United Nations agencies, development partners, guarantor institutions of
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework and private sector representatives.
The meeting identified gaps and opportunities for support and highlighted the need to
foster synergy and coherence to mobilize needed resources for the region. The
meeting also urged ICGLR to explore, with the support of the Office of the Special
Envoy and ECA, the establishment of a platform to promote greater coherence of
interventions and to track progress by Member States, regional economic
communities and businesses in accessing available financial support packages.
66. In addition, my Special Envoy continued to support preparations for the second
Great Lakes Investment and Trade Conference, which remains a key vehicle to
promote regional economic integration and cooperation as pathways towards a more
peaceful, stable and prosperous region. The Conference is expected to be held in early
2021 in Rwanda, circumstances related to COVID-19 permitting.

G.

Youth and peace and security
67. On 28 May, the Office of the Special Envoy participated in a consultative
meeting of the Executive Committee of the ICGLR Regional Multifunctional Youth
Forum, aimed at reinvigorating the platform for youth engagement in the region.
Participants included senior officials from ministries in charge of youth affairs and
national youth representatives from ICGLR member States. My Special Envoy
encouraged the young people in the region to contribute to collective efforts to combat
the COVID-19 pandemic and invited Member States to seize the opportunities
presented by resolution 2250 (2015) on youth and peace and security, and the contents
of the first progress report on the implementation of that resolution, released in March
2020.

20-12709

13/17

S/2020/951

H.

Regional strategy
68. In line with my peace and security reform agenda, my Special Envoy organized
a series of consultations between May and September with national, regional and
international stakeholders to develop a United Nations strategy for peace
consolidation and conflict resolution and prevention in the Great Lakes region.
Stakeholders consulted included officials from signatory countries of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework, guarantor institutions, civil society
organizations, women and youth representatives, academics and expe rts,
representatives of the private sector, international partners and representatives of
United Nations entities, both from the field and at Headquarters. The strategy will
build on the positive momentum witnessed recently in the region, and will seek to
harness the comparative advantage of the Organization’s multifaceted presence to
support the countries and people of the Great Lakes Region towards more durable
peace, security and sustainable development.

V. Partnerships with regional organizations and mechanisms,
international partners and United Nations entities
A.

Regional organizations and mechanisms
69. To promote a shared understanding of key regional developments and facilitate
a harmonized approach, my Special Envoy held regular consultations with the African
Union Special Representative for the Great Lakes region. He also discussed regional
developments with the Executive Secretary of SADC on 5 June. On 9 June, my
Special Envoy and the Executive Secretary of ICGLR examined option s to further
enhance collaboration. These meetings helped enhance coordination on peace and
security issues and support for efforts to mitigate the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic and maximize synergy among the four guarantor institutions of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework. The Office of the Special Envoy also carried
out numerous activities in collaboration with ICGLR, including joint meetings on the
sustainable management of natural resources, on judicial cooperation and on women
and peace and security.

B.

Other United Nations entities
70. My Special Envoy regularly engaged other senior United Nations officials in
the region to support United Nations efforts to deliver as one, including my Special
Representative for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Head of MONUSCO,
my Special Representative for Central Africa and Head of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa, and the Assistant Secretary -General for Africa.
He consulted and coordinated his actions with the Resident Coordinators in the
region, the United Nations Development Programme, OHCHR, UNHCR, the United
Nations Office to the African Union, the United Nations Global Compact, ECA, the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the World F ood Programme,
the World Bank and the African Development Bank.
71. Prior, during and after the elections in Burundi, my Special Envoy facilitated a
coordinated approach among the United Nations presences in the region through
regular coordination meetings at the principals and technical levels, which afforded
the opportunity to develop a shared assessment of the evolving situation and to
collectively determine concerted approaches, plans and actions by the United Nations
to support the unfolding process in Burundi.

14/17

20-12709

S/2020/951

72. At the technical level, the Office of the Special Envoy for the Great Lakes
Region also continued to engage on a regular basis with MONUSCO on peace and
security developments in the region and on ways to enhance cooperation towards
improved information-sharing, coordination and analysis with regard to the situation
in the region. Similarly, in monthly interactions, the Office of the Special Envoy,
together with United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa, the Office of the
Special Envoy for Burundi and MONUSCO, explored options for shared analysis and
enhanced regional political engagements.

VI. Observations and recommendations
73. I am encouraged by progress in regional cooperation in the Great Lakes region,
despite the unprecedented challenges caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. The
commitment and leadership of the signatories and guarantors of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework are more important than ever, as the pandemic risks
exacerbating instability and undoing hard-won gains. I encourage the countries of the
region to think creatively in order to turn the challenges arising from the COVID -19
pandemic into opportunities to enhance collaboration and solidarity and to deepen
cooperation on issues central to peace and development. I express my solidarity with
the people and the Governments of the region and assure them of the steadfast support
of the United Nations in their efforts to respond to and recover from the COVID -19
pandemic.
74. I commend the actions taken by countries, organizations and mechanisms to
limit the spread of the virus. I am concerned, however, by the slow response of
international partners in the face of what could be a major driver of social and
economic distress in the region. I call on the international community to step up its
support for national and regional institutions tasked with responding to the pandemic,
bearing in mind the urgent needs of the most vulnerable populations. I call on these
institutions to discharge their responsibilities in a t ransparent manner to ensure that
steady support is received by the populations in need.
75. Cordial relations between countries are central to achieving peace, stability and
development in the region. I therefore welcome the continuation of the quadripartite
process to normalize relations between Rwanda and Uganda under the auspices of
Angola and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I encourage Rwanda and Uganda
and the facilitators to bring the dialogue to a swift and successful conclusion.
76. I welcome the decision by the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Zambia
to peacefully resolve their border dispute. I salute the commitment of SADC to
facilitate a political settlement, with the support of ICGLR and the African Union. I
further welcome the progress made towards the resumption of security cooperation
between Burundi and Rwanda, as demonstrated by the meeting of the chiefs of the
military intelligence services of the two countries held on 26 August. I also commend
Angola and the Democratic Republic of the Congo on their commitment to dialogue
through the revival of the permanent joint commission on defence and security. My
Special Envoy stands ready to continue to support all regional initiatives aimed at
building trust and confidence among the signatories of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework.
77. The political transition in Burundi constitutes an important milestone for the
country and the region. I encourage Burundians to take decisive steps towards
national reconciliation and the improvement of the country’s relations with its
neighbours. The United Nations will continue to support the Government and the
people of Burundi on the path to political and socioeconomic stability and inclusive
and sustainable development.
20-12709

15/17

S/2020/951

78. I am concerned by the increasing tensions within the governing coalition in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which risk jeopardizing progress on some critical
reforms that would contribute, among other things, to enhanced security in the eastern
provinces and a continued weakening of armed groups. I therefore reiterate my call
on all Congolese stakeholders across the political spectrum and civil society to work
together to continue laying the foundations for peace, stability and sustainable
development.
79. While the COVID-19 pandemic has had an adverse impact on the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, causing, inter
alia, the postponement of important meetings of its governance mechanisms and of
the Great Lakes Investment and Trade Conference, I commend the signatories and
co-guarantors of the Framework for remaining engaged in these processes through
virtual meetings. In this regard, I express my hope that the tenth meeting of the
Regional Oversight Mechanism can be held as soon as the circumstances permit.
80. Efforts to advance regional economic cooperation and integration should
continue, especially at the present time, to help mitigate the economic and social
consequences of the pandemic. In this regard, and in the context of tackling the root
causes of instability, I welcome efforts by ICGLR, supported by my Special Envoy,
to facilitate a comprehensive solution to the illicit exploitation of and trade in natural
resources. I call upon the countries of the region, along with transit and d estination
countries of illegally sourced natural resources, to fully engage in this process to help
usher in an era of regional cooperation on natural resources conducive to shared
prosperity.
81. The continuing activities of armed groups, particularly in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, pose a major threat to regional stability and
development. I welcome the ongoing confidence-building process bringing together
the intelligence and security services of the core Great Lakes countries, along wi th
the consensus among the leaders of the region on the importance of non -military
measures to complement military operations against armed groups. I encourage the
leaders of the region to pursue and intensify these efforts, with the support of my
Special Envoy and the co-guarantors of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework. In particular, I urge the Governments of the region to expedite the
establishment of critical national and regional disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration frameworks.
82. Despite some progress in improving the human rights situation, more must be
done to ensure that the people of the Great Lakes region are protected from abuses
and that the rule of law prevails across the region. The sharp increase in gender-based
violence, partly linked to lockdown measures related to the COVID -19 pandemic, is
worrisome. I call upon the leaders of the region to ensure that the protection of human
rights and the fight against impunity remain priorities. My Special Envoy stands ready
to work with national and regional partners to promote this agenda and to help
implement additional measures to mitigate the impact of the pandemic on human
rights.
83. I note some progress in promoting the women and peace and security agenda in
the region. I encourage all stakeholders to address the disproportionate impact of the
COVID-19 pandemic on the safety and livelihoods of women and to take further steps
to empower them socially and economically. I call upon all countries in the region to
mark the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) by guaranteeing, once and
for all, the full participation and representation of women in political and electoral
processes.
84. I am deeply concerned by the continued displacement of populations and the
impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on refugees and internally displaced persons.
16/17

20-12709

S/2020/951

I call on all stakeholders to take urgent measures to ease the plight of these vulnerable
populations and redouble efforts to find durable solutions for them.
85. It is my hope that that the United Nations strategy for peace consolidation,
conflict prevention and resolution in the Great Lakes region will lead to more
effective support by the United Nations for the region and will contribute to progress
towards the attainment of the Sustainable Development Goals in the region.
86. I thank my Special Envoy and his team for their unwavering support for the
signatories in the implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.

20-12709

17/17
