X
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORT OF THE JOINT SECOND
AND THIRD COMMITIEE AND THE FIFTH COMMITIEE,
MEETING JOINTLY
tions already constitutes a very complex problem,
which would be further aggravated by a too rapid
growth of those activities,

309 (IV). Action taken in pursuance
of the agreements between the
United Nations and the specialized
agencies

Considering the desirability of concentrating the
limited technical, administrative and financial resources of Member States for the effective implementation of projects already approved or under
consideration, which cover a wide variety of
fields, and of limiting new initiatives, in so far
as possible, to those which are of an urgent nature
or deemed necessary to achieve the objectives of
plans already initiated,

The General Assembly,
N oi,ng the report 1 on action taken in pursuance of the agreements between the United
Nations and the specialized agencies, transmitted
to it by the Economic and Social Council in
response to the instruction given by the General
Assembly in its resolution 50 (I) 2 of 14 December 1946,
Noting the recommendations made by the Economic and Social Council in its resolution 259
(IX) C of 9 August 1949, 3
Decides to take no measures at this session for
revision of the agreements with the specialized
agencies and requests the Economic and Social
Council to submit a report on this subject to the
next session of the General Assembly.
255th plenary meeting,
24 November 1949.

Resolves therefore
1. To urge Member States to refrain from
initiating new projects other than those which
are urgently required and which can be effectively
carried out ;

2. To draw the attention of the competent
organs of the United Nations and of the specialized agencies to the recommendations contained
in the annex to resolution 259 (IX) 4 of the Economic and Social Council of 9 August 1949, with
special attention to paragraph 2 of section I
relating to a greater concentration of effort and
available resources;

310 (IV). Problem of the proliferation and overlapping of the programmes of the United Nations and
of the specialized agencies

3. To request the Secretary-General, through
the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, to
assist the Economic and Social Council in the
discharge of its responsibility in this regard by
putting before it any relevant recommendations ;

The General Assembly,
Considering that the proliferation of acttv1ttes
and the multiplicity of projects and programmes
may impair the effectiveness of the United Nations
and the specialized agencies, impeding the necessary concentration on projects and programmes
of primary importance,
Considering, further, that the resulting excessive number of sessions and meetings, as well as
the creation of subsidiary organs, is placing a
severe burden on the technical and personnel resources of Member States, rendering difficult an
adequate participation and representation of their
Governments in international work,
Noting with concern that the majority of Member States are encountering increasing difficulties
in meeting the contributions and other indirect
expenses incidental to their membership in the
various international organizations,
Bearing in mind that the co-ordination of the
increasing activities of the international organiza-

4. To request the Secretary-General to supplement the Catalogue of Economic and Social
Projects with such information on costs and duration of · projects described therein as may be
available;
5. To request the Economic and Social Council
to review the Catalogue referred to above in terms
of categories of priorities and to report thereon
to the fifth regular session of the General Assembly;
6. To commend the Economic and Social
Council for the initial action it has taken looking
towards the termination, absorption and integration of certain inter-governmental organizations
and the establishment of relationships between
other such organizations and the United Nations
or the specialized agencies, and to urge the Members of the United Nations concerned to take such
action as may be necessary to give effect to the
recommendations of the Council ; and further
3
See Official Records of the Economic and Social
Council, Fourth Year, Ninth Session, Resolutions,
page 67.
• Ibid., page 68.

1 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, Fourth Year, Ninth Session, Supplement No. 17.
2 See Resolutions adopted by the General Assembly
during the second part of its first session, page 78.

29
