A /69/PV.93

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-ninth session

93rd plenary meeting

Monday, 8 June 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kutesa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Uganda)

In the absence of the President, Mrs. Al-Mughairy
(Oman), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 112 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections
(e) Election of members of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law
(A/69/920)
The Acting President: I would like to draw the
attention of members to document A/69/920, in which
the Permanent Representative of Georgia to the United
Nations informs the President of the General Assembly
that, according to the agreement among the members
of the Group of Eastern European States to rotate their
membership in the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law among themselves, Georgia
will relinquish its seat in favour of the Czech Republic
on the last day prior to the beginning of the forty-eighth
session of the Commission, in July 2015. As a result, a
vacancy will occur and a new member must therefore
be elected to fill the unexpired term of office of Georgia
that commenced in June 2011, the first day of the fortyfourth session of the Commission.
As the Assembly is aware, in accordance with rule
92 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly,
all elections shall be held by secret ballot and there shall
be no nominations. However, I should like to recall
paragraph 16 of decision 34/401, whereby the practice

of dispensing with the secret ballot for elections to
subsidiary organs when the number of candidates
corresponds to the number of seats to be filled should
become standard unless a delegation specifically
requests a vote on a given election.
In the absence of such a request, may I take it that
the Assembly decides to proceed to the election on that
basis?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I therefore take it that
the Assembly wishes to declare the Czech Republic
elected as a member of the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law for a term of office
beginning on the first day of the forty-eighth session of
the Commission, in July 2015, and expiring on the last
day prior to the beginning of the forty-ninth session of
the Commission, in 2016?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (e) of agenda item 112?
It was so decided.
Reports of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee)
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will now consider the reports of the Special Political
and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) on
agenda items 52 and 118.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-17101 (E)

*1517101*

A/69/PV.93

If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, I shall take it that
General Assembly decides not to discuss the reports
of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) that are before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will therefore
be limited to explanations of vote. The positions of
delegations regarding the recommendations of the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth
Committee) have been made clear in the Committee
and are reflected in the relevant official records. May
I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of decision
34/401, the General Assembly agreed that when the same
draft resolution is considered in a Main Committee and
in the plenary meeting, a delegation should, as far as
possible, explain its vote only once, that is, either in
the Committee or in the plenary meeting, unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different from
its vote in the Committee.
May I remind delegations that, also in accordance
with decision 34/401, explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.

08/06/2015

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
69/287).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 52?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 118 (continued)
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
Report of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) (A/69/463/Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft decision recommended by the Special Political
and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
in paragraph 4 of its report contained in document
A/69/453/Add.1. The Assembly will now take action on
the draft decision.
The Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) adopted the draft decision without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 69/525 B).

Before we take action on the recommendations
contained in the reports of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee), I
should like to advise representatives that we are going
to proceed to take decisions in the same manner as was
done in the Committee unless notified otherwise in
advance.

The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 118.

Agenda item 52 (continued)

The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly concluded its consideration of sub-item
(b) of agenda item 19 at its 75th plenary meeting, on
19 December 2014. In order for the Assembly to take
action on the draft resolution before it, it will be
necessary to reopen consideration of the sub-item.

Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects
Report of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) (A/69/455/Add.1)
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
before it a draft resolution recommended by the Special
Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth
Committee) in paragraph 6 of its report contained in
document A/69/455/Add.1. The Assembly will now take
action on the draft resolution.
The Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
2/16

Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen consideration of sub-item (b) of
agenda item 19?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Members will furthermore
recall that, at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 19 September
2014, the General Assembly decided to allocate
sub-item (b) of agenda item 19 to the Second
Committee. To enable the General Assembly to take

15-17101

08/06/2015

action expeditiously on the document, may I take it
that the Assembly wishes to consider sub-item (b) of
agenda item 19 directly in plenary meeting and proceed
immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 19 (continued)
Sustainable development
(b) Follow-up to and implementation of
the Mauritius Strategy for the Further
Implementation of the Programme of Action for
the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing States
Draft resolution (A/69/L.73)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of South Africa to introduce draft
resolution A/69/L.73.
Mr. Malawane (South Africa): On behalf of the
Group of 77 and China, I have the honour to introduce
draft resolution A/69/L.73, entitled “Comprehensive
review of United Nations system support for small
island developing States”.
The SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action
Pathway (Samoa Pathway) laid the foundation for a
comprehensive review by tasking the Joint Inspection
Unit with defining the parameters for implementing the
review. Consequently, the Joint Inspection Unit report
on the matter (JIU/REP/2015/2), which was published
in March 2015, contains six such parameters. The time
is now ripe to launch the full review, based on those
parameters, in order to improve the United Nations
system support for small island developing States.
As envisioned in the Samoa Pathway and reaffirmed
in last year’s resolution on small island developing
States (resolution 68/238), the initial findings would
be included in the upcoming report of the SecretaryGeneral to the seventieth session. The report in full
would be published later in the same session as an
annex to the report.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
two facilitators of the draft resolution for bringing the
informal consultations to a speedy conclusion. I would
also like to express my appreciation to all delegations for
their constructive engagement during the consideration
of the draft resolution, as well as to the Secretariat, for
their assistance.

A/69/PV.93

In conclusion, I commend draft resolution
A/69/L.73 to the General Assembly for adoption by
consensus.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/69/L.73.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/69/L.73, entitled “Comprehensive review
of United Nations system support for small island
developing States”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft resolution A/69/L.73?
Draft resolution A/69/L.73 was adopted (resolution
69/288).
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 19.
Agenda item 10
Implementation of the Declaration of Commitment on
HIV/AIDS and the Political Declarations on HIV/AIDS
Report of the Secretary-General (A/69/856)
The Acting President: I am pleased to participate
in this meeting and deliver this statement on behalf
of the President of the General Assembly, Mr. Sam
Kahamba Kutesa. I thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report entitled “Future of the AIDS
response: building on past achievements and accelerating
progress to end the AIDS epidemic by 2030”.
This meeting comes at a critical juncture as the
international community approaches the target date for
the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and is now
in the final stages of negotiations to define a universal,
transformative and ambitious post-2015 development
agenda.
The Secretary-General’s report demonstrates that
the global AIDS response has been highly successful in
reversing, and in some cases even stopping, the spread of
HIV/AIDS, in line with MDG Target 6 and the ambitious
targets set out in the 2011 Political Declaration on HIV
and AIDS (resolution 65/277, annex).
New HIV infections and AIDS-related deaths
are falling globally. Risk-taking behaviour has been
reduced, while access to lifesaving antiretroviral
therapy has vastly improved and mother-to-child
transmission rates are dropping. Through these and
other important developments, millions of lives have
been saved.

15-171013/16

A/69/PV.93

Despite these important accomplishments, we
must not be complacent. Worldwide, 2.1 million
people became newly infected with HIV in 2013 and
1.6 million people lost their lives to the disease. Today,
of the 36 million people living with HIV, 19 million
do not know they are infected. Social and econonomic
inequality and gender-based violence continue to
place women and girls at an unacceptably high risk of
infection. HIV is the leading cause of death globally
among women of reproductive age, and stigma and
discrimination against people living with or at a higher
risk of HIV infection persist.
Given these realities, the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) has developed
fast-track targets to ensure that, by 2020, 90 per cent of
all people living with HIV will know their HIV status,
90 per cent of all people with diagnosed HIV infection
will receive sustained antiretroviral therapy, and 90 per
cent of all people receiving antiretroviral therapy will
achieve viral suppression. Increased resources and
investment, global solidarity, shared responsibility and
an inclusive, people-centred, human rights-based and
gender-sensitive approach will be necessary to achieve
these objectives.
As we work this year to put in place the future
development agenda along with adequate means of
implementation, I welcome the target to end the AIDS
epidemic by 2030 set forth in the proposed sustainable
development goals (SDGs). Progress in the AIDS
response is closely intertwined with other objectives
outlined in the SDGs, including targets related to
health, gender equality, human rights, and development
as a whole. Significant value lies in the lessons learned
from the global AIDS response and the UNAIDS
approach as we seek to deliver a post-2015 development
agenda that is truly transformative.
As it has had to address complex challenges, the
AIDS response has reaffirmed the value of multisectoral
approaches, inclusive governance and partnerships
with a wide range of stakeholders. Our response to HIV
and AIDS has demonstrated that much can be achieved
through collective action and adequate resourcing. We
should take the important lessons learned and seek to
implement similar approaches across the post-2015
development agenda.
I now give the floor to the observer of the European
Union.

4/16

08/06/2015

Mr. Poulsen (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union and its
member States.
We welcome the comprehensive and balanced
report of the Secretary-General entitled “Future of the
AIDS response: building on past achievements and
accelerating progress to end the AIDS epidemic by
2030” (A/69/856). The report underlines some of the
remarkable achievements of the global AIDS response
in reducing HIV infections and AIDS-related deaths.
However, much remains to be done. Several of
the key targets and goals that we set for 2015 may not
be reached. The fight against AIDS will remain an
urgent global health and development challenge in the
post-2015 development agenda. The report concludes
that intensified efforts are needed to build upon the
achievements already made and ensure that the global
goal of ending the HIV/AIDS epidemic by 2030 can be
realized.
At the country level, there is a need to invest
strategically in evidence-based and tailored responses
developed in collaboration with all the relevant
stakeholders — including people living with HIV/
AIDS, key populations and civil society — to ensure
that resources and programming are targeted and
responsive to needs and that the relevant health services
are accessible for key populations, including hardto-reach and marginalized groups, while remaining
available in locations and for populations where a rise
in new infections has been observed.
We fully agree that the goal of zero discrimination
must be rigorously pursued. National responses must
support human rights-based initiatives and address
human rights challenges such as discrimination,
including of women and girls, who are particularly
vulnerable and at risk for contracting HIV/AIDS, and
the stigmatization of key populations together with
restrictions and punitive approaches towards key
populations.
As countries develop economically, they should
increasingly take over the financing of their HIV/
AIDS programmes. We welcome the increased efforts
of low- and middle-income countries to reduce their
dependence on international funding. We encourage
the leveraging of domestic resources, not only for HIV/
AIDS but for the health sector in general. In that regard,
we would like to remind Governments to urgently and
significantly scale up their efforts to accelerate the

15-17101

08/06/2015

transition towards universal access to affordable and
quality health-care services.
We look forward to the high-level meeting on
HIV/AIDS to be held in 2016 and to broader strategic
discussions on HIV/AIDS activities in the context of a
thorough health-system-strengthening approach in the
post-2015 era.
Ms. Derderian (United States of America): The
United States commends the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), the Global Fund
to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, and partner
Governments on the tremendous progress outlined in the
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS and
the Political Declarations on HIV/AIDS (A/69/856).
It is critical for all partners to continue to fasttrack the fight against HIV/AIDS. We must accelerate
our investments and focus on effective interventions
where they are needed most. The United States strongly
supports the UNAIDS fast-track 90-90-90 global
targets described in the report of the Secretary-General,
and we have made them an essential part of the United
States-funded programmes.
President Obama is committed to partnering
with countries to control the epidemic and ensure
that no one is left behind. The United States displays
this commitment by increasingly focusing on data,
mutual accountability and transparency to implement
evidence-based prevention, treatment and care
interventions that directly contribute to controlling the
epidemic.
We applaud UNAIDS for its analytic and advocacy
efforts that have encouraged us to focus the right
interventions in the countries, cities and communities
where the burden of HIV/AIDS is greatest. To reach the
90-90-90 global targets, the United States President’s
Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR) takes a
data-driven approach in order to strategically target
geographic areas and populations where we can achieve
the most impact for our investments. For PEPFAR
that means targeting effective prevention measures to
reach neglected and hard-to-reach populations, such as
adolescent girls, as well as key populations, including
men who have sex with men, transgender people,
female sex workers and people who inject drugs.
The United States is particularly concerned about
addressing the needs of girls and young women while
continuing to expand treatment with children. Through

A/69/PV.93

partnerships, we have worked to double the number of
children receiving life-saving antiretroviral treatment
in 10 African countries, and will enable 300,000 more
children living with HIV to receive such treatment.
Continued global solidarity coupled with an
increasing shared responsibility and strategic
investment, as defined by the 90-90-90 global targets,
can put us on a trajectory to end the HIV/AIDS epidemic.
The United States encourages all Governments to
redouble the intensity of the fight to control HIV/AIDS
as they plan and implement the post-2015 development
agenda. The United States commitment to ending
the HIV/AIDS epidemic is unwavering. Compassion
and impact demand that we focus our efforts where
the burden of HIV/AIDS is greatest, and ensure
that all people in the hardest-hit countries cities and
communities have access to services that allow them to
survive, thrive and fulfil their dreams.
Mrs. Natividad (Philippines): We thank the
Secretary-General for his report (A/69/856). The
Philippines is one of the countries that has seen a rise
in the number of HIV infections. In February 2015,
there were 646 new HIV cases reported — the highest
since the first case was diagnosed, in 1984. That
translates into 20 cases diagnosed per day for 2015,
as compared with 17 per day in 2014 and 9 per day in
2012. From January 1984 to February 2015, there were
23,709 diagnosed HIV cases, 81 per cent of which have
been reported in the past five years alone. Most of the
cases — 96 per cent — were male and the median age
was 28 years.
The Philippines is committed to combating the
rise of HIV/AIDS cases. The budget of our Department
of
Health
national
HIV/sexually
transmitted
infection prevention programme has been increased
to approximately $11.24 million. Recognizing
that addressing the threat of HIV/AIDS requires a
multifaceted approach, the Department of Health is
currently carrying out behavioural, biomedical and
structural interventions to control HIV infections
among key affected populations. For instance, a
module on HIV/AIDS is now part of the predeparture
orientation seminar for all Government personnel and
Filipino migrants.
On the legislative side, several bills amending the
Philippines AIDS Prevention and Control Act of 1998
are now under consideration by our Congress and
Senate, to harmonize that Act with evidence, informed

15-171015/16

A/69/PV.93

strategies and approaches on prevention, treatment,
care and support. Critical to the fight against HIV/
AIDS is the advocacy of, and corresponding funding,
provided by local governments. The Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS in the Philippines
has been very strong in that regard. It is important,
however, that interventions and campaigns at the level
of local governments be coordinated with national
Government initiatives.
Consistent with the post-2015 developed agenda,
we are also strengthening our health system as a
whole, in particular by expanding the reach of our
universal health-care programme. Given that may basic
knowledge on HIV among key affected populations is
only 32 per cent, widespread and intensive information
campaigns, including through faith-based initiatives
and the active participation of those most at risk, are
essential and are an integral focus of our people-centred
strategy.
The Philippines Government recognizes that time
is of the essence in the fight against HIV/AIDS. If we
are to end the AIDS epidemic as a public threat within
the next 15 years, continued international support
is necessary, in line with the principles of global
solidarity, shared responsibility and good governance.
Mrs. Ntaba (Zimbabwe): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the 15 member States
of the Southern African Development Community
(SADC). The SADC member States align themselves
with the statement to be delivered by the delegation of
Rwanda on behalf of the African Group. The Group
thanks the Secretary-General for his report (A/69/856)
submitted under this agenda item.
SADC member States are gratified to be part
of the statistics that speak to the progress that has
been achieved in reducing HIV infection rates and
expanding access to antiretroviral therapy, particularly
in the hardest-hit regions and countries. The SADC
region is one of the regions that has experienced the
ravages of the HIV/AIDS epidemic. High prevalence
rates reversed decades of social and economic progress
in our region and weakened our health systems.
Against that background, SADC member States
adopted a collaborative approach to combat the spread
of HIV and AIDS in the region and its deleterious
effects on social and economic development of the
region. The SADC regional response to the HIV

6/16

08/06/2015

epidemic was guided by the SADC HIV and AIDS
Strategic Framework.
The region also witnessed an unprecedented rise in
the proportion of orphaned children, largely stemming
from the ravages of HIV and AIDS. As a result of a
combination of high poverty levels and high morbidity
among the adult population, many of those children
ended up either under the care of elderly grandparents
or being part of child-headed households. That situation
led the development of the region’s strategic framework
on orphans and vulnerable children, which has guided
national initiatives on ensuring comprehensive support
for that vulnerable group of children.
In addressing the HIV and AIDS epidemic, SADC
member States have adopted a multifaceted approach
in recognition of the fact that no one model on its own
can yield sustainable results. Among other initiatives
and programmes, SADC member States have promoted
abstinence, as well as prevention and protection by
encouraging condom use and distribution, implementing
behaviour modification programmes, increasing HIV
testing and counselling and promoting medically safe
circumcisions. Individual countries have also taken
unprecedented steps to mainstream efforts to combat
HIV and AIDS across all sectors, expand treatment
for people living with HIV and increase support for
home-based care.
A number of important lessons have been learned
in the fight against the HIV epidemic. We have seen
an unprecedented mobilization of international
cooperation with a view to reducing the prevalence of
HIV, notably under the auspices of the Global Fund.
That has given rise to a well-coordinated system to
address HIV. In a number of countries, the spillover
effects of the HIV response have had a positive impact
on national responses to other diseases. However, we
must be careful to make sure that the lessons learned
from the HIV response are deliberately used to
strengthen health systems in a comprehensive manner
so as to increase their resilience and ensure that they
effectively address the general health needs of the
population.
SADC member States are deeply concerned by
the findings set forth in the Secretary-General’s
report regarding the lack of access to treatment for
adolescents. Indeed, various SADC member States have
gleaned similar information through their statistical
data regarding access to treatment by children and

15-17101

08/06/2015

adolescents. We call for increased international
cooperation in this area, including in initiating
collaborative approaches to research into paediatric
antiretroviral therapy. The HIV response can never
be labeled as a success if children continue to receive
insufficient access to treatment.
Much has been said about the need for countries to
know their epidemic in order to better respond to it and
to ensure that the gains recorded are not reversed. We
emphasize that the drivers of the HIV/AIDS epidemic
differ in various settings, and therefore each country
should have the flexibility to tailor its intervention to
the specificities of its situation. We reiterate that there
is no one-size-fits-all response.
In the SADC region, the epidemic has disproportionately
affected women and girls. Accordingly, the region has paid
significant attention to the linkages between the status
of women and HIV/AIDS. Current data has shown
that women and young girls continue to experience
higher rates of infection. It is therefore important
that we expand proven prevention programmes to
target these vulnerable groups. Some of these proven
initiatives include delaying sexual debut among young
people, amplifying HIV/AIDS prevention education
and education on sexual and reproductive health,
and expanding counselling and testing facilities.
In addressing HIV among young people, we must
increasingly attend to the needs of early beneficiaries
of life-prolonging antiretroviral therapy who are now
entering adolescence and require counselling and
support about living with HIV/AIDS.
The issues we have just outlined require concerted
cooperation if we are to address them successfully.
We have seen unprecedented global partnership and
international cooperation in the HIV/AIDS response and
we cannot afford to slacken or reduce our momentum
at such a critical time. If we are to reach our goals of
ending HIV/AIDS, we must ensure that international
assistance is sustained and possibly increased to assist
those countries that do not have the domestic capacity
to cope with the demands of containing the epidemic.
As we conclude, we call on all stakeholders and partners
to take decisive action to ensure that we do not lose the
gains we have made to date in the global HIV/AIDS
response.
Mr. Ansari Dogaheh (Islamic Republic of Iran):
Fifteen years ago, when the red ribbon was placed at
the centre of Millennium Development Goal 6, a ray
of hope captured the hearts of people across the globe

A/69/PV.93

who had been diagnosed with HIV/AIDS. Through
coordinated efforts with the aim and hope of halting
and beginning to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS by
the target year 2015, the international community has
come a long way. The 2006 Political Declaration on
HIV/AIDS (resolution 60/262, annex) set 10 priority
targets and commitments to ensure universal access
to prevention, treatment, care and support by 2015.
In 2011, the General Assembly adopted the Political
Declaration on HIV and AIDS: Intensifying Our Efforts
to Eliminate HIV and AIDS (resolution 65/277, annex).
Despite significant global progress, as elaborated
in the report of the Secretary-General (A/69/856),
emerging gaps and challenges still have to be addressed
by the international community. The Islamic Republic
of Iran, through its robust commitment to addressing
the challenges of the HIV/AIDS pandemic and in
implementing the Political Declaration, has rapidly
developed HIV/AIDS prevention, care and treatment
measures at the national level. We have recently
developed our third national strategic plan with a
concentration on three major targets: zero new HIV
infections, zero discrimination and zero HIV-related
deaths.
The Iranian Ministry of Health and Medical
Education submitted its fifth national progress report
on HIV/AIDS to UNAIDS in 2014. The five national
reports we have submitted clearly show that Iran
promotes a participatory and proactive approach by all
programme partners in controlling the epidemic while
seeking to advance a common strategic vision rooted
in the “three ones” concept: one strategic programme,
one coordinating institution and one monitoring and
evaluation framework that is used by all partners to
gauge their interventions.
Tens of non-governmental organizations in the
Islamic Republic of Iran are active in a wide variety
of activities, from awareness-raising to running
drop-in centres and outreach teams. Every year, 10
non-governmental organizations from around the world
are selected to receive Red Ribbon Awards from the Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS),
and in 2012 and 2014 Iranian non-governmental
organizations received Red Ribbon Awards for their
outstanding community leadership on AIDS.
All people living with HIV/AIDS in Iran enjoy
free health insurance coverage. Furthermore, the
Government has established triangular clinics to provide
HIV-positive injection drug users with methadone

15-171017/16

A/69/PV.93

maintenance treatment programmes and antiretroviral
therapy. The services have also been scaled up to
all provinces of the country to bring about universal
access. At the community level, hotline services, group
educators, training of trainers, home-care services,
family education, positive prevention strategy services
for post-test clubs, and counselling and harm-reduction
services for vulnerable women are provided among
all other relevant services. All these facilities, which
provide their services confidentially and free of charge,
have led to a decrease in the number of new cases and
an increase in society’s awareness on issues relating to
HIV/AIDS.
It should be noted that these services have been
provided despite the illegal and unfair sanctions in place
against the Islamic Republic of Iran. The sanctions
have made more difficult the task of ensuring universal
access, which needs a combination of increased and
predictable funding and an effective response to diverse
and evolving epidemics based on nation contexts and
circumstances.
We are of the opinion that the family and the
promotion of family ethics play a vital role in achieving
the targets stipulated in the Political Declaration. By
educating family members while upholding ethics and
morality that help prevent HIV/AIDS, we can reduce
the stigma and improve prevention and treatment across
the board.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that the
Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran remains
robustly committed to the global efforts to work
towards reversing the spread of HIV/AIDS, ensuring
universal access to treatment for HIV/AIDS patients
and preventing any related deaths.
Mr. Mohamed (Guyana): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the 14 member States of the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM) at this plenary meeting
to review the implementation of the Declaration of
Commitment on HIV/AIDS (resolution S-26/2, annex)
and the Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS (resolution
60/262, annex).
I would like to take this opportunity to express
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his report
contained in document A/69/856.
CARICOM takes note of the extraordinary gains
made in the global AIDS response since 2000, which
has resulted in a decrease of the number of new
infections and AIDS-related deaths in 2015. We concur
8/16

08/06/2015

with the report’s findings that the work required to
end the epidemic is far from over, and that intensified
efforts will be needed to build on the impressive gains
of the past.
It is important to recognize that the transition
from the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)
to the sustainable development goals is upon us and
that several of the MDGs, especially those related to
health and HIV, will not be achieved. We were pleased
to note that a commitment to end the AIDS epidemic
by 2030 was included, as part of Target 3.3, in the
report of the Open Working Group on Sustainable
Development Goals (A/68/970). The transition also
means that the existing AIDS-related commitments
and goals identified in the 2011 Political Declaration on
HIV and AIDS (resolution 65/277, annex), to which this
component of the General Assembly is dedicated, must
be reconfigured and redirected to the goals of defeating
AIDS and advancing global health, the theme of the
soon-to-be-released report of the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS and Lancet Commission.
I am pleased to be able to report on the significant
progress that has been made in the Caribbean towards
achieving the goals of the Assembly’s 2011 high-level
meeting on the Political Declaration (see A/65/PV.95).
Indeed, that achievement is associated with a number
of factors. They include the region’s trend towards
becoming the first in the world to eliminate mother-tochild transmission of HIV; a 52 per cent decline between
2001 and 2012 in HIV infections among children, owing
to the fact that 90 per cent of pregnant women living
with HIV are receiving services to prevent mother-tochild-transmission; a 49 per cent decline in overall HIV
incidence over the past decade; a rate of HIV prevalence
that fell from 1.5 per cent in 2002 to 1.0 percent in 2012;
the availability of antiretroviral treatment to 70 per
cent of those eligible, resulting in a major reduction
in deaths due to AIDS and an improved quality of
life for people living with HIV; a lower prevalence of
HIV among female sex workers in several Caribbean
countries; strengthened health systems and scaledup prevention, treatment, care and support services;
substantial returns on investments from internal and
external sources; and the provision of regional public
goods and services, creating more affordable access to
medicines and shared capacity in key areas.
Despite the overall gains, considerable challenges
remain. The Caribbean has a mixed HIV epidemic,
consisting of a low-level HIV-prevalence generalized

15-17101

08/06/2015

epidemic in the adult population and an unacceptably
high
hyper-epidemic
among
vulnerable
and
marginalized populations, including in particular men
who have sex with men. A more recent disturbing trend
is a spike in prevalence among young women, which
may also be related to high reported levels of domestic
violence and other forms of sexual abuse of Caribbean
women.
Through its CARICOM Council for Human
and Social Development and the Pan-Caribbean
Partnership against HIV/AIDS network, which has
expanded beyond the CARICOM region to include the
Dominican Republic and Cuba as well as the Dutch,
English and French-speaking areas of the Caribbean,
our region has recognized the broader development
agenda and accountability framework for AIDS within
the post-2015 development agenda. To that end, we
have highlighted the interconnections and potential
synergies that break down silos across various sectors,
placing the emphasis on rights-based movements that
aim to achieve social justice and equity, leaving none
behind.
In addition, the region’s ministers of health
have urged their Heads of Government to urgently
consider strategies for joint action to ensure that the
region continues to maximize the use of flexibilities
related to trade-related aspects of intellectual property
rights, including the Doha Declaration on Financing
for Development, which provides opportunities for
Caribbean countries to expand access to low-cost,
quality-assured pharmaceutical products and pass laws
to prevent patent evergreening practices.
Changing the way we do business requires that
our leaders demonstrate political will. It requires that
civil society maintain its activism, that development
partners provide adequate and sustained financing
for efforts to end AIDS and that national health
systems be strengthened. Among other indicators,
those requirements force us to recognize that the 2011
Political Declaration, though still relevant, must enable
the creation of a framework that embraces the good
practices in the AIDS response in order to advance global
health, social justice and development. The key elements
include collective leadership and engagement on the
part of the affected communities in decision-making,
investment in innovation and implementation research,
the pursuance of operational convergence, the building
of multi-stakeholder collaboration and sustainable

A/69/PV.93

financing for the convergence of AIDS and global
health.
CARICOM is of the view that linkages with the
AIDS response should be promoted across the post2015 development agenda, particularly in the areas
of poverty eradication, employment creation and the
empowerment of women and girls. CARICOM member
States will continue to take the necessary steps to create
synergies at the country and regional level to achieve
our targets on HIV and AIDS. In addition to working to
advance South-South cooperation, we look forward to
continued collaboration with our development partners
to that end.
Mr. Sana (Rwanda): I have the honour of delivering
this statement on behalf of the Group of African
States. The African Group thanks the SecretaryGeneral for his report (A/69/856) and takes note of its
recommendations.
We are gathered here today to shape the ways by
which we can ensure realization of the global goal
of ending AIDS as a public-health threat by 2030.
It is therefore important to assess the actions and
investments that the international community will have
to implement in the next five years in order to achieve
that objective.
The Secretary-General’s report shows that the
global HIV response has reached an important stage,
in which rates of new HIV infections and AIDS-related
deaths in sub-Saharan Africa continue to decline. It is
important to point out that the member States of the
African Union (AU) have taken significant steps in the
area at various levels, including the adoption in 2012 by
the AU’s Heads of State and Government of a road map
on shared responsibility and global solidarity for AIDS,
malaria and tuberculosis. They have strengthened
ownership, accountability and partnerships aimed at
accelerating progress in achieving clear deliverables
under three pillars — financing, access to medicines
and improved governance — in order to help countries
build long-term and sustainable solutions.
In line with those policies and actions, a special
summit of the AU held in Abuja in July 2013 issued a
declaration on “Abuja Actions toward the Elimination of
HIV and AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria in Africa by
2030”, calling for accelerating antiretroviral treatment,
eliminating mother-to-child HIV transmission and
strengthening preventive measures for reducing new
HIV infections. Its commitment to allocating 15 per

15-171019/16

A/69/PV.93

cent of AU member States’ individual national budgets
to the health sector was another clear demonstration of
the strong political will behind this cause in Africa.
In fact, Africa, in collaboration with its partners,
has made considerable progress in creating awareness
and mitigating the effects of the pandemic among its
population. We have also made significant progress
towards achieving universal access to health-care
services in general and those directed at HIV and AIDS
in particular.
Despite that progress, the African Group is
concerned that North Africa is experiencing a rise
in HIV infections. We are of the view that a critical
analysis should be undertaken of the reasons for that
rise so that the subregion can receive assistance and
undertake the necessary precautions.
The African Group takes note of the UNAIDS
initiative to launch new HIV treatment targets for the
post-2015 era at the twentieth International Conference
on AIDS in 2014. The fast track 90-90-90 targets provide
that, by 2020, 90 per cent of all people living with HIV
will know their HIV status, 90 per cent of all people
diagnosed with HIV infection will receive sustained
antiretroviral therapy, and 90 per cent of all people
receiving antiretroviral therapy will achieve viral
suppression. The Group also notes that meeting those
targets will require significant strengthening of health
systems; smart, focused investment in the interventions
that have the highest impact; and increased access to
tailored services for all those left behind.
The Group therefore calls for increased resources
to be devoted to HIV/AIDS responses. It also stresses
the importance of complementarity in innovative
sources of financing in addition to traditional funding,
including official development assistance (ODA),
to support national strategies, financing plans and
multilateral efforts aimed at combating HIV/AIDS.
The African Group further reaffirms the
importance of guaranteeing access to affordable
treatments, vaccines, medicines, traditional medicine
and indigenous knowledge. It also reaffirms the
importance of prioritizing the finding of solutions that
would make possible pharmaceutical industry licenses
for the production of generic HIV medicines for
companies in the developing world. This should be done
by intensifying coordination efforts with the World
Health Organization, the World Trade Organization
and the World Intellectual Property Organization to

10/16

08/06/2015

support the research and development of vaccines and
medicines for AIDS and to provide affordable access
to those vaccines and medicines, pursuant to the Doha
Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health.
That Agreement affirms developing countries’ right to
use to the fullest the provisions in the Agreement on
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
regarding the flexibility to protect public health and,
in particular, to provide access to medicines for all and
technologies for the treatment, care and prevention
of HIV/AIDS, including vaccines, medicines and
antiretroviral therapy.
The Group also calls for a substantial increase
in ODA allocations for health, financing and the
recruitment, development, training and retention of
the health workforce in developing countries; and
strengthening the capacity of all countries, particularly
developing countries, for early warning, risk reduction
and management of HIV.
However, the African Group is alarmed that,
until now, the AIDS response has been failing young
people. In some instances, not all pregnant women are
accessing antiretroviral therapy, and not all pregnant
women are being offered HIV testing. Moreover,
UNAIDS estimates that in 2013 more than half of HIV
transmissions to infants occurred during breastfeeding,
which today leads to more mother-to-child transmissions
than those related to pregnancy and childbirth.
Health services have left behind children exposed
to or living with HIV. In 2013, only 42 per cent of HIVexposed children received early infant diagnostics
within two months of birth, and nearly half of those
who received diagnostic services received their test
results. Furthermore, children living with HIV are often
not accessing treatment, and pediatric antiretroviral
therapy regimens are far less available to them than that
for adults. Globally, only 24 per cent of children living
with HIV have access to treatment, as compared to
38 per cent of adults. Issues related to the formulation
of pediatric antiretroviral therapy regimens, such as
finding the right dose and palatable taste, still remain a
challenge. The African Group therefore reaffirms and
reiterates that prevention, diagnosis, treatment, strong
surveillance systems and universal access to services
must be at the core of our efforts. In that regard,
increased access to early infant and paediatric diagnosis
and treatment, which will require strengthened health
systems and mechanisms, should be given the critical
attention they deserve.

15-17101

08/06/2015

The Group underscores that universal access to
HIV/AIDS treatment remains paramount in global
response strategies and constitutes a fundamental
human right. The Group reiterates the importance of
regional, cultural and religious value systems as well as
peculiarities in considering human rights issues. The
Group is disturbed by the continuous use of certain
terms in the Secretary-General’s report and stresses the
need to maintain joint ownership of the international
human rights agenda and to consider human rights
issues in an objective and non-confrontational manner.
It is the African Group’s view that we should refrain
from using notions that fall outside the internationally
agreed human rights framework, taking into account
that such attempts constitute an expression of disregard
for universal human rights.
According to the Secretary-General’s report, stigma
and discrimination against people living with HIV/
AIDS continue to prevail. The Group is concerned that
such attitudes undermine an effective AIDS response,
and people living with HIV continue to face challenges.
In some countries, they are criminalized and denied
health-care services and family-planning measures. In
some cases, they are forced or coerced into sterilization
or abortion or face gender-based violence from their
partners. Others are refused employment. Punitive
laws and practices undermine the efforts to bring HIV
treatment to all who need it. The Group strongly urges
that people with HIV/AIDS should be treated fairly and
equally and be protected from stigma, discriminatory
practices and related intolerance.
The Group believes that prevention should remain
among the key elements in the fight against HIV/AIDS.
Priority should continue to be given to the development
of prevention programming, including through
sensitization and campaigns against risky activities
and risky sexual behaviours. In that context, although
there has been progress in reducing new HIV infections
in people who inject drugs, the Group believes that,
while scaling up HIV treatment for people who inject
drugs, more emphasis should be placed on efforts such
as counselling and other means to encourage people to
refrain from using drugs. In Africa, drug use and abuse
remain a critical legal matter.
In conclusion, the African Group reaffirms its
commitment to fight the HIV/AIDS scourge. The
Group welcomes medical research and development
and technological initiatives on the treatment and
cure of HIV/AIDS that are accessible, affordable to

A/69/PV.93

all and of good quality. We believe that HIV treatment
for 15 million people, a target set by the SecretaryGeneral, is achievable only if the significant current
gains in HIV prevention and antiretroviral treatment
are sustained, including strengthening the treatment
to prevent mother-to-child transmission. The Group
therefore calls upon its partners to support the business
plan for the implementation of the Pharmaceutical
Manufacturing Plan for Africa, which has been
developed in collaboration with partners and which was
subsequently adopted at the special session of the fifth
conference of the African Union Ministers of Health,
held in May 2012.
Mr. Bishnoi (India): We thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report entitled “Future of the
AIDS response: building on past achievements and
accelerating progress to end the AIDS epidemic by
2030” (A/69/856).
We have set ourselves an ambitious goal of
ending the AIDS epidemic by 2030. To achieve this,
international commitment must be renewed and
strengthened with regard to the 10 priority areas set out
in the Political Declaration on HIV and AIDS.
As far as India is concerned, the Government has
undertaken targeted interventions for people living
with HIV, high-risk groups and bridge populations.
A strategy for the period 2012-2017 is in place that is
based on lessons learned from the previous phases of
the programme. This aims to accelerate the process of
reversal by further strengthening the response to the
epidemic. We have also involved the corporate sector,
non-governmental organizations and other stakeholders
towards this end.
Notwithstanding significant global progress in
overall terms, there is concern that it has been uneven
in the priority areas of the Political Declaration. At the
same time, the HIV epidemic has been on the rise in
new regions.
The Secretary-General’s report points out the need
for accelerated efforts to ensure that the required levels
of international and domestic funding are available to
stabilize progress and maintain HIV-related services.
Of particular importance is scaled-up antiretroviral
therapy to extend lives and improve the quality of
life. Global efforts have ensured that the target of
15 million people receiving antiretroviral therapy by
2015 has nearly been met. While this is a matter of

15-1710111/16

A/69/PV.93

some satisfaction, we also need to reach the remaining
22 million people infected with HIV.
The challenge before us is not of unavailability of
medical treatment, but of accessibility arising from its
high cost in many developing countries. We need to
bridge this North-South divide if we are to achieve the
2030 target.
The Indian pharmaceutical industry has been
plugging this critical gap by producing high-quality
affordable drugs for use in India and other developing
countries. India is committed to using all flexibilities
allowed under the Agreement on Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) of the
World Trade Organization to ensure the availability
of affordable and quality medicine to all people living
with HIV.
It is, however, regrettable that these TRIPS
flexibilities, which are critical for the provision of public
health care to millions across the developing world, are
being questioned in some quarters. It would be most
callous if we were to allow narrow considerations of
commerce to deny people the most basic and the most
fundamental human right: the right to life. We would
like to take the opportunity of this debate to draw
attention to this matter.
While Governments no doubt need to augment
their national efforts, it is equally evident that many
developing countries will not be able to meet these
challenges themselves. The need for international
solidarity to ensure an integrated and holistic approach
that includes effective prevention strategies, access
to low-cost affordable treatment for all and scaledup treatment and sound health systems cannot be
overemphasized if we are to end the HIV/AIDS
epidemic by 2030.
Ms. Grignon (Kenya): I thank you, Madam
Acting President, for giving me the floor to address
the Assembly at this meeting to consider the
implementation of the Declaration of Commitment on
HIV/AIDS and the Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS.
We thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report (A/69/856) highlighting the progress made on
the status of the epidemic and the tasks ahead in terms
of achieving the end of the public health threat posed by
the AIDS epidemic.
We align ourselves with the statement delivered by
the representative of Rwanda on behalf of the African
Group.
12/16

08/06/2015

Our consideration of this highly important issue
comes at a watershed moment in the evolution of the
international development agenda. Key milestones have
already been achieved in the process of elaboration
of the post-2015 development agenda — notably,
the sustainable development goals, goal 3 of which
recognizes the importance of ensuring healthy lives and
the promotion of well-being and includes the critical
target to end epidemics such as HIV/AIDS, malaria and
tuberculosis by 2030, which is indeed instructive for
our deliberations today.
Almost 15 years ago, at the turn of the millennium,
the adoption of the Declaration of Commitment
(resolution S-26/2, annex) represented a recognition
that the global HIV/AIDS epidemic, through its
devastating scale and impact, constituted a global
emergency. Further, it recognized HIV/AIDS as a
most formidable challenge to human life and dignity
that undermines social and economic development
throughout the world and affects all levels of society
at the national, community, family and individual
levels. Subsequent declarations and resolutions of the
Assembly have outlined this fact, and there have been
a raft of decisions and recommendations adopted to
address this epidemic.
The continuing ravages of the AIDS epidemic are
a poignant reminder of the much-touted unfinished
business of the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs). We welcome the report of the SecretaryGeneral and note that, while highlighting the
extraordinary gains made towards halting and reversing
the course of the epidemic, it reminds us that the task
is far from over. Of great concern is the slow progress
and sliding backwards in some countries and regions,
even as a majority of countries report good progress
towards the targets of the Declaration and MDGs. This
was also mentioned by the representative of Rwanda
while reading the statement of the African Group.
In the process of elaborating the post-2015
development agenda, we all recognize that there is
unfinished business in achieving the MDGs and that
it behoves us to craft a new development agenda that
takes care of this and that goes beyond, to secure our
collective and ambitious aspirations for our common
future, development and well-being. This is why we
greatly appreciate the reflection of the unfinished
agenda of the MDGs in the sustainable development
goals. The onus is upon us, the international community,
with the impending dawn of a new development

15-17101

08/06/2015

paradigm, to make the achievement of the end of HIV/
AIDS a reality. This will call for intensifying efforts,
increasing our investment and emphasizing accelerated
action. In this regard, we welcome the development and
implementation by the Joint United Nations Programme
on HIV/AIDS of the ambitious fast-track targets for
2020.
Kenya is committed, and remains steadfast,
in its efforts to stem the tide of this deadly scourge,
both nationally and as part of a dynamic African
region experiencing economic growth, having been
re-categorized as a middle-income country. The
Constitution of Kenya reflects this changing context
and places health as a priority, in view of the fact
that development is critical in building a skilled and
competitive workforce and lifting people’s living
standards.
Progress has been made with regard to HIV
prevalence, which has dropped from a high of some
14 per cent in the 1990s to stabilize at the current rate
of 6 per cent among adults. In the last five years, there
has been a decline of two percentage points, and new
infections among children have almost been halved.
HIV nonetheless continues to contribute to high
mortality rates, burden households and strain national
health systems and budgets. The number of new HIV
infections among adults still remains unacceptably
high. There are marked gender, age and geographical
disparities in HIV prevalence, which remains highest
among women, at 6.9 per cent, when compared with
that of men, which stands at 4.3 per cent.
Sexual transmission remains the most common
mode of HIV transmission — accounting for 85 per
cent of all new infections. It is regrettable that, every
day, 15 mothers and over 290 children under the age
of 5 die from preventable diseases, pregnancy and
birth complications, HIV and AIDS. Those numbers
are still too high, and countries will continue to need
international cooperation and support to fund their
AIDS responses.
Kenya’s AIDS strategic framework for the
period 2014-2015 to 2018-2019 exemplifies the firm
commitment made by key stakeholders to help the
national Government as well as county governments in
their efforts to deliver better health for all, with a focus
on cost-effective and socially inclusive interventions
to prevent and manage HIV/AIDS. Kenya’s new and
progressive Constitution asserts that the Government
has a duty to address the needs of vulnerable groups

A/69/PV.93

within society through the provision of safety net
programmes, such as nutrition feeding programmes.
Kenya has also enacted the HIV and AIDS
Prevention and Control Act, which seeks to promote
supportive care and protective and preventive measures
against HIV/AIDS. The Government’s strategy
emphasizes an equitable HIV response that ensures
that no one is left behind. That response is a priority
for Kenya in its efforts to achieve its goals, and focuses
on effective evidence-based investments that target
priority populations so that all Kenyans are reached,
stigma and discrimination are reduced and improved
health outcomes are achieved.
In line with the call for increased investment and
leadership set forth in the Secretary-General’s report,
Kenya’s AIDS strategic framework underscores the need
to increase domestic and sustainable financing for HIV
as a matter of priority. It outlines an innovative leveraged
funding approach based on the implementation of an
HIV fund that will increase resources, increase access
to universal health care for those living with HIV, and,
ultimately, subsidize Kenya’s future liability for HIV
prevention and treatment.
In Nairobi, at the launch of All In — a new
global initiative to end the AIDS epidemic among
adolescents — President Uhuru Kenyatta announced
Kenya’s commitment to lead by example by increasing
domestic resources for its AIDS response, which
includes improving HIV prevention and treatment
and providing essential health care and counselling
services for adolescents. The Ministry of Education has
been mandated with the duty to re-examine the national
curriculum to better engage with young people living
with HIV and to eliminate stigma and discrimination in
schools. The Government has launched its first national
gender plan of action to facilitate the mobilization of
stakeholders in the design and the implementation of
actions and targets. That plan of action, which has
been disseminated in all of Kenya’s 47 counties, will
guide stakeholders on how to mainstream gender in the
national response to HIV/AIDS.
In 2011, Kenya was among countries that endorsed
the global plan that aims to eliminate new HIV infections
among children by 2015 and keep their mothers alive.
The recent global focus on evidence-informed HIV
prevention programming has introduced a paradigm
shift, allowing Kenya to examine innovative ways
to improve our investments in preventing new HIV
infections. In that regard, the Government’s strategic

15-1710113/16

A/69/PV.93

plan has reduced the number of new infections by at least
50 per cent, reduced AIDS-related mortality by 25 per
cent, led to a marked decrease in HIV-related morbidity
due to the availability of antiretroviral treatment, and
reduced the socioeconomic impact of HIV/AIDS at
household and community levels. The Government’s
collaborative efforts with national and external partners
have also led to the formulation of a comprehensive
prevention of mother-to-child transmission strategy.
This targets expectant mothers and their spouses and
provides voluntary counselling and testing as well as
antiretroviral treatment for the mother and child. As a
consequence of that campaign, new infections among
children have been brought down from an estimated
100 HIV infections per day to only 36.
Primary prevention among women of reproductive
age, family planning for all HIV-positive women and
those who want to delay their next birth, antiretroviral
prophylaxis
during
pregnancy,
delivery
and
breastfeeding and care and treatment are all services
that the Government continues to provide.
Our first lady, Margaret Kenyatta, launched the
Beyond Zero campaign, which aims to promote HIV
control and strengthen maternal and neonatal health
services to prepare for the birth of a future HIV-free
generation in Kenya. She has spearheaded that effort
by running marathons to raise awareness and mobilize
funds for the purchase of mobile clinics to deliver
health-care services all over the country. She has
delivered more than half those mobile clinics to half
the counties in Kenya. The campaign is guided by
Kenya’s development priorities, as outlined in Kenya
Vision 2030, Kenya’s AIDS strategic framework and
the Kenyan health sector strategic and investment plan
2012-2017. The campaign is organized in collaboration
with the Ministry of Health and other key stakeholder.s
In conclusion, in line with Kenya’s priorities, I
would like to reiterate our call to the international
community to scale up resource mobilization, ensure
adequate resource allocation and secure political
commitment and leadership in the fight against HIV
and AIDS, especially in sub-Saharan Africa and other
less privileged regions of the world. The end of the
devastating AIDS epidemic, which is set to be a truly
historic global achievement for humankind, is within
reach during our generation.
Mr. Bosah (Nigeria): Nigeria associates itself with
the statement just delivered on behalf of the African
Group by the representative of Rwanda.
14/16

08/06/2015

We join other delegations in congratulating the
President for convening this important meeting.
I also thank the Secretary-General for his report
(A/69/856), and the Executive Director of the Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS),
Mr. Michel Sidibé, for his statement. We welcome other
stakeholders, such as youth, women, the private sector
and people living with HIV/AIDS, and thank them for
their collective endeavours.
The adoption of the Declaration of Commitment
on HIV/AIDS (resolution S-26/2, annex) and of the
follow-up Political Declarations on HIV/AIDS of 2006
(resolution 60/262, annex) and 2011 (resolution 65/277,
annex), respectively, marks the determination of the
international community never seen before on any
single disease condition to wage a global and sustained
war on HIV/AIDS. Much progress has been made since
then, thanks to our collective determination, to the
extent that HIV is now better understood, and AIDS is
no longer an automatic death sentence. Yet a lot remains
to be done.
HIV remains a great global concern, particularly
in Africa, where HIV/AIDS poses a heavy financial
burden, a social nightmare and a development disaster.
The disease knows no race, age or gender. In addition,
women are at much higher risk of contracting HIV owing
to their biological make-up and how vulnerable they are
seen to be within their communities. In sub-Saharan
Africa, three young women are infected for every man,
while girls between the ages of 15 and 19 are six times
more likely to be HIV-positive as compared to boys
the same age. The disease is also a leading cause of
maternal and child mortality in the African region. As a
result, greater attention must be given to the promotion
of gender equality and the empowerment of women.
We therefore agree with the Secretary-General that
promoting gender-sensitive policies and empowering
women constitute an integral part of the global
AIDS response. We acknowledge the need to address
the structural gender barriers and negative power
relationships that affect the ability of women and girls
to confront the challenge of HIV. We share the view that
critical action is needed to ensure that young women
and girls can access and remain in education; women
feel safe and have control over their own sexual health;
women are engaged to a greater extent in leadership,
decision-making and service provision; and there is a
greater promotion of women’s legal rights and access
to justice.

15-17101

08/06/2015

As a demonstration of our determination to
strengthen regional cooperation, Nigeria hosted the
Abuja+12 Special Summit of the African Union on HIV/
AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria in July 2013. We will
continue to play an active role in vigorously supporting
and beneficially advancing those objectives.
In spite of the commitment to fight HIV/AIDS, a
large population and limited financial and technological
resources have made the fight against the pandemic
a major challenge for Nigeria, particularly placing
a heavy burden on the health-care delivery system.
However, we continue to rise to the challenge, making
considerable progress in the process. Some of the
initiatives that we have put in place include adopting a
national health bill on 19 February 2014. The new law
provides a framework for the regulation, development
and management of a national health system, which is
aimed at setting standards for rendering health-care
services.
In addition, on 10 April 2014, Nigeria’s National
Assembly adopted the HIV/AIDS anti-stigma and
discrimination bill. The new law seeks to prevent the
stigmatization of, and discrimination against, those
living with or infected with HIV/AIDS. On 25 March,
the Nigerian Government also adopted a bill called the
Violence Against Persons Prohibition, which provides a
legislative and legal framework for the prevention of all
forms of violence against vulnerable persons, especially
women and girls. It seeks to provide maximum
protection and remedies for victims of violence and
punishment for offenders.
Prevention also remains a major concern, as there
is still relatively low access to the prevention of motherto-child transmission services in rural areas, even as
stigmatization and discrimination pose barriers to
universal access to services. Furthermore, national
ownership and the sustainability of responses continue
to be undermined by limited and unpredictable
funding. We remain committed nonetheless. Our
new Administration, while building on the success
of previous Governments, is determined to provide
renewed impetus for advancement and development
and to consider the health sector as a key component
and target of our human development agenda.
We expect that those national efforts will be
complemented, not replaced, by support from
development partners, the United Nations system and
donors. Our international cooperation strategy will
not be restricted to the usual major donors; rather, we

A/69/PV.93

seek to expand it to include greater collaboration at the
regional, continental and South-South levels.
To say that adequate funding is critical to the
success of our HIV/AIDS strategy is an understatement.
Many countries, including mine, cannot not
achieve the noble goals of our declarations, nor the
Millennium Development Goals, without the support
of our development partners. While appreciating their
cooperation and assistance, we call on them to make
every effort to fulfil their obligations early in view of
the need to create a formidable post-2015 development
agenda. We also call for flexibility and understanding
on the issue of the transfer of technology and training
in the production and distribution of HIV/AIDS-related
drugs and devices.
Mr. Maksimychev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation is firmly committed
to the goals and principles of the 2011 Political
Declaration on HIV and AIDS (resolution 65/277,
annex), which we regard as the key framework and basis
for increasing international cooperation in the fight
against the human immunodeficiency virus. In the past
two decades, Russia has undertaken significant efforts
to prevent HIV infection. Russian national legislation
guarantees that all citizens, including those from highrisk groups, have access to a wide range of prevention
programmes and free voluntary testing for HIV and
that those who are HIV-positive have access to free,
high-quality medical assistance and social protection.
An important role in achieving encouraging results
in reducing HIV infection in our country can also
be ascribed to the strategy we have chosen, which is
based not on the principle of harm reduction, but on
risk-exclusion programmes. Such policies have kept
the disease under control. We are convinced that
a genuinely scientific approach to drug addiction,
prevention and treatment is incompatible with any form
of drug legalization.
The vertical transmission of HIV infections in
Russia has virtually disappeared, and we are prepared
to offer our successful experience of that work to
any interested partner. Our country has continued to
contribute actively to combating the spread of HIV/
AIDS and other infectious diseases around the world.
Through that work we aim to to combine participation
in international mechanisms with the provision of
assistance on a bilateral basis. In 2013, in cooperation
with the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/
AIDS (UNAIDS) and with the participation of Russian

15-1710115/16

A/69/PV.93

donors, we began the successful roll-out of a project
to help strengthen national systems for controlling
infections in Armenia, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and
Uzbekistan, including by modernizing material and
technical resources for diagnostic laboratories and
improving the training of relevant specialists. Last
year, together with UNAIDS, we organized the fourth
Conference on HIV/AIDS in Eastern Europe and
Central Asia, held in Moscow. The result was a plan of
action that defined the obligations of partner countries,
donor countries, international organizations and civil
society in achieving the chief goal of the United Nations
strategy on HIV/AIDS — zero new HIV infections,
zero discrimination and zero deaths from AIDS.
Our experience of cooperation within the
Commonwealth of Independent States has shown
that it is collaboration at the regional and subregional
levels, where the spread of infectious diseases has
similar characteristics, that plays an important role
in combating the epidemic. We intend to continue to
expand our technical, financial and organizational

16/16

08/06/2015

assistance to countries in the region for their efforts in
that direction.
We are also giving very serious attention to the
issue of infection within the framework of Russia’s
chairship this year of the countries of the BRICS
group — Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa.
One upcoming event on the subject will be held this
month in St. Petersburg, bringing together experts on
preventing mother-to-child HIV transmission. At the
same time an international conference will be held in
Moscow on the issue of ensuring a joint response to the
challenges of dangerous infectious diseases, including
HIV/AIDS.
Combating the spread of infectious diseases will
continue to be a focus Russian international development
assistance, which was strengthened in the State policy
concept in this sphere approved by RussianPresident
Putin in 2014.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

15-17101
