S/PV.7645

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7645th meeting

Tuesday, 15 March 2016, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Gaspar Martins. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Angola)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Yoshikawa
Mrs. Adnin
Mrs. Schwalger
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2016/218)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-07042 (E)
*1607042*

S/PV.7645

The situation in Afghanistan

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2016/218)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, Australia, Canada,
Germany, India, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy,
the Netherlands, Pakistan, Sweden and Turkey to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Nicholas
Haysom, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. João Pedro Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2016/218, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.
I now give the floor to Mr. Haysom.
Mr. Haysom: In 2016, Afghanistan is being as
severely tested as it was in 2015, by the task of managing
its difficult transition, with its interrelated political,
economic and security challenges. To survive 2016,
the National Unity Government will need to overcome
five distinct hurdles, namely, a contracting economy
characterized by low growth and high unemployment;
an intensifying insurgency, regarded by some as an
eroding stalemate; and an increasingly fractuos and
divided political environment. In addition, Afghanistan
will need to secure significant medium-term financial
support from the international community at the
Warsaw and Brussels conferences this summer. Finally,
it will need to achieve progress towards sustainable
2/35

15/03/2016

peace, without which all the other gains will be
threatened. For 2016, survival will be an achievement
for the National Unity Government. Some may criticize
that benchmark as being low. Yet Afghanistan must
overcome each and every one of those five hurdles
to avoid severe consequences. Survival cannot mean
inaction or treading water; it means active engagement
in confronting those challenges.
On the economic situation, we acknowledge that
there was a failure to appreciate the shock of the
withdrawal of the international community at the end
of 2014. In 2012, decisions on the future of Afghanistan
assumed the continuation of an annual growth rate of
8 per cent and that the exploitation of Afghanistan’s
abundant mineral resources would drive economic
development. It is now clear, however, that neither would
occur. The World Bank now expects low economic
growth, off a low base. In addition, the latest weather
forecast suggest that some areas of the country may be
affected by drought this summer, thereby increasing
Afghanistan’s humanitarian vulnerabilities. Low levels
of growth have resulted in high unemployment. The
hundreds of thousands of young people who seek to join
the work force each year confront the absence of jobs
and complain of corruption in public and private life.
That combination fuels not only the impulse to migrate,
but also lays a foundation for social volatility.
However, that picture is mitigated by the
Government’s effort to implement its reform agenda,
as articulated in the Self-Reliance through Mutual
Accountability Framework, to create jobs. In 2015,
the Government met the International Monetary Fund
goals under the recently concluded staff-monitored
programme, as well as domestic revenue-collection
targets. It avoided the liquidity crisis it faced in 2014.
And the Government has now stated its clear intention
and taken preliminary steps towards putting an end
to the pervasive culture of graft in the armed forces,
the civil service, the banking sector and in public
sector procurement. The Government’s engagement
with it neighbours, bilaterally and through initiatives
such as the Heart of Asia Process and the Regional
Economic Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan,
for the purpose of regional economic integration has
begun to bear fruit, inter alia, with the launch of the
Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India pipeline project.
Those are encouraging, but only first, steps in a long
road towards self-reliance.
16-07042

15/03/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

With regard to the security situation, we can expect
a difficult fighting season. The Taliban, emboldened
by their military successes in Kunduz and elsewhere,
will continue to test the Afghan security forces across
the country, including as we speak, from Helmand
in the south, to Baghlan province in the north. Yet in
this first year of independent command, the Afghan
security forces have largely held their own in the face
of continuing high rates of attrition.
The Afghan National Defence and Security Forces
are undertaking efforts to adapt and improve. They
are absorbing the lessons from Kunduz and elsewhere,
including, we hope, as they relate to the use of armed
militias. They are reconstituting their front-line units and
concentrating their otherwise thinly spread presence in
the field in order to adopt a more offensive operational
posture to prevent insurgents from gaining momentum
in advance of the fighting season. The stakes are high,
not least because the loss of a provincial capital, even if
temporarily, will have significant repercussions for the
political standing of the National Unity Government. On
a positive note, since my last briefing (see S/PV.7591),
the active presence of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant/Da’esh has been confined to a small area in the
east of the country, following operations by Afghan
security forces, with international military support.
With regard to the political transition, the
National Unity Government continues to be subject
of criticism on account of the economic and security
deterioration, although that is not of its own making. It
is being challenged by a fractious political elite and the
erosion of a necessary sense of national unity — and,
consequentially, that most precious political commodity,
confidence in the future. In the face of calls for
reviewing the current political framework, the United
Nations and the international community have made it
clear to all stakeholders that they stand firmly behind
the National Unity Government. We can even positively
report that, despite delays in effective decision-making,
the Government has now appointed an Attorney
General and a Minister of Interior. A number of key
posts, however, remain to be filled.
Electoral reform is important for the National
Unity Government to indicate manifest progress in
democratization and to fulfil the commitments it made
to the population in 2014.
The announcement of a 15 October election date has
brought some clarity, but for there to be real progress,

S/PV.7645

what is required is the introduction of electoral reforms
and the standing-up of the election management bodies.
The United Nations has made it clear that it expects
Afghans to take these decisions expeditiously and on
the basis of the broadest consensus. We can report
that, only this week, the Government finally issued
a decree establishing a new selection committee to
nominate independent election commissioners. Yet
the urgency to complete preparations remains, and
the failure to undertake these preparations will have
political consequences.
In the coming months, the international community
will make critical decisions at Warsaw and Brussels on
the level and type of assistance that it will continue
to provide to Afghanistan. As the country continues
to rely on external funding sources for 69 per cent of
Government expenditures, failure by the international
community to pledge a medium-term commitment
to Afghanistan will have a devastating impact
both materially and on the levels of confidence of
ordinary Afghans.
Because of alternative demands for international
attention and resources, donors will need to be
assured that their assistance will have a tangible
impact. Afghanistan must show, in particular, that
it is committed to tackling corruption, making the
necessary governance reforms, addressing the illicit
economy and generating confidence in Afghanistan’s
future. Investment in Afghanistan’s must be shown
to be a better alternative to the costs of integrating
immigrants. However, donor expectations of
Afghanistan’s reform agenda must be realistic, taking
into account the formidable challenges facing the
country. The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) itself will assist donors and
the Government in formulating a joint consensus on
this programme. The final hurdle is progress towards
a sustainable peace. Afghans want peace, they deserve
peace, but most importantly they need peace. Without a
peace process, the sustainability and viability of all our
efforts in Brussels, Warsaw, New York, and elsewhere
to bring stability and prosperity to Afghanistan will be
called into question.
The establishment of the Quadrilateral Coordination
Group is a welcome development that has reinvigorated
efforts to put a peace process on track. We notably
appreciate the efforts of Pakistan to assist in midwifing
such talks. A successful peace process will require the
support of neighbouring countries and the wider region.

16-070423/35

S/PV.7645

The situation in Afghanistan

As such, and with the increasing regional dimension of
terrorism, it will be important for countries of the region
to collaborate on a common approach to the shared
threat as well as to act in support of Afghanistan’s
peace initiatives.
We have called repeatedly and we will continue
to call for nothing less than direct talks between the
Taliban and the Afghan Government. I again met
with the Taliban Political Commission last week
and reiterated that peace in Afghanistan requires
an intra-Afghan dialogue that must, by necessity,
involve the Taliban and Taliban groups. However,
they reiterated that they were not yet ready to engage
directly with the Government. The United Nations will
continue to energetically engage with all stakeholders
offering support, assistance, advice, good offices and
supplementary channels of communications. Whatever
the eventual path forward, the United Nations will also
encourage the participation of women in any peace
process so as to ensure that women’s voices are heard
and that their rights are protected.
Some 11,000 civilian Afghans were killed or injured
last year as a result of the conflict. A quarter of these
victims were children. We are conscious that behind
this figure lies the tragic loss and grief of surviving
members of families and communities. It is no longer
sufficient for parties to the conflict to make public
statements on the need to avoid civilian casualties;
they must change the way they conduct the war. The
United Nations has recently expressed its concern at the
disturbing pattern of attacks and raids on educational
and medical facilities, in contravention of international
humanitarian standards. We do, however, welcome the
Government’s renewed commitment and recent steps
to prevent the recruitment of children by parties to
the conflict.
UNAMA welcomes its refreshed mandate to be
adopted by the Security Council today. We reassure the
Council of our commitment to the ever more effective
discharge of our mandate for the benefit of the people
of Afghanistan.
The President: I thank Mr. Haysom for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative
of Afghanistan.
Mr. Saikal (Afghanistan): I congratulate Angola
on its successful leadership of the Security Council
this month. I would like to take this opportunity to
4/35

15/03/2016

thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
for his briefing and for his outstanding leadership of
the United Nations work in Afghanistan. I thank the
Secretary-General for his recent report on the situation
in Afghanistan (S/2016/218), which offers a lucid
overview of the situation prevailing in my country.
Since the Council’s last deliberations on
Afghanistan in December 2015 (see S/PV.7591), we
have witnessed important gains in several key areas.
Enhanced regional and global cooperation has brought
renewed hope in our peace efforts with the armed
groups. The sustainability and enabling needs of our
security forces have received fresh attention, with
good deliveries from regional and global partners. Our
security forces have conducted large-scale operations
and flushed out terrorists and extremists in several
districts and villages across the country. Government
inclusiveness and social outreach has improved political
stability. The Government has met human rights
benchmarks through multiple pieces of progressive
legislation. Electoral reform is benefiting from fresh
momentum. A number of key senior appointments has
increased professionalism in governance. Measures to
increase revenue mobilization have brought results. An
increased rate in voluntary return of our nationals prove
that more people are coming back to Afghanistan. In
addition, there has been substantial reduction in opium
cultivation and production. With the Afghan New Year
just days away, these developments give hope for more
promising times for us.
The renewal of UNAMA’s mandate is another
affirmation of the strong partnership between
Afghanistan and the United Nations. On this occasion,
we are grateful for the vital United Nations contributions
to our security, development and rehabilitation. We
welcome the reflection of the recommendations of the
Tripartite Review Commission in the renewed mandate
of UNAMA. Taking this opportunity, I would like to
thank Ambassador Román Oyarzun Marchesi and his
entire team for doing a fantastic job as the penholder of
the UNAMA resolution to be adopted.
With preparations in progress for security, political
and development discussions on Afghanistan at the
forthcoming NATO Summit in Warsaw and the Brussels
Conference, there are clear signs that Afghanistan
is once again turning into a symbol of international
cooperation, with the National Unity Government as a
16-07042

15/03/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

trusted partner for all. We look forward to continuing
our partnership with the international community
over the coming years and are confident that our joint
success in stabilizing the situation and achieving peace
and prosperity is inevitable.
We continue to face challenges from the Taliban,
Da’esh, Al-Qaida and other violent extremist and
terrorist groups. Their human rights violations persisted
during an unusual winter lull, resulting in high civilian
casualty rates, massive internal displacement and
increasing instability in different parts of the country. In
the face of mounting struggles, Afghans have remained
united in a commitment to thwart these groups.
Following last December’s Ministerial Conference
of the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process in Islamabad
and its side meetings, increased efforts have aimed at
restoring peace talks. The Quadrilateral Coordination
Group, which consists of Afghanistan, Pakistan, China
and the United States, has met four times in two months,
in Islamabad and Kabul, and succeeded in finalizing
the road map for the next steps forward. Moreover, in
Afghanistan itself, the appointment of a new leadership
team for the High Peace Council has reinvigorated the
promotion of peace. We will spare no effort to grant
our citizens their fundamental right to live peaceful and
dignified lives.
Despite those important developments, we are
cognizant of the challenges ahead of us. So far, the
call of the Quadrilateral Coordination Group for peace
talks has received mixed reactions. Some groups
have expressed readiness to attend the talks, some
are weighing their options and some are attempting
to raise the stakes. Two weeks ago, Mr. Sartaj Aziz,
Foreign Ministry adviser to Pakistan’s Prime Minister,
Nawaz Sharif, publicly stated that his Government
had influence on the Taliban because its leadership,
together with their families, lived in Pakistan.
Mr. Aziz’s statement speaks volumes about the crucial
need for Pakistan to play its role in helping to facilitate
direct talks between authorized representatives of the
Taliban and the Afghan Government. We repeat our
call to the Taliban to engage in the peace talks and give
up violence. We assure them that they will be among
the first beneficiaries of the peace dividend. At the
same time, let me make it clear in no uncertain terms
that those elements that choose the path of violence and
terror will face the full might of our security forces and
will be held accountable, no matter whose protection
they enjoy.

S/PV.7645

We welcome the growing voice of reason within
Pakistan calling for a change in the right direction. In
the light of that, we want an immediate end to regular
incursions around the Durand Line, which cannot,
and will not, be tolerated by Afghanistan. In the past
three months alone, we have documented at least 56
instances of violation to the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Afghanistan across the Durand Line, in
breach of Article 24, paragraph 2, of the Charter of the
United Nations and contrary to resolution 2131 (2013).
That jeopardizes Afghanistan-Pakistan relations at a
time when making peace with Pakistan is essential to
making peace with the Taliban.
Despite our high ambitions and political will, we
have realistic expectations from the peace process.
Success depends on a number of factors at the national,
regional and international levels, including the adequate
handling of the spoilers of peace. At the national
level, violence must decrease so that we can win the
confidence of our people, especially women, in the
process. Ultimately, the peace process should further
unite Afghans, rather than divide us. Every effort must
be made to eliminate those elements of the armed groups
that oppose peace. We anticipate clear and decisive steps
towards that objective. At the regional and international
levels, we should aim at minimizing negative State
rivalries and maximizing cooperation. States have the
right to be concerned about their interests. However,
they do not have the right to pursue them through
violent means and proxies in others’ territories. The
price of greatness to regional and global powers is
responsibility and better cooperation in the legitimate
interests of all. Given its sensitive geostrategic location
and its history of turmoil, as well as the fact of being
embroiled in global violent extremism and terrorism,
Afghanistan must continue to remain a symbol of
international cooperation.
While we deliberate here today, terrorists and
violent extremist groups, including Da’esh and
Al-Qaida, continue to threaten the foundations of our
society. Everything we cherish — equality, democracy,
justice and human rights — is under attack from the
daily onslaught of violence. We are in a constant
battle between legality and illegality, civilization and
darkness. For our part, we will continue our more
than two decades-long struggle against the menace of
terrorism. We will do so as a matter of national and
strategic priority. Moreover, ridding Afghanistan, our
region and beyond from this menace demands more

16-070425/35

S/PV.7645

The situation in Afghanistan

robust efforts regionally and globally by all States,
particularly those in which extremist groups originate.
The time is now to strengthen the overall international
architecture against terrorism. Afghanistan has long
advocated the conclusion of the draft comprehensive
convention on international terrorism. As we struggle
to reach a common definition of terrorism, we must
remind ourselves of the enormous pain and suffering
that extremism inflicts on the civilized world. Think
about the loved ones of the 146 people who either lost
their lives or were wounded in the terrorist attacks of
the past couple of days in Ankara and Côte d’Ivoire.
The Council should ensure that all States meet
their international obligations with respect to the
implementation of the relevant counter-terrorism and
sanctions regime resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council, in particular resolutions
1373 (2001), 1624 (2005), 2178 (2014), 2253 (2015)
and 2255 (2015), and present genuine and regular
compliance reports.
While we press for the success of the peace process,
Afghanistan must be able to defend its sovereignty and
territorial integrity and to protect is citizens. While we
agree that there is no military solution to the security
problems imposed on us, we firmly believe that, without
an effective defence and security system, there will be
no solution. In the past three months, despite limited
resources, the initiative has very much remained in the
hands of our security forces. They have had success in
a number of provinces, including Nangarhar, Baghland,
Helmand, Badakhshan, Takhar and Faryab. In Helmand,
our forces have repelled sizeable enemy attacks, despite
sustaining heavy casualties. However, the cost of war
imposed upon us is massive, and way beyond our own
capacity. Sustainability, proper training, the right
enablers, reform and high morale among the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces (ANDSF) are
crucial in facing the regional and global terror threat.
Lately, the United States, India, China and the Russian
Federation have contributed to the delivery of the
right enablers to the ANDSF. We look forward to the
NATO Warsaw Summit in July, where the long-term
sustainability of the ANDSF will be discussed.
Afghanistan continues to make strides in civilian
protection and the promotion of human rights, especially
protecting the rights of our children, which has always
been our priority. We will continue to implement the
road map to compliance to prevent the recruitment of
child soldiers, having already endorsed the national
6/35

15/03/2016

age assessment guidelines, to ensure we bring an end
to practices that put the lives and future of our children
at risk. The recent Afghanistan visit of Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, provided
an excellent opportunity for a first-hand assessment
of the situation. Our pledge to empower women and
ensure their equal rights is bearing fruit. Multiple
Government initiatives continue to encourage women’s
participation in all sectors, while the strengthening
of existing laws on violence against women help to
create a just society. In the past three months, we have
witnessed multiple attacks on civilians, including the
slaying of a journalist of a populat television network.
Following that incident, President Ghani affirmed his
commitment to the freedom of expression by issuing a
decree to prevent the intimidation.
There is significant political will to consolidate
the progress made in the past years. However, the high
price paid by Afghans due to the imposed conflict pulls
us in a downward spiral. The Council must note that
our Government’s policy is to protect civilians at any
cost. The Afghan National Security Forces operate
under strict rules of engagement based on principles
of justifiability and proportionality. They provide
compensation and support to victims of violence, and
never use any civilian facilities for military purposes.
Afghanistan is currently suffering a humanitarian
crisis of epic proportions. The number of internally
displaced people is at its highest since 2002, but the rate
of voluntary returns under the repatriation programme
has seen a significant increase since 2014. However, the
continuous flow of Afghans out of the country is a source
of concern, as they contribute to the migrant crisis in
Europe, constituting the second largest group of arrivals
via the Mediterranean Sea route. Compounding the
crisis, several European countries have started rejecting
Afghan asylum petitions. It is our Government’s policy
to improve conditions in Afghanistan so that we can
create economic opportunities and strengthen security
to incentivize people to stay and contribute to their
nation. We call upon our friends from the international
community to work with us in achieving this goal.
Countering the menace of the narcotics trade and
breaking down the nexus of criminality and drugs are
key priorities for us. Our success is evident from the
findings of the Afghanistan Drug Report 2015, which
emphasizes significant reductions in opium cultivation
and production, and slight increases in drug seizures.
16-07042

15/03/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

We will continue to work with the international
community to garner support on the Afghan national
drug action plan 2015-2019 to counter the threat of
illicit drugs.
No country can achieve self-reliance without
economic self-sufficiency, and Afghanistan has been
adopting concrete measures to move in that direction.
In line with the Sustainable Development Goals, we are
in the process of drafting a new national development
strategy, the guiding document on strategies for security,
governance, economic growth, poverty reduction and
employment. We are serious in dealing with corruption
because it negatively impacts economic growth. In
that regard, the Government has implemented multiple
anti-corruption strategies and has started programmes
that would ensure transparency of recruitment in public
service and prevent nepotism.
In October 2016, the ministerial conference on
Afghanistan, to be held in Brussels, is expected to convey
a message of strong political support for our reform
and State-building process, to commit development
assistance in support of Afghanistan’s reform process
within an updated mutual accountability framework,
and to create a political momentum of reinforced
regional cooperation. We invite Member States to take
an active part in this conference, as investing in Afghan
stability would create safety dividends worldwide.
The President: Members of the Council have
before them document S/2016/241, which contains the
text of a draft resolution submitted by Spain.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, China, Egypt, France, Japan, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Russian Federation, Senegal, Spain,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay, and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
The President: The draft resolution received
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 2274 (2016).
I shall now give the floor to the members of
the Council.

S/PV.7645

Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Afghanistan, Mr. Nicholas Haysom,
and his team for their splendid work. I also thank
Ambassador Saikal. It has been a true pleasure for the
Spanish delegation to work with the Afghan Mission.
We have just adopted resolution 2274 (2016),
extending the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for one more year,
in keeping with the desires of the Afghan Government
and in consultation with it. The members of the Council
are aware of the new era that began a year ago with the
transformation decade, and acknowledge the progressive
efforts that have been undertaken in Afghanistan. By
way of this new resolution, the Council underscores
these extremes and expresses its desire to continue to
support the Government and people of Afghanistan on
their path of reform, progress, internal reconciliation
and regional and global integration.
My delegation subscribes to the statement that
will be made later by the observer of the European
Union. Notwithstanding my capacity as penholder of
the Council, I should like to briefly take stock of the
resolution we have just adopted.
I would like to refer to the Tripartite Review
Commission. As members will recall, in response to
a series of concerns expressed by Afghanistan, one
year ago the Security Council, through resolution 2210
(2015), mandated a commission that included the Afghan
Government, United Nations and the donor community,
to consider the role, structure and activities of the
United Nations in the country. During our discussions
on Afghanistan last September (S/PV.7526), we took
note of the document containing the recommendations
resulting from that review (see S/2015/713). In the
resolution adopted today, the Council took account
of those recommendations in a pre-eminent manner
by renewing the mandate of UNAMA. In that regard,
we stress the importance of Afghan leadership
and ownership that underlay the exercise, and of
strengthening the legitimacy of UNAMA. Without
attempting to be exhaustive, I should like to highlight
some of the references made in the outcome document
of the Tripartite Review Commission.
First, reference was made to the ongoing good offices
of the Mission, as well as to the need to emphasize the
role of the United Nations in the promotion of human
rights and the rule of law, including the rights of women

16-070427/35

S/PV.7645

The situation in Afghanistan

and gender equality, and in helping Afghanistan to meet
its international commitments in this regard. Finally, the
report referred to the importance of the humanitarian
dimension of the United Nations, in particular as the
facilitator of humanitarian access.
Secondly, the new resolution takes note of the most
relevant measures adopted by the Afghan Government in
the past year, and refers to the main challenges awaiting
in the year to come. In that regard, the Council renews
and reiterates its call on the international community
to continue to support Afghanistan; expresses its firm
support for the Government of National Unity and its
reform agenda; and recalls the two significant meetings
that will take place in 2016: the Warsaw NATO summit
in July, and the ministerial conference to be convened
jointly by Afghanistan and the European Union in
Brussels on 4 and 5 October.
As was just mentioned by the Special Representative,
the most recent report (S/2016/218) of the SecretaryGeneral recalls the difficulties encountered by the
Afghan Government in implementing its reform
agenda, as well as the deterioration in the security
situation despite the courageous and decisive actions
of the Afghan security forces throughout the territory
of the country. We are particularly concerned by the
ongoing increase in the number of security incidents
and the number of civilian victims of the conflict. We
are concerned by the situation of children, with regard
to which the Government recently adopted significant
legislative measures. We are concerned by the express
threat by the Taliban against the press, the media and
humanitarian workers. And we are concerned by the
increase in what the report calls high-profile attacks,
such as what happened in December in Spain’s Embassy
in Kabul, which took the lives of two Spanish police
and five Afghan civilians.

15/03/2016

through the Quadrilateral Coordination Group, to make
progress in the peace process. In today’s resolution,
the Security Council expresses its decisive support for
those efforts. We trust that soon the efforts undertaken
by the Quadrilateral Coordination Group will lead,
in line with the road map that has been developed, to
direct peace talks between the Afghan Government
and the representatives who are authorized to represent
the Taliban, in order to work towards a cessation of
hostilities and towards lasting peace. We encourage
all those relevant actors to persevere in their efforts to
make that possible.
Allow me to conclude by reiterating Spain’s
conviction that the international community’s
commitment to Afghanistan will be maintained, as will
all of our desires to continue supporting the country, its
institutions and its citizens.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Haysom for his update and his hard work over recent
months. I also thank Ambassador Saikal for his
comments this morning.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) remains a critical asset for the
Security Council and the Afghan Government. We look
forward to ensuring that its comprehensive range of
support continues. Today I would like to briefly touch
on three key areas, namely, the ongoing toll on the
civilian population, actions that must be taken to ensure
economic and political progress, and the importance of
the Council’s action to renew the mandate of UNAMA,
which continues to play a critical role in guiding the
Government through this difficult period.

My delegation reiterates Spain’s support to
Afghanistan in meeting all those challenges, as well
as in implementing its agenda for reform and in its
process of regional economic integration. Similarly,
we would like to express our desire that the electoral
process announced for this year will make it possible
to strengthen Afghan democracy and make further
progress along the path towards political and
social stability.

The briefing of Special Representative Haysom
once again underscored the fact that this conflict
continues to exact a significant toll on the civilian
population. The year 2015 was especially difficult,
with anti-Government elements’ brutal tactics and the
use of indiscriminate violence pushing the number of
civilian casualties to record-setting levels. Hundreds of
thousands of able-bodied citizens have fled the troubled
nation to seek asylum elsewhere. We encourage the
Afghan National Defence and Security Forces to
continue to develop its operational capacity and do its
best to limit civilian casualties.

Thirdly, I would like to highlight the renewed efforts
of the Afghan Government in recent months, with
the support of the United States, China and Pakistan

As the Special Representative also noted, perhaps
none have endured more suffering than the most
vulnerable Afghans — children — who sadly comprised

8/35

16-07042

15/03/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

a significant number of last year’s casualties and who
continue to be exploited by anti-Government elements.
As the security of Afghanistan is so closely linked
to the nation’s economic and political stability and
progress, the international community must continue
to provide its full support to the Afghan Government to
deliver on its ambitious reform agenda, led by President
Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah.
Governance and development remain critical
elements for stability and progress; therefore, we
encourage the Afghan Government to continue to fill
key leadership positions in Government, follow through
on its Self-Reliance through Mutual Accountability
Framework
reform
commitments
and
make
progress towards electoral reform. We welcome the
recommendations announced by the Special Electoral
Reform Commission, as they represent an important
step in strengthening public confidence in the electoral
process and in democratic institutions.
We continue to believe that outreach from the
Government to all major segments of society is critical,
as those who feel excluded are more likely to undermine
the National Unity Government and foster greater
instability. Accordingly, we commend and strongly
support the Afghan Government’s efforts to foster a
peace and reconciliation process with the Taliban and
other armed groups. Moreover, we welcome the support
from regional partners to advance this Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned initiative. We will continue to work
through the Quadrilateral Coordination Group to do
our part to advance the peace process.
On the economic front, we welcome President
Ghani’s efforts to increase regional connectivity. We
also commend the Government for its significantly
increased revenue collection in 2015. Slow economic
growth remains a serious concern, and we encourage
the Government to take steps to improve the investment
climate for both foreign and domestic businesses.
In 2016, the international community will have
an opportunity to renew security and development
assistance for Afghanistan at the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization Summit in Warsaw in July and
at the Brussels ministerial meeting on development
in October. We encourage nations to sustain their
commitments for financial and security assistance
through the transformation decade.

S/PV.7645

I would like to conclude with a few words
about the importance of UNAMA. We agree with
the Tripartite Review Commission’s assessment
that Afghanistan continues to demand significant
international assistance; it is essential for the country
to achieve political and economic stability and security.
UNAMA is representative of our common resolve to be
Afghanistan’s partner. With the renewal of UNAMA’s
mandate, the Council will once again demonstrate
its collective commitment to Afghanistan and to the
Afghan people.
We thank Special Representative Haysom again and
reaffirm our support for his ongoing efforts to ensure
UNAMA effectively discharges its mandate, namely,
exercising good offices, promoting human rights and
the rule of law, coordinating humanitarian assistance
and donor support, and countering narcotics.
In the face of tremendous obstacles, the Afghan
Government has made great strides towards its stated
goals; however, there is much work to be done. The
Government’s continued focus on the tasks ahead
remains imperative. The international community
must continue to buttress Afghanistan’s efforts with
technical, financial and moral support.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Haysom for his briefing on
the situation in Afghanistan. We listened with interest
to the substantive statement made by the Permanent
Representative of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan,
Mr. Mahmoud Saikal.
The developments in the military and political
situation in Afghanistan are a matter of serious
concern. There has recently been a significant increase
in militant activity by the Taliban, as well as other
terrorist groups. One very worrying subject is the
increase in the numbers and influence of Islamic
State fighters in Afghanistan and the latter’s efforts to
subsume other opposition armed groups, primarily in
the north of the country. We have noted with concern
the cases of assaults and terrorist attacks on diplomatic
missions of foreign Governments in Afghanistan, which
recently have become more frequent. We are compelled
to conclude that the activities of the four-nation contact
group created a few months ago to establish direct
talks between Kabul and the Taliban unfortunately has
not produced visible results. A clear indication of this
was the Taliban’s statement about its refusal to resume

16-070429/35

S/PV.7645

The situation in Afghanistan

peace negotiations until the Afghan Government meets
its previously announced preconditions, and in that
case there can be no possibility of starting a successful
peace process. But without full-fledged peace talks and
an end to military action, the suffering of the Afghan
people will continue.
For our part, we support the Afghan Government’s
policy regarding the achievement of national
reconciliation. We are ready to help to advance the
negotiation process, including by demonstrating a
flexible approach to the issues related to the functioning
of the sanctions regime on the Taliban of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011). We
are ready to build a constructive partnership with
the Afghan leadership in the interests of maintaining
the country’s stability and independent path, free of
terrorism and drug trafficking. In our view, a key to
stability in Afghanistan is the combat-ready national
security forces, which must be able to independently
ensure peace and stability in their country.
In February, we shipped supplies of weapons and
munitions — 10,000 Kalashnikov assault rifles and
more than 2 million cartridges — to Afghanistan free of
charge. We will continue to help Kabul to prepare and
train Afghan security personnel in cooperation with the
relevant Russian authorities, both on a bilateral basis
and by cooperating with our international partners,
regardless of the change in position on the part of the
United States, NATO and a number of Western countries
regarding their implementation of joint projects with
Russia aimed at assisting Afghanistan.
We consider NATO’s ongoing Resolute Support
Mission to be a direct successor to the International
Security Assistance Force, which was unable to
complete the tasks it had been set over a 12-year period
from 2002 to 2014. Nonetheless, we supported the
Security Council’s adoption, in December 2014, of
resolution 2189 (2014), on the launch of the Resolute
Support Mission, on the assumption that the NATO
leaders would continue to report to the Security Council
on their Mission’s activities regarding the situation
in Afghanistan. In view of the results of the NATO
Summit in Wales and Kabul’s signing of agreements on
security with Washington, D.C., and with NATO on the
status of forces, the Alliance and the United States, as
the main supplier of troops to NATO’s Afghan mission,
now bears greater responsibility for training the Afghan
national security forces and for the development of the
security situation in Afghanistan. It is also crucial that
10/35

15/03/2016

no security threats to third countries emanate from
Afghanistan. We are compelled to conclude that so
far the new NATO mission has not achieved its stated
goals either. Units of the Afghan national security
forces have sustained significant losses in fighting the
opposition and have shown an inability to effectively
repel their onslaught.
The drugs being produced in large quantities in
Afghanistan pose a serious threat to its own stability
and to that of the surrounding region and the world
in general. Besides the direct harm it inflicts, the
production of drugs provides terrorism with significant
financial fuel. In that regard, we believe it is essential
to intensify the international community’s efforts to
combat drug-trafficking in Afghanistan. We have no
illusions about the data published in 2015 showing a
significant drop in opium production in Afghanistan,
and we attribute those numbers to a change in the
methodology for assessing the level of drug production.
We note the growing awareness around the world
of the importance of the regional context to reaching a
settlement in Afghanistan, and of increasing the number
of regional forums focused on the issue of Afghanistan.
We also believe it is important to ensure that regional
actors play a decisive role in such activities. In that
context, we have some doubts about the Istanbul
Process, also known as the Heart of Asia. We believe
that it is merely a platform for dialogue aimed at
generating new ideas that should not be duplicating the
work of existing regional organizations.
We believe that efforts to assist Afghanistan should
chiefly consist of promoting the work of established
structures, primarily the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO), whose members, observers and
dialogue partners include almost all the countries
in the region, including Afghanistan. We welcome
Afghanistan’s official application for membership
status in the SCO, submitted by President Ghani during
his meeting with President Putin on the margins of
the SCO summit in Ufa. We see excellent potential
in strengthening counter-terrorist and anti-drug
interaction between Afghanistan, the SCO and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), for his useful and detailed briefing. We
16-07042

15/03/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

would also like to express our appreciation to the
Spanish delegation for its efforts in the drafting and
adoption of today’s resolution 2274 (2016), on extending
the work and mandate of UNAMA. Egypt welcomes
the Council’s unanimity on this important resolution,
and always emphasizes the crucial role played by the
Security Council and UNAMA.
The regions of Central Asia and the Middle East
share interlinked interests and stability factors. Egypt
has therefore always kept a watchful eye on the Afghan
Government and supported it in its fight against
terrorism and in its strenuous efforts to establish
its control and sovereignty over the whole of the
country. We support the Afghan authorities in their
political and social efforts to entrench security and
ensure the development and prosperity of the entire
Afghan people. We would like to stress the risk that
the illicit trade in drugs poses to stability and security
in Afghanistan and Central Asia as a whole. In that
regard, we would like to emphasize the importance
of close coordination, regionally and internationally,
with the Afghan authorities, in combating trafficking
in narcotics, an effort that cannot be separated from
counter-terrorism action, owing to the fact that drugs
are one of the principal sources of financing for terrorist
groups and armed groups. In that regard, we can only
welcome the efforts of the the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime as well as those of the regional
organizations working in this area to help Afghanistan
solve this problem, which is so damaging to efforts to
promote development and peace in Central Asia.
Where the United Nations is concerned, and taking
into consideration the Secretary-General’s September
report on Afghanistan (S/2015/684), the General
Assembly’s most recent resolution on the situation in
Afghanistan, issued in December (resolution 70/77) and
the resolution adopted by the Security Council today,
the international community is raising the alarm about
the growing presence of Da’esh inside Afghanistan
and its increasing control and capacities in the eastern
part of the country. This is a cancerous tumour that we
must confront, fight and uproot wherever it appears,
both through our international Organization and in our
anti-terrorism efforts. In that context, Egypt reiterates its
continued willingness to help to train the Afghan army
and police at specialized high-level sessions. We would
also like to emphasize that we have no involvement in
any internal Afghan struggles and no interests at stake
except that of helping to ensure security and stability

S/PV.7645

in the entire Afghan region by assisting the country’s
national army and its fight against the various terrorist
organizations. We therefore hope to be able to work to
ensure tripartite coordination in this vital area, as well
as sufficient financing from donors to cover the costs of
these specialized training sessions.
The Arab Republic of Egypt welcomes regional
initiatives in this field, particularly the final declaration,
entitled “Enhanced Cooperation for Countering
Security Threats and Promoting Connectivity in the
Heart of Asia Region”, issued at the Fifth Ministerial
Meeting of the Heart of Asia-Istanbul process, held on
9 December 2015 in Islamabad. At the international
level, we reiterate the importance of addressing the issue
of Afghanistan in the appropriate forums, especially
the European Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan,
to be held on 4 and 5 October in Brussels.
Finally, Egypt is closely monitoring developments
in the political and military situations in Afghanistan
in order to achieve the shared goal of enhancing the
capacities of a State that has suffered too much over
the past few decades and to help it meet the challenges
it faces in the areas of peace, stability, security and
sustainable development.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I join earlier speakers
in thanking Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Nicholas Haysom for his briefing, and
the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
Ambassador Saikal, for his statement.
As Afghanistan completes the first year of the
transformation decade, Malaysia is pleased to witness
the steadfast commitment and ongoing efforts of
the Afghan Government in implementing its reform
agenda, particularly in the areas of security, economy,
governance and development, as outlined in the
document “Realizing self-realization: commitments
to reform and renewed partnership”. We are also
pleased to note the increasingly positive atmosphere in
the region in support of the Afghan-led and Afghanowned peace and reconciliation process. In that
context, Malaysia welcomes the establishment of the
Quadrilateral Coordination Group on the Afghan
Peace and Reconciliation Process, and its adoption of
a road map outlining steps towards a peace process.
We reiterate that a peaceful political settlement is the
only way to achieve sustainable peace and stability in
the country, and hope for the early holding of direct

16-0704211/35

S/PV.7645

The situation in Afghanistan

peace talks between the Government of Afghanistan
and the Taliban.
Malaysia has always maintained the importance
of the international community’s ongoing support,
encouragement and assistance to the Government
of Afghanistan during these challenging times. In
that respect, we are encouraged to note the various
international and regional initiatives, such as the Heart
of Asia-Istanbul process and the Regional Economic
Cooperation Conference for Afghanistan. We also look
forward to the Warsaw summit and the ministerial-level
development conference in Brussels, to be held in
July and October, respectively. We are hopeful that
this initiative will complement and assist the Afghan
Government’s reconstruction and development efforts.
Nonetheless, we recognize that the Government
continues to face significant challenges in its efforts
to rebuild the country. Of particular concern is the
dire security condition and its devastating impact on
Afghan civilians.
As highlighted in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2016/218), the 11,000 civilian casualties recorded last
year represent the highest number of civilian casualties
recorded since 2009. Unsurprisingly, children continue
to suffer disproportionately as a result of the ongoing
conflict, accounting for almost one-third of all civilian
casualties in Afghanistan. The Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict recently adopted its
conclusions on the situation in Afghanistan, which
delivered clear messages to all parties to the conflict
and the international community on measures needed
to safeguard the security and well-being of children in
Afghanistan. Malaysia commends the Government’s
firm commitment to children’s rights and protection,
including by ending and preventing the recruitment of
children within the Afghan National Police through the
full implementation of its action plan and road map.
We also commend the many positive measures already
taken and strongly encourage continued progress on its
implementation, especially with regard to the Afghan
local police.
Yet many challenges and dangers remain for the
country’s youngest citizens, not least the grave threat
to their lives. As many as 144 children were killed
and 418 injured in the three months from November
2015 to January 2016. Schools and hospitals continue
to be targets for attack, preventing crucial safe access
to education and medical facilities. Non-State armed
groups, including violent extremist groups, continue to
12/35

15/03/2016

recruit children into their ranks through manipulation or
coercion due to poverty. We are deeply concerned about
this phenomenon and the resultant detention of children
associated with such armed groups. In our view, it
would be worthwhile considering alternative measures,
such as rehabilitation and reintegration programmes,
that would allow for the reinsertion of those children
as productive members of the community, thereby
reducing stigmatization.
The future of Afghanistan will one day rest in
the hands of its children. Therefore, focusing on child
protection during the ongoing conflict is a sound
investment. The support of the international community
is vital to this long-term endeavour, and we encourage
continued cooperation between the Government of
Afghanistan and the United Nations, including the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
as well as with bilateral and other multilateral partners
in this regard.
Finally, I take this opportunity to pay tribute to
Mr. Haysom and the entire UNAMA team for their
tireless efforts under challenging circumstances. We
are convinced that the United Nations, in full respect
for the principle of the country’s sovereignty, will
continue to play a decisive and contributing role towards
realizing Afghanistan’s transformation decade. I also
wish to welcome the work of the Tripartite Review
Commission on the United Nations in Afghanistan,
which has provided us with valuable insights to further
enhance the United Nations engagement with the
Government of Afghanistan.
Given the critical moment that Afghanistan is
going through and the importance of UNAMA’s role,
we favour the extension of the UNAMA mandate for 12
months. We are confident that, under its refocused and
consolidated mandate, UNAMA will be able to assist the
Afghan Government in meeting its aspirations towards
achieving national unity and lasting stability. We also
thank Spain for all its hard work that contributed to the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2274 (2016) today.
Allow me to conclude by reiterating Malaysia’s
firm support for the reconciliation and reintegration
efforts undertaken by the Government of Afghanistan
in the context of respect for the country’s democracy
and Constitution, non-violence and the rights of
all Afghans.
16-07042

15/03/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV.7645

Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): On behalf of
the delegation of Senegal, I welcome this opportunity
to address the important issue of the situation in
Afghanistan at a time when the country has just
completed the first year of its transformation decade
from 2015 to 2024, which my delegation fully supports.
I thank the Spanish delegation for its efforts and
Mr. Haysom for the high quality of the report that he
has introduced (S/2016/218).

before us, the number of victims of the conflict in 2015
rose 4 per cent over the previous year. In 2015, more
than 3,000 children lost their lives in Afghanistan, an
increase of 14 per cent over 2014 and a sad toll unseen
since 2009. And that is above and beyond difficulties in
accessing humanitarian assistance and education, along
with the recruitment of child soldiers and the existence
of sexual abuse and other reprehensible acts, which my
delegation of course condemns vehemently.

I also take this opportunity to pay well-deserved
tribute to the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) for its outstanding work,
often undertaken in difficult security conditions. My
delegation voted in favour of resolution 2274 (2016),
which the Security Council has adopted today with a
view to extending the UNAMA mandate by one year.

On the humanitarian front, the record number of
internally displaced persons — 335,000 in 2015 — offsets the 58,463 persons returning voluntarily. A number
of Afghan refugees — 213,000 people — are also
headed for Europe, which represents the largest group
after those coming from Syria. All of this serves to
highlight the gravity of the challenges we face.

I welcome and highlight the significant progress
made thanks to the joint action of the Afghan
Government, the NATO Resolute Support Mission,
which took over from its International Security
Assistance Force, the United Nations country team and
other international actors. We should also pay tribute
to all of Afghanistan’s international partners, who
continue to be committed for the sake of the country’s
stability and the security of its population. With regard
to technical and financial partners and other generous
donors, we urge them to pursue their efforts towards
Afghanistan’s reconstruction and development.
Afghanistan has made notable progress, in
particular with the setting up of the Quadrilateral
Coordination Group, the steps taken with regard to the
enrolment of children and combating drug trafficking,
as well as the submission of the recommendations
of the Special Commission on Electoral Reform.
Nevertheless, sizable challenges continue to exist,
including the deterioration in the security situation,
in particular the heightened terrorist threat, as well as
delays in implementing electoral reforms in the runup to local and parliamentary elections, protecting
human rights and ensuring respect for international
humanitarian law.
Developments in the security and political front
remain of great concern, as witnessed by the recent
statement by a Taliban faction to temporarily withdraw
from talks, slowing a political process that is already
facing difficulties. The intensity of the conflict and its
spread continue to have an atrocious impact on civilians,
especially on women and children. As noted in the report

We welcome the work done by the Afghan
Government, especially with the support of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, to protect
children and improve their well-being. We call on all
stakeholders to continue their efforts to help civilians.
We would point out that protecting civilians in conflict
is a responsibility that lies with the parties to a dispute,
in line with international humanitarian law.
That leads me to stress the overriding need to
carry out an inclusive peace process between the
Government and the Taliban, with the support of the
international community, in particular neighbouring
countries. Senegal therefore welcomes the conclusion
of the agreement between China, Pakistan, the United
States and Afghanistan to establish the Quadrilateral
Coordination Group, which is the format chosen to
support the peace talks. In that connection, allow
me to welcome the regional momentum generated by
Afghanistan, neighbouring countries and international
partners that enabled the holding, in Islamabad on
9 December 2015, of the fifth Ministerial Conference
of the Heart of Asia Process as well as the seventeenth
meeting of the International Contact Group on
Afghanistan, held in Berlin on 3 February 2016, and
which also led to the joint declaration adopted by
Iran and Afghanistan early this year. The willingness
expressed by Afghanistan and Pakistan to step
up their cooperation on border security, trade and
fighting terrorism continues to be commendable, as
its contribution to achieving peace with the Taliban
remains decisive.

16-0704213/35

S/PV.7645

The situation in Afghanistan

Given the complexity of the peace process and
the time it will take, it will be necessary to ensure
the ongoing presence of international forces to pursue
the efforts under way to strengthen the capacities of
the Afghan security forces in a context marked by the
threat posed by the Haqqani Network, Al-Qaida and the
Islamic State in the country. Moreover, my delegation
believes that it is important to increase cooperation
between the Sanctions Committee on Da’esh, Al-Qaida
and the Taliban and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
in order to counter any actions that could derail the
peace process.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Senegal’s
full support for the economic, social and political
goals set out by the Afghan Government in the hope of
achieving a stable and prosperous Afghanistan living in
perfect harmony with its neighbours.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): Let me first express my
gratitude to the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Nicholas Haysom, for his tireless efforts
in Kabul and for his comprehensive briefing today. I
noted in particular the point he made that 2016 would
be the year of survival. I would also like to extend my
sincere appreciation to Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi
of Spain and to his colleagues for effectively guiding
consultations on resolution 2274 (2016), which was
adopted unanimously moments ago. I am also grateful
for the statement by Ambassador Saikal of Afghanistan.
I notice that we have 28 speakers today. I am only
the ninth, and it is already 11.30. I will keep to the
five-minute rule that the Security Council set.
Since Japan joined the Security Council in January,
I have been underlining the importance of implementing
resolutions. Security Council resolutions are effective
only when implemented. I would like to discuss how
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) is implementing its mandate.
Resolution 2274 (2016) describes UNAMA’s mandate
in detail, therefore I will not spell it out now. But I
will say that UNAMA is implementing its mandate
under extremely difficult circumstances. UNAMA
plays a significant role in the progress of electoral
reforms and in supporting the Special Electoral Reform
Commission. As described in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2016/218), we have observed progress in
this area. Confusion in the 2014 Afghan presidential
election, which we still remember, occurred due to the
lack of a robust electoral architecture. We are confident
14/35

15/03/2016

that UNAMA’s efforts will fully ensure an inclusive,
transparent and credible election in the future.
One of Japan’s priorities has been, and is, the
enhancement of Afghanistan’s capability to maintain
security. Japan has fully implemented its commitments
by providing assistance for capacity-building and the
salaries of the Afghan National Police. Despite strong
support from Japan and other international donors, the
situation in Afghanistan is far from stable. The number
of civilian casualties in 2015 was at a record high, with
more than 11,000 people either killed or injured. Many
previous speakers focused on that point.
Under the deteriorating security situation, Japan
welcomes the establishment of the Quadrilateral
Coordination Group, which includes Afghanistan,
China, Pakistan and the United States. The Group
focuses on the Afghan peace and reconciliation
process and on the resumption of direct talks between
the Afghan Government and the Taliban, which will
hopefully provide a significant improvement in security
conditions in Afghanistan.
My personal experience as Japan’s first Special
Representative for Afghanistan and Pakistan tells me
that there is no one-size-fits-all solution for Afghanistan.
The efforsts of the Quadrilateral Coordination Group’s
are highly appreciated, but the peace and reconciliation
process is not the only answer to the many challenges
the National Unity Government faces. The delay in
starting direct talks should not be an excuse for the lack
of progress in other key areas, such as anti-corruption,
governance, the rule of law and human rights. Again,
the key word is “implementation”.
The Security Council meets every three months to
discuss the situation in Afghanistan and from time to
time adopts resolutions. But given the seriousness of
the challenges that Afghanistan is facing, this approach
seems like business as usual. What more can the
Security Council do to support the efforts of UNAMA
and the Government of Afghanistan? This has long
been my question.
In my view, the Security Council could explore
the possibility of conducting a Council mission to
Afghanistan. It is certain that we would have to examine
various elements of such a proposal, for example, the
timing of a mission, the security situation, and what
messages we would like to send to the country. But I
believe that a Security Council mission can serve as a
good opportunity to send a strong message of support
16-07042

15/03/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

for the stability and the development of Afghanistan,
which continues to face the difficult challenges that
have been reported to us today.
As the Afghan Government implements its
commitment to reforms on the basis of mutual
accountability and makes a crucial transition towards
self-reliance, Japan, and other members of the Security
Council and the international community, I am sure,
stand ready to offer their support.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I welcome Special
Representative Haysom and Ambassador Saikal back to
the Security Council and thank them for their briefings.
I will stick to the five minute rule, particularly since we
rigidly enforce it when we are President.
The extension of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) today is a welcome
sign of the Council’s continued commitment to
Afghanistan. It is a commitment to standing by the
people and the Government of Afghanistan so that,
together, they can forge the safe, stable and prosperous
country that all Afghans deserve. As we have just
heard from the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, the road ahead will be difficult at times, but
together with the international community’s assistance
and the support of the NATO Resolute Support Mission,
I am confident that Afghanistan can successfully
navigate the path ahead. UNAMA will play a vital role
in that effort.
We see three priorities for the coming months.
First, economic growth needs to be the linchpin of
Afghanistan’s development. A growing economy will be
the engine of opportunity for all Afghans — opportunity
for men and women tired of years of violence,
opportunity for the next generation of entrepreneurs
and innovators, and of course opportunity that will help
Afghans choose a future inside Afghanistan rather than
risk fleeing to find an uncertain future abroad.
I therefore congratulate Afghanistan on its recent
accession to the World Trade Organization and on
its progress on the International Monetary Fund
programme. These are vital steps towards creating
opportunity, steps that will integrate Afghanistan into
lucrative international and regional trade networks,
but major challenges remain and a clear strategy on
economic reform will be needed by the National Unity
Government if long-term growth is to be secured. I
hope that Afghanistan’s leaders will seize on recent
momentum to make this a reality.

S/PV.7645

Turning to my second point, it is clear that an
economy cannot flourish without security. Longterm growth needs long-term stability. As my Foreign
Secretary made clear during his visit to Afghanistan
last week, the United Kingdom fully supports the
crucial work of the National Unity Government and the
Quadrilateral Coordination Group on the Afghan Peace
and Reconciliation Process. I would like to take this
opportunity to welcome the new leadership of the High
Peace Council, who will also have an important role to
play in these efforts.
But it is not just those within Afghanistan or the
Quadrilateral Coordination Group who can assist this
process. The international community and the region
all can provide valuable support. Therefore, let us all
make clear this Council’s united support for the peace
process, our united call for the Taliban to come to
the negotiating table and our united encouragement
for Afghanistan and Pakistan to cooperate even more
closely to combat the shared threat posed to them
by extremism.
The UNAMA report (S/2016/218) paints a clear
picture of the consequences of such extremism. We
wholly condemn the Taliban’s continuing attacks,
especially those against civilian targets. The violence
must stop. The people of Afghanistan have paid too
high a price for far too long. I would like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute to the bravery and sacrifice
of the Afghan Nation Security Forces in their efforts
to halt the violence. I welcome their robust actions
supported by their international allies, including to
combat the emerging threat of Da’esh affiliates in the
east of the country, to which Special Representative
Haysom referred in his remarks.
My final point is about the National Unity
Government. While a strong economy may require
security, both can only really succeed with strong
governance. The United Kingdom is a strong supporter
of the National Unity Government, and I hope we can
all show our support today for President Mohammad
Ashraf Ghani Ahmadzai and Chief Executive Abdullah
Abdullah as they work together in pursuit of stability
and prosperity.
The Brussels Conference in October is the moment
for the National Unity Government to demonstrate
its own commitment to the three priorities I have
just outlined. It is a chance for them to showcase the
reforms they have made so far and the reforms ahead

16-0704215/35

S/PV.7645

The situation in Afghanistan

that will lead the country towards self-reliance in the
coming years. This will need to include concrete action
to combat corruption, a coherent plan for economic
growth and a plan for reforming and strengthening
the electoral system, one that builds on the Special
Electoral Reform Commission. We support the work of
UNAMA in this area.
I would like to conclude with this final point.
Although the onus is on the National Unity Government,
the Brussels Conference is also a moment for us, the
international community, to match our words with
action. It is the moment to set the parameters for
the international community’s future engagement
in Afghanistan and really demonstrate what our
commitment means. To step away now would not only
damage the three priorities I have just outlined, but it
would also send the wrong signal to the people and the
Government of Afghanistan.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): We would like to
express our gratitude to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Nicholas Haysom, for
his extensive briefing and for his team’s efforts in
Afghanistan. We welcome the unanimous adoption of
the resolution 2274 (2016), extending the mandate of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) for a year, and we thank the delegation of
Spain for a job well done. Ukraine aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered shortly by the observer of the
European Union (EU).
Ukraine is persuaded that robust peace can be
established in Afghanistan and that the only path to that
result is through a broad-based national reconciliation.
We are of the opinion that there is no viable alternative
to the National Unity Government and we deplore any
initiatives resulting in internal tensions that could put
Afghanistan’s much desired stability at risk.
Like others, we commend the efforts of the recently
established Quadrilateral Coordination Group on the
Afghan Peace and Reconciliation Process to enable
the holding of early peace talks between the Taliban
factions and Afghan Government representatives. We
also call on members of the international community
with a degree of influence on the Taliban to use
it to encourage their earnest participation in early
peace negotiations.
We commend the Afghan Government’s determination
to focus its efforts on resolving economic issues and
addressing the fiscal gap, poverty and unemployment,
16/35

15/03/2016

as stipulated in the Self-Reliance through Mutual
Accountability Framework, as well as to promote
regional economic cooperation. However, the ability
of the Government of Afghanistan to promote further
reforms, in particular in the economic sphere, and
to effectively confront the numerous challenges and
threats posed by the insurgency and the activities of
violent extremists, depends on the continued support
provided by the country’s international partners.
In this regard, we look forward to the July 2016
NATO Conference in Warsaw to consider further
military support to Afghanistan and the 2016 Ministerial
Conference hosted by the EU in Brussels in October
2016, where renewed donor assistance to civilians will
be discussed. Nevertheless, we note that the extent of
the donor community’s commitment to security and
development assistance to Afghanistan goes hand in
hand with the progress made by the Afghan Government
in advancing its reform and good-governance agenda.
Unfortunately, the efforts of the Afghan Government
and its international partners are overshadowed by the
overall deteriorating security situation in the country,
with the intensification of violence by the Taliban
movement and other terrorists and violent extremist
groups as well as the dangerously growing presence
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and its
affiliates. On the territories upon which the Taliban
and other violent extremist groups impose their cruel
terror, one can witness the alarming picture of flagrant
violations of human rights, the maltreatment of civilian
populations, summary executions, deliberate abuses
and continuing discrimination against women and
girls, as well as the use of child soldiers. That creates
an atmosphere of fear and terror in the entire region and
contributes to instability and prolongation of conflicts.
Ukraine condemns all violations of international
humanitarian law, in particular deliberate and
indiscriminate attacks against civilian objects,
internationally protected places, such as hospitals and
clinics, as well as humanitarian and health personnel,
thereby creating insurmountable difficulties for the
implementation of the international community’s
humanitarian programmes in Afghanistan. We call on
all parties in Afghanistan to take measures to minimize
civilian casualties by taking all feasible precautions
in that regard. We also call on the Government of
Afghanistan to systematically investigate, with the
support of UNAMA, all violations of international
humanitarian law to ensure that all perpetrators are
16-07042

15/03/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV.7645

held accountable, as well to ensure that the victims and
their families are provided with appropriate remedies.

Notwithstanding the progress achieved, the political
and security situation remains fragile.

Given the appalling practice of the recruitment
of children by the armed groups in the territory
of Afghanistan, we commend the Government’s
commitment to ending and preventing grave violations
against children, namely, through the full and complete
implementation of the relevant action plan within the
Afghan National Defence and Security Forces, as well
as its pledge to the United Nations “Children, Not
Soldiers” campaign.

The attacks by armed groups, particularly the
Taliban insurgency, have caused significant casualties
in the Afghan security forces, which have been
undermined in their capacity due to the low levels of
recruitment of staff and the high attrition rates within
the armed forces. That state of affairs is compounded
by the presence of the Islamic State in Iraq and Sham
and the Islamic Uzbekistan Movement. Given the
complexity of those challenges, it is necessary that
the international community support the efforts of the
Afghan authorities to strengthen their institutional
capacity at such a crucial crossroads. Otherwise, it
would be to condemn the country and its people to the
expansion and strengthening of terrorist groups, which
today have ravaged with their barbarity other countries
in the region and in Africa.

Ukraine is also highly concerned about the serious
threat that anti-personnel mines, explosive remnants
of war and improvised explosive devices pose to the
most vulnerable parts of the population, in particular
women and children, in Afghanistan. We are of the
opinion that the international community should
continue to enact relevant measures to prevent the
flow of weapons and military equipment to the Taliban
and other violent terrorist extremist groups. We also
consider it necessary for UNAMA, together with other
United Nations entities, such as the United Nations
Mine Action Support Team, to promote mine-risk
education programmes in order to reduce the risks
posed to civilians.
Ukraine, as a troop-contributing country to the
NATO-led Resolute Support Mission, commends its
national efforts in assisting Afghanistan in building
effective and viable national security forces. We call
on the United Nations and Afghanistan’s international
partners not to relent in helping the country bring about
lasting peace, security and stability.
In conclusion, I would like to confirm Ukraine’s
full support for Afghanistan’s unity, sovereignty and
territorial integrity and for its endeavours to combat the
scourge of international terrorism.
Mr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we wish
to thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Head of United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), and the
Ambassador of Afghanistan, Mr. Mahmoud Saikal, for
their respective briefing and statement.
The Government of President Ashraf Ghani
Ahmadzai has been implementing a series of measures
to strengthen institutions in order to promote peace
and political stability with a view to ending the armed
conflict that has impacted the nation for decades.

In that context, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela reiterates the fact that a peaceful and
political negotiation among the major political actors
is the only path to bring an end to the armed conflict
and to achieve a stable and lasting peace. We support
the statement expressed by the Secretary-General in
his report (S/2016/218) that direct negotiations between
the Taliban and the Afghan Government are key in
this process. In that regard, we appreciate the positive
role played by the Quadrilateral Coordination Group,
composed of Afghanistan, China, Pakistan and the
United States, in support of the peace dialogue and
national reconciliation between the Afghan Government
and the Taliban.
Moreover, within the agenda of political reforms
agreed by the Government of National Unity, we should
highlight the implementation of the recommendations
of the Special Electoral Reform Commission of
December 2015 as a pending issue. Its implementation
is essential to the strengthening of political institutions.
Likewise, we are pleased that the interactions that have
been registered among the Cabinet Ministry with the
different local and regional Government levels. Those
meetings, which have been led by President Ghani,
constitute an advance towards better coordination at
all levels of the public administration, while ensuring
concrete results in governmental management to the
benefit of the Afghan people.
In the area of the political empowerment of
women, we recognize the efforts that the Government

16-0704217/35

S/PV.7645

The situation in Afghanistan

of President Ghani has achieved in the implementation
of the national action plan on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). We must make particular
mention of the emergency fund created by the Ministry
of Women, which provides emergency medical care for
women who have suffered abuse and violence, and we
hope that this nefarious practice will become a thing of
the past as quickly as possible.
The Afghan Government’s efforts in overcoming
obstacles to peace, stability and socioeconomic
development require the active support of the
international community. In that regard, we call on
donors to provide resources to assist the socioeconomic
development of the country and to bolster its
national capacities.
In the area of bilateral relations, we are pleased to
note the strengthening of bilateral cooperation between
Afghanistan and neighbouring countries, especially
India and Iran. The high-level visits are a clear,
unequivocal indication of the trend towards dialogue
and solving problems of common interest.
In another vein, Venezuela wishes to stress the
constructive work made by UNAMA in coordination
with the Government. The role of the Mission has
been essential in the promotion of peace, national
reconciliation, regional cooperation and socioeconomic
development. That is why our delegation supported
the renewal of the mandate of this special political
Mission, convinced that UNAMA’s presence is of
the utmost importance to supporting the work done
by the Government of Afghanistan for the benefit of
its people. In that context, we would like to take this
opportunity to recognize the work of the achieved by
the Permanent Misssion of Spain to negotiate resolution
2274 (2016), just adopted. We would also like to pay
tribute to the UNAMA staff, who, with professionalism
and dedication, have carried out their tasks in a scenario
filled with risks and challenges.
Trafficking in narcotics continues to pose serious
threats to the peace and stability of Afghanistan,
while also being a public health issue with serious
consequences for its population. As indicated in
the report of the Secretary-General, 12.6 per cent of
adults — or 2.4 million people — use drugs, which
poses a real challenge to the future of the country,
taking into account the diminished capacity to deliver
health services that entails. Although the report
also notes that there has been a decrease in poppy
18/35

15/03/2016

cultivation and in the number of seizures by the
Afghan authorities, this illegal activity is the main
source of financing for armed group. Combating the
illicit trafficking in drugs requires, on the one hand,
coordinated efforts among the various law enforcement
agencies and, on the otehr regional and international
cooperation. In that regard, we recognize the efforts
undertaken by the Government, which has also had
the support of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime. We reiterate that the effective fight against
drugs requires international cooperation, including
that of neighbouring countries, to prevent, combat and
eliminate this scourge. It also requires the cooperation
of users. Without demand, there would be no offer.
Moreover, we urge the international community to
continue to support the people and the Government of
Afghanistan by providing resources and capacity to
promote their comprehensive development.
It is necessary to remember that achieving lasting
peace in Afghanistan requires the strengthening of
security and the creation of economic and social
conditions to allow the country to overcome the poverty,
exclusion and discrimination that have burdened its
citizens for decades and whose factors are main causes
of conflict in that nation.
Our country expresses its concern with the ongoing
attacks on the civilian population. The annual report
for 2015 on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
in Afghanistan registers 11,002 victims for that year,
making it the most lethal year reported by UNAMA
since 2009. We are particularly concerned by the fact
that boys and girls represented one-third of the victims
from November 2015 to January 2016, for a total of 562
young minors affected. We condemn the recruitment
of boys and girls. Moreover, United Nations personnel
have continued to be subject to attacks, which we also
condemn. All these acts are breaches of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
and carry criminal consequences. According to the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2016/218), in 2015
the humanitarian situation deteriorated throughout
the country, making it difficult for the humanitarian
agencies difficult to do their work.
In conclusion, we encourage the Government
of Afghanistan to maintain its efforts to achieve a
broad and inclusive political process leading to a firm
and lasting peace. Attaining that goal will need the
cooperation of all sectors of Afghan society, together
16-07042

15/03/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

with the help of the international community and the
United Nations, particularly UNAMA.
Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): We too thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Haysom and Ambassador Saikal for their briefings,
and commend Spain for its skillful stewardship of the
mandate renewal of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
The first year of Afghanistan’s transformation
decade has been a difficult one for the people of
Afghanistan. As we have heard today, the security
situation continues to deteriorate. Intense fighting has
seen record numbers of civilians killed and wounded
and the Taliban has now asserted its authority over
a third of Afghanistan’s district centres. Sadly, child
casualties caused by ground engagements continue to
rise, and an estimated 2 million refugees have fled
the country in the past nine months alone. With the
summer fighting season set to commence, prospects for
the year ahead look even more challenging, as a number
of speakers here have mentioned today.
The record of the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces in meeting these challenges has been
mixed. They have displayed considerable courage
and resilience on a number of occasions, scoring
notable victories. At other times, they have displayed
a worrying fragility. The economy remains extremely
weak, with unemployment high and few prospects for
improvement in the year ahead. It is clear that if it is
to meet these challenges, Afghanistan will remain
dependent on assistance from its core international
partners for the foreseeable future. Against that bleak
backdrop, several points merit highlighting.
First, to meet these challenges Afghanistan needs
resolute, unified and effective national leadership
like never before. We urgently need the National
Unity Government to lift its game in providing this.
That means getting serious about tackling rampant
corruption, and it means ensuring strong leadership
in key portfolios, including the security sector. The
international community continues to have an important
role to play in providing support for these efforts. We
commend the work of UNAMA in providing focused,
quality technical assistance, and sustaining funding in
support of the long-term capacity of the Government
of Afghanistan.
But all of this will amount to little without
focused and effective national leadership. We

S/PV.7645

look to Afghanistan’s leadership to deliver on its
obligations — first to the people of Afghanistan and,
secondly, to those countries that have invested so
much to provide them with the opportunity to restore
Afghanistan to a fully functioning State. We recognize
the scale and the complexity of the task, and we
commend the continued resilience and determination
of the Government and security forces of Afghanistan
in the face of these enormous challenges.
The second point we would make is that there can
be no peace in Afghanistan in the long term without a
meaningful peace and reconciliation process.Again, we
do not underestimate the challenges faced in achieving
progress, particularly in the current circumstances, but
we must ensure that we are laying the groundwork now
for a successful process.
Thirdly, we call on regional partners to play their
part in helping to restrict the flow of arms, fighters and
narcotics across Afghanistan’s borders that continues
to fuel instability. We welcome the momentum in the
Heart of Asia-Istanbul process, and urge participants
to carry forward the progress made at the most recent
meeting in Islamabad.
Fourthly, we believe that greater use can and should
be made of the Taliban sanctions regime as a tool for
supporting peace and reconciliation and for combating
the efforts of those who continue to work against a stable
and prosperous Afghanistan.New Zealand believes that
greater use can be made of the sanctions regime to
incentivize individuals to refrain from activities that
jeopardize prospects for peace, as well as to constrain
the flow of arms and military material into the conflict.
We remain particularly concerned about the
destabilizing effects of the continued flow of improvised
explosive device components to the Taliban. We urge
Member States to act on the call in resolution 2253
(2015) to share information, establish partnerships
and develop national strategies and capabilities to
counter inprovised explosive devices. As Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011), Ambassador Van Bohemen hopes in the coming
months to take forward a discussion on how better use
can be made of the sanctions regime in this regard,
including directly with key Afghan stakeholders.
In conclusion, the year ahead is shaping up to be a
dangerous and uncertain one for the Government and
people of Afghanistan. After our collective investment

16-0704219/35

S/PV.7645

The situation in Afghanistan

and sacrifice over the past 15 years, we cannot afford to
let the country fall once again into chaos.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me at the outset to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Nicholas Haysom, for his
briefing and particularly for his work. I also thank the
Ambassador of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan
and our colleague Ambassador Saikal for his statement.
Allow me to express particular appreciation to the
delegation of Spain for its work in preparing resolution
2274 (2016), which was submitted to the members well
ahead of time, and for its participation in a broad and
fruitful process of consultations. The outstanding work
of the delegation of Spain stands out all the more when
compared to certain recent resolutions of the Security
Council, concerning which the delays and consultations
were not exactly encouraging.
Afghanistan continues to face major political,
economic and security challenges. We are therefore
pleased that the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan and the Government of Afghanistan
continue to maintain close relations, which is
key to ensuring lasting peace and security in the
country. It is also crucial that the United Nations
and the international community continue to provide
their support and assistance to the National Unity
Government of Afghanistan, in strict compliance with
the principles of national leadership and ownership,
taking into account that major challenges still lie ahead
in the country’s reconstruction. Uruguay encourages
the Afghan authorities to continue their efforts and to
continue on the same path, drawing on the principles
of sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and
national unity.
It is important that Afghanistan be able to continue
the ongoing electoral reform process, so as to ensure
that the parliamentary elections scheduled for this year
take place in a democratic, transparent atmosphere and
with the necessary guarantees.
Uruguay welcomes the initiatives undertaken to
revive the peace process, as well as the agreement
reached by the Quadrilateral Coordination Group on
Afghan Peace and Reconciliation for the peace talks
held in December 2015.
Uruguay is concerned by the deteriorating security
situation in Afghanistan, and in particular by the
impact this situation has on civilians, who continue to
20/35

15/03/2016

be the most affected by the conflict, especially women
and children. We are horrified by the over 11,000
civilian casualties in just 2015. In that respect, the
grave violations of human rights makes it essential that
the international community commit to the effective
implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, and 1612 (2005), on children
and armed conflict. Afghan civilians continue to
be those most affected by the conflict, with an everincreasing number of civilian casualties and numerous
human rights abuses.
Uruguay believes it imperative that the parties
respect the obligations of international humanitarian
law and the prohibition of targeted attacks against
civilians. In the midst of this veritable calamity, we
once again extend our thanks to the staff members of
the United Nations and humanitarian organizations for
their relief efforts and dedication in difficult security
conditions. We encourage them to continue that work.
Another point of particular urgency is the fight
against terrorism and violent extremism, especially the
Taliban and groups associated with the Islamic State.
Uruguay believes it is essential that the international
community join forces against the financing of terrorist
groups operating in the region, which are closely
linked to the high volume of illegal drug trafficking
documented in the country.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank the President of the Security Council for
convening this debate on Afghanistan. I also thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Afghanistan, Mr. Haysom, for his briefing, as
well as the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
Mr. Saikal, for his statement.
Recently, the security situation in Afghanistan has
worsened. Many conflicts and terrorist attacks have
occurred inside that country, resulting in heavy civilian
casualties. The Afghan Government of National Unity
has worked to maintain national stability, fostering
economic development and promoting national
reconstruction. However, Afghanistan still has a long
way to go before it can achieve comprehensive economic
and social development and enable all its people to
benefit from the peace dividend. That requires the joint
efforts of all people in Afghanistan and the support and
assistance of the international community. I would like
to emphasize four points.
16-07042

15/03/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

First, efforts should be made to improve the
security environment in Afghanistan to avoid a reversal
of the situation. The international community should
vigorously support Afghanistan, including by helping
to build the capacity of its national security forces. That
should include intensified training for Afghanistan’s
counter-terrorism and border control officials and
the improvement of its independent self-defence and
counter-terrorism capabilities. The parties concerned
should also comprehensively implement the Islamabad
declaration of the fifth Ministerial Conference of the
Istanbul Process, take effective security measures and
formulate common counter-terrorism measures to help
the Government respond effectively to the challenges
and threats of terrorism, transboundary crime and
drug trafficking.
Secondly, efforts should be made to support
effective administration by the Afghan Government
and to strengthen State governance. The Afghan
Government of National Unity has begun formulating
the new national development strategy. The
international community should, in the light of the
strategic priorities and specific needs of Afghanistan,
help the Afghan Government to improve the efficiency
of its administration and governance capabilities and
consolidate the fruit of State-building efforts there. The
parties in Afghanistan should also build solidarity and
continue to settle their differences through dialogue and
consultation in a commitment to achieve development
and prosperity in Afghanistan.
Thirdly, attention should be paid to the efficacy of
assistance to ensure that Afghanistan benefits in the long
term. The international community should continue to
provide assistance to Afghanistan, while placing equal
emphasis on providing such assistance and enabling the
country to assist itself, and promoting comprehensive
economic and social development in the country.
Additional international aid would mean added hope
for the Afghan people. The international community
should continue to provide Afghanistan with relief
in the form of humanitarian goods, and help ease the
pressing needs of the Afghan population. Cooperation
with regard to infrastructure and investment in trade
should also be intensified, and human-resource training
augmented in order to increase Afghanistan’s ability to
function independently. Resolution 2274 (2016) calls
upon the parties to actively participate in economic
initiatives, such as the “One Belt, One Road” strategy.
This will provide new opportunities for the economic

S/PV.7645

and social development of Afghanistan. We hope that
the parties concerned will take proactive action in this
regard.
Fourthly, the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) should continue to play an
important role in coordinating international efforts. In
accordance with the Council mandate and in the light
of the aspirations of Afghanistan, the Mission should
comprehensively push forward international efforts in
support of Afghanistan’s development and improved
governance. In the political field, UNAMA should support
an Afghan-led peace process, and should support the
Afghan parties in bolstering their confidence-building
measures. With regard to regional cooperation,
UNAMA should fully leverage Afghanistan’s unique
geographical advantage as it assists the country in its
move towards regional cooperation and in boosting
the international community’s confidence in a smooth
Afghan transformation.
The realization of extensive and inclusive national
reconciliation in Afghanistan is key to settling the Afghan
question. China supports a reconciliation process that
is Afghan-owned and Afghan-led. China has actively
participated in the Quadrilateral Coordination Group
on Afghan Peace and Reconciliation in an effort to
create an enabling external environment for achieving
reconciliationand to help the Government work out a
practicable road map for reconciliation. China is ready
to join all parties in continuing to play a constructive
role in achieving reconciliation and reconstruction in
Afghanistan, and in continuing to help bring about
the early attainment of lasting peace and prosperity
in Afghanistan.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Nicholas Haysom, for his briefing. I also thank
Ambassador Saikal of Afghanistan.
I associate myself in advance with the statement to
be delivered on behalf of the European Union.
A year and a half after the beginning of the transition,
Afghanistan has fully entered the transformation
decade. The Government has demonstrated its will to
move forward under often difficult circumstances. In
that regard, I reiterate France’s support for the Afghan
Government to encourage it to continue its efforts
undertaken since September 2014. France continues to
stand alongside Afghanistan, particularly within the
framework of the friendship and cooperation treaty.

16-0704221/35

S/PV.7645

The situation in Afghanistan

The year 2016 began with positive signals, which
included initiatives that could lead to a peace process
and recent nominations to the High Peace Council
and the Ministry of the Interior. However, the Afghan
Government has many substantial challenges before
it — and they are substantial indeed. At the level of
security, the conflict continues to spread, the level of
violence unfortunately remains very high and civilians
are the main victims. The Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces have on the whole managed to
maintain control of the situation on the ground and to
counter some of the acts of terror in the large cities,
despite severe tactical, logistical and organizational
difficulties. In that context, the Government should not
let up in its efforts, with the support of its international
partners, to build its capacities.
At the political level, it is essential to maintain the
Government’s unity in a context fraught with tensions.
The effective relaunching of the peace process by way
of the offer made to the Taliban to hold direct talks — as
well as through electoral reform, a more active fight
against corruption and the relaunching of the economy,
which has been hit by a severe crisis leading to
hundreds of thousands of Afghans illegally emigrating
to Europe — are all areas in which expectations are
particularly high.
The illicit economy, and in particular drug
trafficking, are major impediments to the security and
development of Afghanistan. This trafficking, together
with the illegal exploitation of mineral resources, is the
main resource for the armed insurrection. A high level
of corruption persists, which stifles the development of
legal economic activities, while constituting a major
public health issue.
Important steps have been taken since the
Government took office, including the adoption of a
national action plan. Those steps must be maintained and
strengthened, with the assistance of the United Nations.
In that context, we welcome the call of resolution
2274 (2016), which was adopted today, to review, in
close consultation with the Afghan Government, the
United Nations role in supporting the fight against
the illicit economy, including drug trafficking, and in
encouraging international cooperation.
Finally, the situation of women and children
remains worrying. It is essential that the authorities
and Afghan civil society continue to mobilize to fully
implement the national action plan on women and peace

22/35

15/03/2016

and security adopted in 2015 in line with resolution
1325 (2000) by establishing appropriate financing
mechanisms. It is also vital for the Afghan Government
to continue to implement its commitments in the area
of protecting children in armed conflict arising from
the 2011 and 2014 action plans. The recent conclusions
drawn by the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict will provide a useful road map for Afghanistan
and the United Nations in that area. The response to
those challenges will be important in the creation of
the conditions for the voluntary and sustainable return
of Afghan citizens who have sought refuge outside
the country, which the Government has made one of
its priorities. In this fragile context, the international
community must continue to support Afghanistan
as it moves towards greater stability, prosperity and
democracy. The conferences in Brussels and Warsaw
later this year will offer many opportunities to reaffirm
that message.
While Afghanistan continues its political and
security transition, the support of the United Nations,
in particular for the Government, remains essential,
especially to make it possible for the people to benefit
from Government programmes and international
assistance. The resolution we have just adopted this
morning reiterates the UNAMA’s central role, which
embodies the will of the international community
to continue to support Afghanistan. We attach great
importance to the United Nations continuing to be
availed of the means necessary to achieve that goal.
In conclusion, allow me to praise the work of all
United Nations personnel in Afghanistan, who are
working under especially difficult circumstances.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Angola.
I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Afghanistan and Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
Mr. Nicholas Haysom, for his briefing on the quarterly
report of the Secretary-General on Afghanistan
(S/2016/218). We commend Mr. Haysom and his team
for the remarkable achievements of the Mission, despite
the special circumstances under which they operate.
The present debate has been a good opportunity
for the Council to assess the political, security,
humanitarian and human rights, as well as regionally
and internationally related, developments after the

16-07042

15/03/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

update of December 2015 (see S/PV.7591). We commend
the efforts deployed by the Quadrilateral Coordination
Group on the Afghan Peace and Reconciliation
Process — comprising Afghanistan, China, Pakistan
and the United States — aimed at reinvigorating the
peace and national reconciliation process. The initiatives
undertaken by the Group underpin the possibility of
reaching a peaceful solution to the conflict through
dialogue among the Afghani Government, the Taliban
and other groups involved in the conflict. We encourage
the Group to continue supporting the Afghani national
peace and reconciliation process.
Over the most recent period of time, since the
debate held in December, the security situation has
remained unstable and characterized by Taliban attacks
in various regions of the country and an increase in
activity by terrorists, especially Al-Qaida and groups
affiliated with the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
In fact, conflict-related violence has increased,
while the Afghan National Security Forces seeked to
contain insurgent activities resulting in more civilian
casualties. The recent killing by the Taliban in Kabul
of seven members of the press was a direct and totally
unacceptable attack on the freedom of expression. We
convey our condolences to the families and urge all
parties to the conflict to respect the recognized rights
of the press and the freedom of information.
Stability and long-term prosperity in Afghanistan
depends on national reconciliation based on peace, on
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms,
and on regional cooperation based on mutual respect
and non-interference in the internal affairs of other
States. In that connection, we commend the efforts
deployed by the Afghani authorities in seeking an
active involvement with regional partners. A positive
step was the joint inauguration last December by
President Ashraf Ghani Ahmadzai and Prime Minister
Sharif of Pakistan of the Heart of Asia fifth ministerial
conference in Islamabad, with the participation of
high-level representatives from the region. Its final
declaration focused on the fight against security
threats, the promotion of economic cooperation and the
strengthening of confidence-building measures, and
calling on the Taliban and opposition groups to engage
in peace talks with the Afghani Government were steps
in the right direction.
In its 2015 annual report on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict in Afghanistan, UNAMA

S/PV.7645

cited more than 11,000 civilian casualties for the
year, representing the largest number it had recorded
since 2009, with most of the deaths attributed to
anti-Government forces. Children continue to find
themselves in an appalling predicament, accounting for
almost a third of all civilian deaths during the reporting
report. We condemn the indiscriminate killing of
civilians in the strongest terms, and urge all parties to
respect their obligations under international humanright and humanitarian law and to prevent attacks on
civilians and civilian infrastructure. We hope that the
recommendations in the report will help to improve the
mechanisms for protecting civilians in armed conflicts.
We were pleased to note the statement of the
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan to the
effect that the country continues to make strides
in the protection of civilians and the promotion of
human rights, especially the rights of children, in
implementing the road map, preventing the recruitment
of child soldiers and complying with the Government’s
pledge to empower women, ensure their enjoyment of
equal rights and encourage their participation in all
areas of life.
The report’s comprehensive analysis of the situation
in Afghanistan in the area of drugs in 2015 highlights
a substantial reduction in poppy cultivation and opium
production, and sharp increases in drug seizures over
the past three years. That is a matter for rejoicing in
a country so heavily dependent on the drug economy,
and given the latter’s role in funding insurgents
and terrorists.
The challenges facing Afghanistan are immense.
We share the view that the country’s top priority is the
resumption of the peace and national reconciliation
process, so that it can overcome its political and
security crises and enable the Afghan people to achieve
peace and stability. It is crucial that the international
community maintain its engagement with Afghanistan
and its peace and development. In that regard, we
support the Secretary-General’s request to extend
UNAMA’s mandate for one year through resolution
2274 (2016), which we have done this morning.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): We welcome the Security
Council’s adoption this morning of resolution 2274

16-0704223/35

S/PV.7645

The situation in Afghanistan

(2016), which extends the mandate of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
for another year.
We appreciate the welcome accorded in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2016/218) to the
progress that has been made in initiating the peace
and reconciliation process in Afghanistan, which has
“reinvigorated prospects” for a peaceful settlement
of the conflict. That is the course my country has
consistently advocated for in order to end the decades
of war and suffering endured by the Afghan people.
Unfortunately, the long war in Afghanistan
continues. Over the past year, the security situation
has deteriorated further. Insurgent groups have exerted
intense pressure on Government forces. Civilian
casualties continue to increase, with violent attacks
in Kabul and across the country, including on the
Pakistan Consulate in Jalalabad in January. Pakistan
condemns all terrorism. There can be no justification
for indiscriminate attacks on innocent children, women
and men. The prolonged conflict in Afghanistan has
not only imposed epic suffering on its people, it has
also prevented Afghanistan and the entire region from
realizing its immense economic potential. A peaceful
and stable Afghanistan is essential to regional stability
and economic progress. As Pakistan has repeatedly
affirmed, peace in Afghanistan is in our vital interest.
Pakistan is gratified that the international
community has reached a firm consensus on the belief
that a negotiated peace, promoted through an Afghanled and Afghan-owned reconciliation process, is the
best, indeed the only, hope for securing durable peace,
stability and prosperity in Afghanistan. That has been
Pakistan’s long-standing position and recommendation.
A promising beginning has been made in fostering such
a negotiation process in the last couple of months.
Following the positive momentum generated by
the successful Ministerial Conference of the Heart of
Asia Process hosted in Islamabad in December and
jointly inaugurated by President Ashraf Ghani and
Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif, Afghanistan, China,
Pakistan and the United States reached a decision to
create the Quadrilateral Coordination Group, aimed
at giving decisive impetus to Afghanistan’s peace
efforts. The new mechanism’s success is predicated on
the shared commitment and responsibility of each of
its four members. Each must undertake to play its part
in moving the process forward towards our common
24/35

15/03/2016

objective. The Coordination Group has met four times
and has created a detailed road map for a workable
peace and reconciliation process. The implementation
of the road map was initiated through the undertaking
of a realistic assessment of opportunities as well as
likely obstacles to reconciliation, and will culminate
in implementing the framework and modalities for an
eventual peace settlement. Despite delays, Pakistan
remains hopeful that direct talks between the Afghan
Government and the Taliban groups will be resumed in
the near future, in accordance with the road map.
The task ahead is complex and arduous. Our
expectations should be realistic. We must exercise
strategic patience. Unrealistic targets and deadlines
must be avoided, especially now that we have a clear
road map. What is vital now is to create an enabling
environment conducive to operationalizing and
sustaining a peace process. To that end, the following
factors will be critical.
First, we need consistent and unified positions and
declarations from the Afghan Government affirming
its commitment to working for a negotiated peace.
In that regard, we welcome recent statements by the
Afghan leadership and the revamping of the High Peace
Council as steps in the right direction.
Secondly, we need a demonstrated capacity of the
Afghan security forces to hold their ground. Their
ability to do that will obviously help to create the
necessary conditions for the Taliban to return to the
negotiating table.
Thirdly, all four members of the Quadrilateral
Coordination Group, having committed to sharing
responsibilities, must use their respective influence
and political capital to contribute to the success of
the process. In that regard, the ability of the Afghan
Government to craft a set of incentives to engage the
Taliban in sustained talks will be essential. It would be
wise to avoid imposing preconditions, since that could
abort the negotiations even before they get under way.
As I said, that process is our best hope for lasting peace
in Afghanistan. Pakistan will play its due part. As a
first step, we have offered to host direct talks between
the Afghan Government and the Afghan Taliban.
Cooperation between Pakistan and Afghanistan
will be a vital component of the endeavour to realize
peace and security within Afghanistan and the
entire region. What we urgently need now is greater
cooperation on border management in order to stop the
16-07042

15/03/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

movement of terrorists. We have a long border that is
not easy to control. There are incursions by terrorist
members of Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan across the
international border from Afghanistan. Pakistan has
repeatedly called for cooperation in monitoring and
controlling the border but, sadly, Kabul has not been
forthcoming so far. Indeed, there has been opposition
to Pakistan’s creation of border barriers. We urge Kabul
to step forward and respond positively to our efforts to
manage the border.
I would like to say here that the combined potential
of Pakistan and Afghanistan is considerable. Expanded
trade, energy cooperation and the implementation of
the various trans-regional economic projects already
identified can greatly enhance peace and prosperity in
and for the entire region. We must actively promote the
realization of the immense opportunities that can flow
from our bilateral cooperation.
Pakistan looks forward to a relationship with
Afghanistan based on shared values and interests
and respect for each other’s sensitivities. We stand
committed to working with Afghanistan for the
improvement of this relationship for the mutual benefit
of our peoples.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union and wishes to add the following
remarks in its national capacity.
My country joins in the expressions of appreciation
for the work that the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and its Head, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Haysom, have
done and welcomes the renewal of the mandate just
approved by the Security Council. We also thank the
Ambassador of Afghanistan for his exhaustive briefing.
The first year of Afghanistan’s transformation
decade has been difficult and complex. There has
been a troubling deterioration in the security situation
due to an escalation in indiscriminate violence by
insurgent groups and terrorist attacks. The latest data
is unequivocal — 2015 broke yet another tragic record
in terms of civilian deaths. The increase concerns
mainly the weakest categories of society, including
women — up by 37 per cent from 2014; and children,
up by 1 per cent. As noted in the Secretary-General’s

S/PV.7645

report (S/2016/218), there has also been a 78 per cent
increase in internal displacement and an increase in
migration. In this context, the Afghan forces have shown
great courage and resistance, at the cost of many lives
lost, but the threat of destabilization and the challenges
before Afghanistan today continue to be formidable and
to demand the support of the international community
as a whole.
Italy hereby reiterates its support for the efforts
made to establish peace, security and stability in
Afghanistan, and to protect the achievements reached
so far in the fields of democracy and civil and social
development. Among the most prominent of these are
the gains made in the rights of women and girls, which
we must do our utmost to preserve and consolidate. To
this end, together with our NATO partners, we have
renewed our presence in the framework of the Resolute
Support Mission. With our military contingent — which
is still the third-largest presence in the country, deployed
mainly but not exclusively in Herat — Italy fulfils its
role as framework nation for the western region of the
country, helping the Afghan National Security Forces
to strengthen capacity and address autonomously the
violent actions of insurgent groups.
We support the efforts of the National Unity
Government in the peace and reconciliation process
in Afghanistan. We salute the constructive dialogue
forged in recent months among the countries of the
region, in particular between the Governments of
Kabul and Islamabad, and we support the efforts of the
Quadrilateral Coordination Group on the Afghan Peace
and Reconciliation Process to foster peace talks between
the Government, the Taliban and other groups willing
to negotiate. In this context, it is essential to ensure
the active involvement of women’s representatives in
negotiations, and we appreciate the will expressed in
this regard by the Afghan Government.
Improving the security situation is also crucial
to enabling Afghanistan to achieve growth and
self-sustaining development and to overcome the
current precarious economic situation, which creates
uncertainty and has driven many citizens to migrate.
That is why it is absolutely necessary for Afghanistan
to implement effectively the reforms outlined by the
National Unity Government within the Self-Reliance
through Mutual Accountability Framework. Concrete
progress in economic governance, the rule of law,
the fight against corruption and respect for human
rights — and especially the human rights of women,

16-0704225/35

S/PV.7645

The situation in Afghanistan

ensuring women’s empowerment at every level of
society — are all priorities.
It is also more urgent than ever to continue to
pursue electoral reforms, in view of the parliamentary
and district votes scheduled for next fall. This will
enable the consolidation of the partnership with the
international community on the basis of the principle
of mutual commitments, in particular in view of the
Brussels conference and, above all, in the interest of
the country and its people.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Akbaruddin (India): I thank you, Sir, for
the opportunity to participate in today’s debate on the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). I also thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2016/218), Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Nicholas Haysom for his
briefing, and Ambassador Saikal of Afghanistan for
their briefings. Taken cumulatively, these portray the
ongoing saga of the trials and tribulations that the
Government and the brave people of Afghanistan face.
The distress signals are unremitting: a worsening
security situation, an increase in the tempo of insurgent
activities, a greater toll of civilian casualities, and a
deteriorating humanitarian situation. All point to the
need for the greater engagement of the international
community in support of the efforts of the Government
of Afghanistan. Just last week, during an interaction
in another part of this building, Chief Justice Abdul
Rasheed Rashid of Afghanistan explained that the
distressing circumstances confronting him were such
that for long he had not even been able to enjoy the
simple pleasures of life, such as going out for a walk,
which is something we all take for granted.
The Secretary-General’s report confirms the
worrisome security situation. It is alarming that there
were more than 11,000 documented civilian causalities
in 2015. Another disturbing development is the
expansion of the Taliban’s territorial reach. Also, the
efforts to incite ethnic violence and conflict are indeed
serious developments. We urge the Security Council to
look into the security situation and the means to contain
it with a sense of urgency.
Groups and individuals that perpetrate violence
against the people and Government of Afghanistan
cannot be allowed to exercise control or wield influence
26/35

15/03/2016

over any part of Afghanistan’s territory, as that would
pose serious threats to the gains of the past 15 years.
The effective implementation of the Security Council
sanctions regimes — including those under resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings
and entities; and those under resolution 1988 (2011)
concerning the Taliban — is a tangible measure that
will go a long way towards imposing restrictions on the
listed entities’ and individuals’ movements and assets
and strengthening the arms embargo.
As Afghanistan’s friend and neighbour and a
country of the region, India is working to support
Afghanistan in accordance with its priorities and
national circumstances. The Prime Minister of
India, Shri Narendra Modi, visited Afghanistan
on 25 December 2015. During the visit, along with
President Ashraf Ghani Ahmadzai, he jointly dedicated
to the Afghan nation the National Assembly building
constructed under India-Afghanistan development
cooperation. The Parliament complex is a symbol of
the resolve of Afghanistan to shape its future through
votes and debates and the belief that terror and violence
cannot be the instruments to shape Afghanistan’s future
or dictate the choices which the people of Afghanistan
make. Following the visit, Chief Executive Abdullah
Abdullah visited India in January 2016. These visits
reflect the blossoming with a renewed vigour and
vitality of India’s cooperation with Afghanistan. India
is also steadfast in its support for Afghanistan in
plurilateral and multilateral forums and will host the
next Ministerial Meeting of the Heart of Asia process
later this year.
While the brave Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces are doing their utmost in fighting the
forces of terrorism and extremism with courage and
resilience, India extends its full support to Afghanistan
in strengthening its defensive capabilities and preserving
Afghanistan’s unity and territorial integrity. We stand
ready to collaborate with Afghanistan in expanding the
training opportunities for the Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces in relevant Indian institutions,
based on the requirements of Afghanistan.
Afghanistan will be able to achieve its optimum
economic potential if it is allowed the freedom of
transit to major markets of South Asia. We are working
with Afghanistan and the Islamic Republic of Iran
to develop trilateral transit and participation in the
16-07042

15/03/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV.7645

development of the Chabahar Port, which will augment
our connectivity with Afghanistan.

and humanitarian assistance through capacity-building
in disaster management.

We support the Afghan Government-led reconciliation
process, which respects the red lines drawn by the
people of Afghanistan and the international community,
namely, that the groups and individuals to be reconciled
must renounce violence and abide by the Constitution
of Afghanistan.

Improved security remains key to Afghanistan’s
short-term stability and to the achievement of its longterm economic and development goals. It will also
encourage the return of refugees and help convince
Afghans to remain at home and contribute to their
country’s future.

We welcome the resolution extending UNAMA’s
role in assisting Afghanistan’s political and economic
reconstruction process (resolution 2274 (2016)), as
it is uniquely placed to coordinate the international
community’s efforts in the country. For our part, India
will continue to steadfastly stand with Afghanistan
during its transformation decade and will do our
utmost to support the valiant efforts of the people
and the Government of Afghanistan towards peace
and stability.

While Afghan security forces have stood strong in
the face of considerable challenges, the overall increase
in violence across much of the country, including
mounting civilian casualties, particularly among
children, points to the need for continued support for
the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces
(ANDSF). Canada is participating in current NATOled security efforts by providing $330 million over
three years to sustain the ANDSF.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.

Canada also supports an Afghan-led peace and
reconciliation process and welcomes the recent efforts
of the Quadrilateral Coordination Group. While peace
will not come easily, we are heartened by the Group’s
efforts and call on the Taliban to come to the table and
negotiate in good faith. Critical decisions for a lasting
peace cannot be taken without the participation of major
stakeholder groups affected by Afghanistan’s conflict.

Mr. Grant (Canada): I would like to express
my appreciation for this opportunity to address the
Security Council.
Canada thanks the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for its ongoing
critical work and welcomes the latest report (S/2016/218)
of the Secretary-General. Canada is grateful to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Haysom for
his briefing today and for his continued dedication
and commitment to advancing peace, development and
human rights in Afghanistan.
Afghanistan is now into the second year of
its transformation decade, a crucial period for
strengthening security and moving beyond aid
dependence. We welcome the recent achievements of
the Afghan Government in the face of challenging
circumstances, including elaborating a new reform
agenda, dealing with a fragile economy, countering
an intensifying insurgency, engaging in the peace
process and undertaking efforts to strengthen regional
economic integration.
Canada supports the Afghan Government’s efforts
to implement its reform agenda. Through 2017, we
will contribute $227 million in bilateral development
assistance to support programming in education,
health, women’s and girls’ rights and empowerment,

(spoke in French)

Canada also stresses the importance of ensuring
an inclusive peace process that allows the voices of
Afghan women to be heard, in line with resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. In this
vein, we welcome the Government of Afghanistan’s
recent finalization of its national action plan for
the implementation, monitoring and evaluation of
this resolution.
Canada also continues to call upon the Government
of Afghanistan to fully implement the elimination of
violence against women law and to make every effort
to guarantee the participation of women in all facets of
Afghan life, free from violence and intimidation. We
welcome the Government’s recent steps to strengthen
services for women, including through the launch
of an emergency fund to assist women victims of
violence. We also look forward to the Government of
Afghanistan’s completion and implementation of the
women’s economic empowerment national action plan.
Canada continues to stand with the Afghan people
as they strive for a more secure and prosperous future.

16-0704227/35

S/PV.7645

The situation in Afghanistan

We call on Afghanistan’s leaders to redouble their
collaborative efforts to keep Afghanistan moving
forward on the path towards improved stability,
accountability and self-reliance.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
would like to express my appreciation to Angola for
today’s debate on the situation in Afghanistan. I would
also like to thank the representative of Afghanistan
for his statement, as well as Mr. Nicholas Haysom,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for his briefing and
presentation of the report (S/2016/218) of the SecretaryGeneral.
According to the Secretary-General’s report, the
security situation deteriorated further in 2015. Indeed,
there was a very high number of recorded security
incidents, representing a 3 per cent increase from
2014 and the second-highest number since 2001. The
situation remains volatile, and Afghanistan continues to
face major security, economic and political challenges.
The sustained support of the international community
is needed to support the National Unity Government in
order to address those challenges in the framework of
national ownership and leadership.
The Taliban’s attempts to expand its reach to 24
district centres, in addition to its temporarily seizing
the provincial capital of Kunduz, should be a matter of
great concern to all of us. The report of the SecretaryGeneral once again refers to the emergence of Da’esh
and its offshoots, including the so-called Islamic State of
Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province in Afghanistan,
along with the spectrum of other terrorist and extremist
groups. This is another reason for international
and regional powers to support the National Unity
Government in its fight against terrorism.
We condemn all violent attacks committed by the
Taliban and all other terrorist groups, as well as any
cooperation with them, since we believe that this will
encourage them in their odious behaviour and thus
be counterproductive to the establishment of peace
in Afghanistan. At the same time, Iran reiterates its
support for an Afghan-led peace process.
Strengthening our regional cooperation with
Afghanistan is a priority and a major pathway to the
28/35

15/03/2016

consolidation of peace and progress in the region.
We see great potential in our economic cooperation
with Afghanistan and are ready to increase bilateral
cooperation, particularly on security matters, counternarcotics efforts, development projects, economic
cooperation in the fields of infrastructure and
agriculture as well as finding a durable solution for
Afghan refugees.
Chief Executive Abdullah Abdullah visited Iran
from 4 to 6 January, where he met Iranian leaders at the
highest level. There was also a visit to the Chabahar port
facilities, a venture by Afghanistan, India and Iran that,
upon completion, will be very beneficial to Afghanistan
as a landlocked country. In the joint declaration, Iran
and Afghanistan committed to increasing connectivity,
with emphasis on the Khaf-Herat railway and a planned
trilateral Afghanistan-Iran-India transit corridor, as
well as the need to accelerate progress on a bilateral
cooperation agreement and to form a joint working
group to study transboundary water issues on the
Harirud River.
On the counter-narcotics efforts, we take positive
note of the Afghanistan Drug Report 2015, which suggests
that there have been substantial reductions in opium
cultivation and production in parallel with incremental
increases in drug seizures. We take that as a good sign
after several years in which we witnessed an increase
in opium cultivation in Afghanistan. The increase in
narcotics is mainly due to prevailing insecurity and
poverty. Narcotics is a real threat to the region and
beyond, and should be addressed by the international
community in a very serious and comprehensive
manner through support for regional initiatives such
as the triangular cooperation on countering narcotics
among Afghanistan, Iran and Pakistan. The strong
support and commitment of international donors,
Afghan authorities and the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime are essential to deterring the menace
of drug cultivation and drug trafficking. Narcotics are
not only a social health challenge, but also and more
importantly a major source of income for extremist and
terrorist groups.
Iran continues to participate in the work of the
Tripartite Review Commission in order to plan for
the voluntary, safe, dignified and gradual repatriation
of Afghan refugees. Success in voluntary repatriation
will depend first and foremost on providing for
the reasonable needs of repatriated refugees in
Afghanistan, and underscores the necessity to
16-07042

15/03/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

mobilize more international support for this purpose.
We maintain our support for hundred thousands of
Afghan refugees, including students at all levels
from primary to university education, pending their
eventual repatriation. We welcome any effort to help
overcome the main reintegration challenges faced by
returnees and to formulate a comprehensive voluntary
repatriation and reintegration strategy.
Iran continues to offer its full support to the
promotion of security, stability and comprehensive and
sustainable development in Afghanistan, as we consider
the security of Afghanistan to be the security of our
borders and the region. We support UNAMA and United
Nations agencies in their efforts to provide development
and reconstruction assistance to Afghanistan through a
genuine commitment of the United Nations to sustained
partnership with Afghanistan, as set forth in final
report of the Tripartite Review Commission on the
United Nations in Afghanistan. We need to utilize the
UNAMA mandate and its good offices to strengthen
national institutions and capacities in priority areas
requested by the Government.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Sweden.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I congratulate you, Sir,
on your leadership of the Security Council this
month. I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive report (S/2016/218) and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, Mr. Haysom, for his briefing and the
very valuable work being done by the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
Sweden fully aligns itself with the statement to
be made by the observer of the European Union, and
would like to make a few additional, brief remarks.
The year 2015 was seen as critical for Afghanistan;
2016 will be no less important. The Afghan National
Unity Government has an important task at hand to
move ahead with the self-reliance reform agenda. At
the same time, Afghanistan is pursuing a potential
peace process, enacting critically needed economic
and political reforms, and preparing for elections while
facing a challenging security situation. We all need to
give full support to those efforts.
UNAMA will also play an important role in
supporting the endeavours of the Afghan National
Unity Government. The Mission has been essential

S/PV.7645

in the efforts for peace, stability and development
and will continue to be a cornerstone of international
engagement. We believe that there is room to allow
UNAMA to play an even more active role in facilitating
humanitarian access, promoting human rights and
providing good offices in support of a peace process.
Furthermore, the upcoming Nato Warsaw Summit
and the donor conference in Brussels later this year will
be important to determining future international support
to Afghanistan. In that context, we urge all parties to
remain committed and to deliver on their pledges. This
is about doing our part to instil hope and opportunities,
especially for the young Afghan population, to rebuild
their country. We all know that building peace takes
time and that many other urgent situations require our
attention and resources, but we must remain committed
and take a long-term perspective on Afghanistan.
The escalation of violence has led to an appalling
increase in civilian casualties and a worsened
humanitarian situation. As in many other instances,
women and children are particularly affected. We are
also worried by the recent and increasing number of
attacks against health clinics across the country. All
sides in the conflict need to make sure that civilians are
afforded protection in accordance with international
humanitarian law.
A peace agreement is the only viable option for
long-term stability and development in Afghanistan.
We welcome the progress made so far by the
Quadrilateral Coordination Group on the Afghan Peace
and Reconciliation Process, and are encouraged by
signs of confidence between Afghanistan and Pakistan.
We support the work ahead in realizing the road map.
In these and future talks, women should be included
and able to participate fully and on equal terms. Their
empowerment and organization is to the benefit of any
society. It is crucial to the legitimacy and strength of
any agreement, and a means to reach the uniting peace
that the Ambassador of Afghanistan rightly spoke of
earlier today.
Sweden’s commitment to Afghanistan is substantial
and long-term, with the ambition of contributing
approximately $1.2 billion during the transformation
decade. We hope that other key partners in the region
and the wider international community will join in this
long-term approach. We will also continue to assist in
developing the Afghan National Defence and Security

16-0704229/35

S/PV.7645

The situation in Afghanistan

15/03/2016

Forces through participation in the Resolute Support
Mission in 2016.

urge continued commitment to reforms within existing
frameworks in the lead-up to these conferences.

The Afghan National Unity Government has made
commendable progress on a number of issues, despite
a multitude of challenges. It and the Afghan people
deserve our continued support as they seek to build a
self-reliant and peaceful future.

Insecurity and conflict continue to pervade every
aspect of life and governance in Afghanistan. Law and
order and effective policing are key to securing public
trust. The Afghan National Defence and Security Forces
have fought bravely and resolutely, but the insurgency
remains defiant. The Afghan population still bears
the brunt of this war, as United Nations reporting on
civilian casualties tells us, and we condemn in the
strongest terms recent attacks by the insurgency that
have killed dozens of innocent Afghan civilians.

The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Australia.
Ms. Bird (Australia): We welcome the unanimous
adoption today of resolution 2274 (2016), extending the
mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA).
The year ahead brings with it both opportunities
and significant challenges for Afghanistan and the
international community that stands with it. In 2016,
we see the possibility of progress towards peace talks,
another chance for Afghans to exercise their democratic
rights, and major meetings that will plot a path forward
for the international community’s involvement in
Afghanistan. Security, governance and the reform
agenda remain key priorities.
The National Unity Government, under the
leadership of President Ashraf Ghani Ahmadzai and
Chief Executive Abdullah Abdullah, has proven to
be resilient and responsive to the expectations of
the Afghan people. Those expectations now turn to
the forthcoming parliamentary elections, and we
encourage the National Unity Government to advance
the reforms recommended by the Special Electoral
Reform Commission. We commend the progress made
thus far, as well as broader progress on economic and
judicial reform, and urge perseverance in continuing
this progress.
The achievements of the Quadrilateral Coordination
Group on the Afghan Peace and Reconciliation Process
in laying the groundwork for peace talks between the
Afghan Government and the Taliban should also be
commended. No one can doubt the challenges ahead,
but it is only through such a process that security and
stability will be restored. We urge all parties, including
the Taliban, to make further progress in 2016.
Major international meetings in Warsaw in July
and Brussels in October will provide opportunities for
Afghanistan and the international community to plan
the way forward. Australia will be ready to join our
partners in recommitting to Afghanistan’s future. We
30/35

Through its coordination, assistance and reporting
roles, UNAMA’s contribution to Afghanistan and its
people has been profound and hard-fought. We applaud
Mr Haysom’s long and distinguished leadership as
Special Representative and Head of UNAMA, as well
as the dedicated UNAMA staff, and thank them for
their service.
The President: I give the floor to Mr. Vale
de Almeida.
Mr. Vale de Almeida: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union (EU) and its 28 member
States. The following countries align themselves with
this statement: Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania — all
candidates countries to join the European Union; the
country of the Stabilisation and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine, Armenia and Georgia.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2016/218) and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Afghanistan for his briefing.
Let me start by reiterating the EU’s full support
for the continued important role played by the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
and all the United Nations agencies in supporting the
Afghan people,and in coordinating the international
community’s assistance. The successful implementation
of the Self-Reliance through Mutual Accountability
Framework is essential to advancing reforms that are
crucial to Afghanistan’s development and stability. It
is the results from these reforms that will underpin
the unity of the Government and a continued unity of
purpose and the confidence of the Afghan people in
the country’s future. The conference to be convened in
Brussels in October will be an additional step in that
16-07042

15/03/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

direction. The role of the United Nations continues to
be vital in assisting the National Unity Government in
implementing its priorities.
The security situation in Afghanistan remains
tense, as highlighted by the Secretary-General’s report.
The EU is concerned that the number of civilian
casualties caused by conflict and attacks by all fighting
parties have reached record numbers, with insurgency
attacks very often indiscriminately targeting the
civilian population and increasingly affecting women
and children. We need to be very clear on this. The
EU condemns these insurgent groups’ attacks, which
threaten the stability and progress of Afghanistan. More
than ever, we need to continue to protect the vital role
of humanitarian agencies and respect their impartiality
and humanitarian space in addressing the most urgent
needs of the most vulnerable.
The European Union fully supports the efforts being
made towards the start of peace and reconciliation talks
between the Government of Afghanistan and insurgency
groups, as sponsored by the United States, China and
Pakistan. The Quadrilateral Coordination Group on
the Afghan Peace and Reconciliation Process has been
working hard to create the conditions for renewed talks
between the Afghan Government and the Taliban. We
hope that such a first meeting can materialize soon and
become an ongoing process. Afghan leaders should
ensure that any delegation engaging in direct talks is
representative of wider Afghan society. Afghan women
must be able to participate fully in negotiations on the
future of their country.
The EU welcomes the nomination for appointment
of the new President of the High Peace Council in
Afghanistan in the hope that this will help facilitate
future negotiations. The signal of meaningful peace
talks would have a huge positive effect on economic
development and governance in Afghanistan, as well as
international efforts to that end, directly contributing
to a sustainable Afghan State. We call on all countries,
in particular Afghanistan’s neighbours, to support such
an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process. It is
time to invest in Afghanistan’s stability and prosperity
and to abandon the tactics of violence, destabilization
and misery. Afghan women and men need to regain
confidence in their future. This would contribute to
reducing the migratory pressures that weigh so heavily
on Afghanistan’s neighbours and on the States members
of the EU.

S/PV.7645

Despite the challenges of cooperation in the
Central and South Asian regions, the recent progress
made through developments in ambitious regional
infrastructure projects is promising. The TurkmenistanAfghanistan-Pakistan-India pipeline project, linking
Central and South Asia, could create a new momentum
for regional economic cooperation and connectivity,
particularly in collaboration with a regionally backed
peace process. The EU also continues to be a reliable
partner in regionally owned processes, including the
Heart of Asia process, which has shown encouraging
signs of improving regional dynamics. Credit should
go to President Ashraf Ghani Ahmadzai and other
leaders in the region for their endeavours in this
regard. The EU also encourages the strengthening
of regional cooperation in border management and
anti-narcotics activities.
Electoral reform is crucial for Afghanistan. The
electoral reform process has made some, albeit slow,
progress. The parliamentary and district council
elections, provisionally planned for 15 October, rely
on further electoral reform to ensure a fair, democratic
process. The EU welcomes the nominations of the
Attorney General and the Ministry of Interior in
Afghanistan, and hope that this will renew momentum
to effectively implement reforms in this sector and
overcome vested interests opposed to it. We should
ensure the promotion of the rights and the continued
active and equal involvement and participation of
women in Afghanistan at all levels of society. To this
end, the full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
and the National Unity Government’s national action
plan on women, peace and security for 2015-2022
are crucial.
The
EU
supports
Afghanistan
through
comprehensive political, security and development
efforts, and will continue to do so. We look forward
to the NATO Warsaw Summit in July, which will
contribute to the reform and sustainment of the
Afghan National Defence and Security Forces. The
Brussels conference on Afghanistan, to be held on
4 and 5 October, will reaffirm the commitment of the
international community to Afghanistan’s economic
and political development over the coming years. This
will include further improving governance and the rule
of law, promoting sustainable development results, and
implementing effective measures on anti-corruption
and counter-narcotics. The fostering of full respect
for human rights, and in particular the human rights

16-0704231/35

S/PV.7645

The situation in Afghanistan

of women and girls, will remain a cornerstone of
our cooperation.
Afghanistan will need the ongoing commitment of
the international community at or near current levels
to continue on the path to sustainability. Concrete
commitments and delivery by both the Government
of Afghanistan and the international community,
including partners in the region, will underpin the
Brussels conference. It is for the Afghan National Unity
Government, the international and the regional partners
alike to maintain the momentum for reform, for Afghan
self-reliance and for peace. The EU would also like to
commend the important work of the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict in Afghanistan, and
calls on all parties in Afghanistan to implement the
conclusions adopted by the Working Group on 2 March.
In conclusion, international engagement remains
fundamental to Afghanistan’s future. The Brussels
conference aims to facilitate such engagement and
mobilize support, matched by an equally strong
commitment on the part of the Government of
Afghanistan to delivering on concrete reform objectives
and achieving real change. The consequences of
disengagement should not be underestimated, and we
value UNAMA’s critical role in promoting peace and
security for all Afghans.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Germany.
Mr. Braun (Germany): First, I would like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Nicholas Haysom, for his comprehensive briefing
today. We highly appreciate the outstanding efforts of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) in leading and coordinating international
civilian efforts to promote human rights, economic
development, political stability and regional and
international cooperation. We commend the Mission
for its remarkable support for the Afghan Government
in its striving for security, peace and development.
Germany aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union.
Supported by the international community,
Afghanistan has made significant progress over
the past 14 years. Greater observance of human
rights, in particular women’s rights, advances in
the field of counter-narcotics and fostering regional
and international cooperation and coordination are
32/35

15/03/2016

examples of the progress made last year. Nevertheless,
to achieve long-lasting peace and the maintenance of
security and human rights, much remains to be done.
Further reforms by the Afghan Government are of
the essence. The year 2016 will yet again be a critical
year for Afghanistan. We look forward to the Warsaw
NATO Summit in July and the Brussels Conference in
October. Germany will not falter in its commitment to
Afghanistan in terms of support for its development,
stabilization and the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces, and by participating as lead nation in
the Resolute Support Mission.
We are highly concerned about the volatile security
situation and the resulting high number of civilian
casualties. We encourage the Afghan Government
to continue its efforts in countering the rising levels
of displacement and low rates of economic growth.
Nevertheless, facing an intense level of insurgency,
the efforts of the Afghan Government to strengthen
regional economic integration and to move forward in
activating a peace process have been duly noted. The
Afghan National Defence and Security Forces have
proven their strong commitment and great courage. We
therefore commend them for their efforts to establish
and uphold peace and security in their country.
We encourage and support a peace process among
all Afghan parties, which we regard as the only path
to a sustainable internal peace. We welcome the
quadrilateral initiative. A peace process can succeed
only if it engages not only the Government, but
also the population of Afghanistan and its political
representatives. It will also need the unequivocal
backing of the international community here at the
United Nations, and especially of all Afghanistan’s
neighbours. As Chair of the International Contact
Group and one of the largest donors to Afghanistan,
Germany will continue to play an active role to that end.
For Germany and the European Union, migration
from Afghanistan has become a pressing issue with
the arrival of over 150,000 Afghan nationals to
Germany this past year alone. Germany will fulfil
its international obligation and moral duty to provide
those fleeing persecution with international protection.
At the same time, it is counting on the full cooperation
of the Afghan Government to ensure a prompt return
of those who are not in need of such protection to
their home country and to stem the drain on its human
resources. Afghanistan and its international partners
can be successful in building a future for the country
16-07042

15/03/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV.7645

and its people only if Afghans themselves believe in
that future.

the efforts of the National Unity Government to bring
security, development and prosperity to Afghanistan.

Lasting peace, guaranteed compliance with human
rights and sustainable growth can be achieved only by
a strong Afghan Government and the involvement of all
Afghan people. We commend the Afghan Government
for its work towards democratization and electoral
reform, and further encourage it to ensure transparency
and accountability in all political processes, as well
as freedom of speech. We condemn the murder of
seven media professionals in Kabul by the Taliban
on 20 January, which was an attack on the free flow
of ideas and the liberty of the media, and offer our
condolences to the families of the victims.

Fifteen months ago, the Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces (ANDSF) assumed full security
responsibility for their country. While the current
security situation continues to be fragile and the
increasing number of civilian causalities is an issue
of concern, the ANDSF are resolutely defending
their homeland against any threat. We believe that
the ANDSF will be more successful, based on this
year’s experience, while at the same time overcoming
its shortcomings.

To conclude, let me assure the Council that Germany
remains committed to supporting Afghanistan during
the transformation decade, in close cooperation with
the Afghan Government and our international partners.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Turkey.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey): At the outset, I would like to
thank the Angolan presidency for having organized this
meeting, the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report (S/2016/218), Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan Mr. Nicholas
Haysom for his briefing, and Ambassador Mahmoud
Saikal for his statement.
Resolution 2274 (2016), which renews the mandate
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), has arrived at an opportune time, when
change and transformation are dominating the agenda
of Afghanistan. We welcome the role assumed by
UNAMA in assisting the Afghan people to achieve a
bright future. We will continue to support UNAMA’s
activities and efforts in that regard.
The year 2015 was an important time for
Afghanistan. The Afghan National Unity Government,
which we consider to be the symbol of the Afghan
people’s unity, completed its first year in power.
During that period, the National Unity Government
undertook important reforms in various fields, from
good governance to drug-trafficking, and economy
to anti-corruption. Although opposition is an integral
part of political life in any democratic country, we
believe that criticism should not be detrimental to the
endeavours of the National Unity Government. The
international community should continue to support

The parliamentary elections scheduled to take place
in October will strengthen and advance democratic
institutions and traditions in Afghanistan. To achieve
lasting peace in Afghanistan and stability in the region,
the successful conclusion of the peace and reconciliation
process is vital. We welcome and support recent
initiatives to that end, commend the facilitating role
played by neighbouring countries in that respect, and
stand ready to contribute, if the need arises. I would like
to emphasize the following three points in that regard.
We hope, first, that all parties will contribute to efforts
aimed at strengthening peace, stability and prosperity
in Afghanistan and in the region; secondly, that the
armed struggle against the Afghan State and people
will come to an end; and thirdly, that reconciliation
is ensured through negotiations. I would also like to
underline that Turkey will continue to support the
Afghan Government’s struggle against terrorism.
We welcome various initiatives and projects of
connectivity and cooperation among neighbouring
countries. We believe that those initiatives not only
help Afghanistan to achieve a successfully functioning
economy, but also play a key role in the realization
of major regional infrastructure projects. I would
like to reiterate once again that in order to continue
to build on the achievements of the past 14 years,
the international community’s continuing support to
Afghanistan during the transformation decade will be
of the utmost importance.
Before concluding, I would like to underline that
Turkey will continue to support Afghanistan’s security
and development efforts at the bilateral and multilateral
levels and stand by its Afghan brothers as long as
Turkey’s help is needed.

16-0704233/35

S/PV.7645

The situation in Afghanistan

The President: I give the floor to the representative
of the Netherlands.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I thank you
very much, Mr. President, and in honour of your
presidency this month, I will try to say this in your
language. Obrigado, senhor Presidente. I thank you
for the opportunity to speak at this debate on behalf
of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, which aligns itself
with the statement just made by the observer of the
European Union.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
detailed and thorough report (S/2016/218) and Special
Representative Haysom for his briefing. I also would
like to thank my dear friend Ambassador Saikal for
his statement.
I will address three issues: first, the security
situation and the peace process; secondly, the road to
Warsaw and Brussels; and thirdly, the role of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
On the security situation and the peace process,
the report of the Secretary-General states very clearly
that the security situation deteriorated even further
in 2015. It also indicates a substantial increase in
casualties among the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces (ANDSF). We commend the efforts
of the National Unity Government and the ANDSF
in providing security to the Afghan people, but we
need to address the critical shortcomings. Continued
international support, including by the Kingdom
of the Netherlands, is needed in strengthening the
security forces.
The number of civilian casualties has seen an
increase as well, as reported by UNAMA last month. We
deplore all casualties, of course. They indicate all the
more that a peaceful, stable and prosperous Afghanistan
is urgently needed. Political unity in the Afghan
Government will help create stability and a positive
perspective for the Afghan people. Durable peace can
be achieved only through Afghan-led reconciliation,
supported by a regional process. Commendable efforts
in that direction have recently been made by Afghanistan
and Pakistan, as well as within the quadrilateral talks
among Afghanistan, Pakistan, the United States and
China, which we hope will lead to direct talks with
the Taliban. The Netherlands stands ready to support
reconciliation efforts, if so desired.

34/35

15/03/2016

My second point concerns the road to Warsaw and
Brussels. The international community, including my
country, has been engaged in Afghanistan for over a
decade now, in close collaboration with the Afghan
Government. Together we have seen some very
positive results in terms of development. For example,
the service delivery of health care and education
has improved drastically since 2001. Women and
girls are actively part of social life, and Afghanistan
has witnessed a sharp increase in girls enrolling in
schools. In addition, the Government of National Unity
recently took steps to strengthen protection services for
women. The Kingdom of the Netherlands welcomes the
emergency fund for the medical treatment of female
victims of violence that was launched on 31 January
by President Ashraf Ghani Ahmadzai. We welcome
the extra funding in the State budget for additional
prosecution units to address violence against women.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands has been a longtime
partner of Afghanistan, having contributed significantly
in the fields of security, justice and development. We
are committed to fulfilling our part in the longer-term
development of Afghanistan. We are currently planning
our national post-2016 engagements in the fields of
defence, development and diplomacy in the run-up to
the NATO Summit in July in Warsaw and the Brussels
conference in October. For both conferences, which
are very much interlinked, it is crucial that both the
Afghan Government and the international community
demonstrate their commitment to Afghanistan’s future.
This applies both to progress for the necessary reforms,
on the one hand, and the necessary international
support, on the other. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
wishes to further work together with Afghanistan and
partners within the international community. Our focus
will be on the implementations of the reforms as agreed
in the Self-Reliance through Mutual Accountability
Framework for the further development of Afghanistan.
My third point is on the role of UNAMA. This
morning the Council renewed the mandate of UNAMA.
I would like to underline the commitment to and the
continued support of the Kingdom of the Netherlands
for the role played by UNAMA in Afghanistan, and we
thank UNAMA for its continued constructive role in
coordinating the international community efforts and
in fulfilling its political mandate.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
will remain committed to Afghanistan throughout

16-07042

15/03/2016

The situation in Afghanistan

the transformation decade in the context of increased
Afghan ownership and leadership. In the spirit of
partnership, focusing on supporting peace, justice and

S/PV.7645

development, we will continue to support Afghanistan
and its people.
The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m.

16-0704235/35
