V.

Resoludons adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Co-operation among Developing Countries, 192 which is
expected to make a significant contribution to the promotion of economic co-operation among developing
countries;
2. Welcomes also the Action Programme for Economic Co-operation 100 and the resolution containing
policy guidelines on the reinforcement of collective selfreliance between developing countries, 101 which are
expected to make a significant contribution to furthering
economic co-operation among developing countries;
3. Urges the developed countries and international
organizations to provide appropriate support and assistance to the process and activities of economic cooperation among developing countries, notably in
fulfilment of the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, bearing in mind the Arusha Programme189 and its principles and objectives of economic
co-operation among developing countries, namely, that:
(a) Economic co-operation among developing countries is a basic component of the efforts towards the
establishment of the new international economic order
and as such is based on common interests and cooperation among all States;
(b) Economic co-operation among developing countries, being a matter that chiefly concerns the developing
countries, should be devised and implemented by them
at the subregional, regional and interregional levels, and
appropriate, concomitant support action on the part of
the developed countries and organizations of the international community is needed to contribute to its
implementation;
4. Urges all countries, in particular the developed
countries, and international organizations to contribute
fully to the implementation of the recommendations on
economic co-operation among developing countries contained in resolution 127 (V) of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development;185

5. Urges developed countries and international
financial institutions, in their bilateral and multilateral
development assistance programmes, to take action to
enable developing countries to participate effectively in
the execution of bilateral and multilateral projects
financed in developing countries through the greatest
possible use of their own capabilities;
6. Further urges the developed countries to contribute to the implementation of projects of economic
co-operation among developing countries through the
United Nations development system;
7. Requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development to undertake, as a matter of priority, the necessary preparations
for convening a special session of the Committee on
~cono~c Co-o~eration among Developing Countries,
m particular takmg measures to prepare for holding the
three preparatory meetings of governmental experts
from developing countries, as well as other meetings of
governmental experts that may be requested by other
regional groups, referred to in paragraph 13 of resolution 127 (V) of the Conference;
8_. Also requests the Secretary-General of the United
N ahons Conference on Trade and Development, within
the framework of the mandate of the Conference and in
192 Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, Fifth Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.11.D.14), annex VI,
sect. II.

141

the light of its key role in economic co-operation among
developing countries within the United Nations system,
to intensify further its efforts in support of relevant programmes of economic co-operation among developing
countries and to maintain close co-operation, where appropriate, with other United Nations organizations and
the specialized agencies as well as with the regional intergovernmental organizations of the developing countries;
9. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on economic co-operation among developing countries;198
10. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
include in the medium-term plan of the United Nations
an intersectoral presentation of the activities envisaged
for implementing the relevant resolutions of the United
Nations on economic co-operation among developing
countries and to promote the same kind of intersectoral
presentation on a system-wide basis;
11. Urges the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, in accordance
with established procedures and practices, to support
measures of economic co-operation among developing
countries, including-as requested-the continued provision of the necessary Secretariat support services and
other suitable arrangements to facilitate the holding of
meetings by the developing countries in pursuance of the
objectives of economic co-operation among developing
countries;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to include a
review of developments regarding economic co-operation among developing countries, taking into account the
implementation of the present resolution, in his analytical
report to the General Assembly at its special session in
1980 on the implementation of the decisions taken regarding the establishment of the new international
economic order called for in Assembly resolution 33/
198 of 29 January 1979.
I 09th plenary meeting
I 9 December I 979
34/203.

United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries 10 •

The General Assembly,
Noting the request contained in paragraph 11 (e) of
resolution 122 (V) of 3 June 1979 of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, 196 in which the
Conference emphasized the special importance of the
action to be taken and invited the General Assembly to
convene a United Nations conference on the least developed countries, in order to finalize, adopt and support
the Substantial New Programme of Action for the 1980s,
Expressing deep concern at the gravity of the economic. and social situation of the least developed
countries,
Emphasizing that the special and pressing problems
facing the least developed countries should be taken
fully into account in the formulation of the strategy for
the third United Nations development decade,
Bearing in mind the need for full implementation of
the Comprehensive New Programme of Action for the
193

A/34/546.

194 See also sect. I, foot-note 11.
195 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on

Trade and Development, Fifth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.11.D.14),
part one, sect. A.

142

General Allembly-Tblrty-fourth Session

Least Developed Countries and urgent implementation
of the Imme<liate Action Programme for 1979-1981,
called for in resolution 122 (V) of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development,
1. Decides to convene a United Nations Conference
on the Least Developed Countries in 1981;
2. Decides further that the United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries should have
the objective of finalizing, adopting and supporting the
Substantial New Programme of Action for the 1980s
for the least developed countries, outlined in resolution
122 (V) of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to designate the
Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, bearing in mind the focal role
which the Conference has played in the preparation of
the Comprehensive New Programme of Action for the
Least Developed Countries, as Secretary-General of the
United Nations Conference on the Least Developed
Countries;
4. Decides to designate the Intergovernmental
Group on the Least Developed Countries of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development to act
as the Preparatory Committee for the United Nations
Conference on the Least Developed Countries, open to
the full participation of all States members of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development;
5. Further decides to initiate the preparation of
studies, as provided for in resolution 122 (V) of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
by the relevant secretariats of the United Nations system,
requests donor Governments and the least developed
countries themselves to initiate similar studies, and re~uests the Preparatory Committee to consider any additional studies that may be necessary;
6. Requests the Intergovernmental Group on the
Least Developed Countries, which is scheduled to meet
in February 1980, to recommend additional sessions
which may be necessary in 1980 and 1981 to complete
the preparations for the United Nations Conference on
the Least Developed Countries;
1. Requests ihe Preparatory Committee to report on
its work to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth
session;
8. Requests the Secretary-General, in response to
paragraph 33 of resolution 122 (V) of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, to entrust
the Director-General for Development and International
Economic Co-operation with the responsibility for taking the necessary steps, with the collaboration of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, to ensure the full mobilization
and co-ordination of all organs, organizations and bodies
of the United Nations system in the further elaboration
and implementation of the Comprehensive New Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries
and in the preparations for the United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries;
9. Invites the organs, organizations and bodies of
the United Nations system concerned, especially the
regional commissions, the United Nations Development
Programme and the World Bank, to extend their fullest
co-operation, support and contribution to the preparatory process for the United Nations Conference on the
Least Developed Countries.
109th plenary meeting
19 December 1979

34/204.

Effective mobilization and integration of
women in development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2626 (XXV) of 24 October
1970, containing the International Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade,
3517 (XXX) of 15 December 1975 on the mid-term
review and appraisal of progress in the implementation
of the International Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade, 3201 (S-VI)
and 3202 (S-VI) of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment
of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX)
of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States, 3362 (S-VII) of 16
September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation and 2542 (XXIV) of 11 December
1969, containing the Declaration on Social Progress
and Development,
Taking into consideration its resolution 3520 (XXX)
of 15 December 1975 on the World Conference of the
International Women's Year, in which it, inter alia, proclaimed the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace and decided to establish
the International Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women,
Taking note of the part of the Economic Declaration
adopted by the Sixth Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Havana
from 3 to 9 September 1979, relating to the role of
women in development, 196
Also taking into consideration its resolutions 3505
(XXX) of 15 December 1975 on the integration of
women in the development process and 31 / 175 of 21
December 1976 and 33/200 of 29 January 1979 on the
effective mobilization of women in development,
Affirming that women and men should participate and
contribute on a basis of equality in the social, economic
and political processes of development, incJuding decision-making, and should share in improved conditions
of life,
Aware of the need for continuing and increased measures aimed at the effective participation of women in the
over-all development of their countries,
Bearing in mind the preparations for the international
development strategy for the third United Nations development decade,
Bearing in mind also the preparations for the World
Conference of the United Nations Decade for Women:
Equality, Development and Peace, to be held at Copenhagen in 1980,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on the effective mobilization and integration of women
in development, 197
1. Welcomes the inclusion in the Programme of
Action adopted by the World Conference on Agrarian
Reform and Rural Development108 of special provisions
relating to the integration of women in rural development and calls upon the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the United Nations DevelopSee A/34/S42, annex, sect. IV, paras. 112 and 113.
A/34/S31.
See Report of the World Conference on Agrarian Reform
and Rural Development, Rome, 12-20 July 1979 (WCARRD/
REP); transmitted to the members of the General Assembly by
a note of the Secretary-General (A/34/ 48S).
196
197
198
