UNITED NATIONS

&XXJRITY

CO

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

FORTIETH

YEAR

2606”

MEETING:

a=-IQ/l/

20 SEPTEMBER 1985

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

,.

Provikional agenda (S/Agenda/2606)

. ... .. .. ... .... ... .. .... .. .... .. .. ...

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...*.....

1

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 19 September 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Angola to
the United Nations addressed to the President ofthe Security Council (S/17474). .

1

S/PV.2606

:

1,.fl:: ‘_

,

’

,“’ ,

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention’ of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . . ) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it .‘I
is given.
The resolutionsof the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2606th
Held

in New York on Friday,

MEETING
20 September

President: Sir John THOMSON

(United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).

the Chairman of the Special Committee
which reads as follows:

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark, Egypt, France,
India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.

against Apartheid,

“I have the honour to request the Security Council to
permit me to participate in my capacity as Chairman of
the Special Committee against Apartheid, under the provisions of rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, in the consideration of the item ‘Complaint
by Angola against South Africa*.”

Provisional agenda (WAgendaI2606)
1. Adoption

1985, at 10.30 a.m.

On previous occasions the Council has extended invitations to representatives of other United Nations bodies in
connection with the consideration of matters on its
agenda. In accordance with past practice in this matter, I
propose that the Council extend an invitation under rule
39 of its provisional rules of procedure to the Chairman of
the Special Committee against Apartheid.

of the agenda

2. Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 19 September 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of Angola to the United Nations
addressed to the ‘President of the Security Council (S/ 17474)

It was so decided.
The meeting was called to order at 11.25 a.m.

3. The PRESIDENT:
The Council is meeting today in
response to the request contained in a letter dated 19 September 1985 from the representative of Angola to the
President of the Security Council [S/174743.

Adoption of tbe agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 19 September 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of Angola to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/17474)

4. I should like to draw the attention of members of the
Council to the following other documents: S/17472, containing a letter dated 18 September 1985 from the representative of Angola to the President of the Council; S/17475,
containing a letter dated 18 September from the representative of Brazil to the Secretary-General; S/17480, containing a letter dated 19 September from the representative of
Botswana to the Secretary-General.

1. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Angola, Argentina, Brazil, Cyprus, Guyana, Senegal,
South Africa, Sri Lanka and Zambia in which they request
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right
to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

5. The first speaker is the representative of Angola, upon
whom I now call.
6. Mr. de FIGUEIREDO
(Angola): May I congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency for the
month of September.. I also wish to thank you for your
assistance in convening a meeting of the Council, especially since this is a very hectic period for everyone connected with the United Nations. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his efforts and the personal interest
he has always taken in my country.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. de Figueiredo
(Angola), took a place at the Council table; Mr. Muisiz
(Argentina), Mr. Maciel (Brazil), Mr. Moushoutas (Cyprus),
Mr. Sinclair (Guyana). Mr. FaiI (SenegaI), Mr. von Schirnding (South Africa), Mr. Wijewardane (Sri Lanka) and Mr.
Lusaka (Zambia) took the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber.

7. This is a time of rejoicing for the United Nations, a time
for taking stock of the past 40 years, a time which- will
witness in the coming days and weeks one of the largest
attendances of heads of State or Government, a time when
the makers of history gather at the epicentre of intemation-

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter dated 19 September 1985 from
1

alism, a time when chroniclers will record and historians
judge the events of this period.

13. There are no SWAP0 (South West Africa People’s
Organization) bases in Cuando-Cubango and Mexico.
These racist actions are intended exclusively to save
UNITA puppets, who are unable to survive or have any
type of military or political existence without the racist
regime of South Africa. And the South African invasion
has taken place just a short time after the South African
regime sent a letter to my Government containing both
threats and a proposal for a dialogue on the situation in
the region. As my Government was considering a
response, the racists sabotaged all prospects by their clandestine attack on the American Gulf Oil installation at
Malongo, in the province of Cabinda.

8. For the past months, countries in different parts of the
globe, peoples of different colours, creeds and systems
have observed or participated in national or regional activities relating to the glorious fortieth anniversary of the
United Nations. And in the next few days and weeks, the
attention of the world will focus on United Nations Headquarters as the Organization proudly commemorates the
four decades of its existence. This sense of excitement, of
renewed hope and quickening of the senses, is almost palpable, even in the corridors of this building and outside it,
as the VIPs arrive and depart. A possible summit between
the United States and the Soviet Union is a matter of
intense debate, and even blase, cosmopolitan New York
City and its people are caught up in the moment. The
friends of the United Nations are celebrating, and its critics
are almost silent. It is a good time to be alive, to be in New
York, and especially to be at the United Nations.

14. The international community is surely not taken in
by South Africa’s weak and pathetic attempts to portray
this massive invasion of my country as a pre-emptive strike
against freedom fighters of SWAP0 or as a follow-up
operation to purported SWAP0 attempts. These ridiculous explanations and pathetic justifications by the racist
Pretoria regime would also be funny if they were not so
tragic in their consequences.

9. But there is a place where there is no celebration and
no rejoicing. It is a place under attack, under siege, under
bombardment by air and by land, a wrecked place where
today’s reality is war, death and destruction, a place where
the United Nations celebration of 40 years of peace is a
mockery, an event which would be satirical if the situation
in which southern Angola finds itself were not so tragic.

15. It is a matter for some gratification that some of
Pretoria’s friends have deserted the racists; others have
distanced themselves or fallen silent. A few have even come
out strongly, officially and publicly, against the policies and
actions of the Pretoria apartheid regime.
16. South Africa’s rulers are today at war with their fellow South African. The foundations of apartheid are
beginning to rock, and the ramparts are being scaled.
South Africa is aflame with the fury of its people over a
foreign, imported, imposed, artificial structure alien to the
land and its people. South Africa is burning with the
blood, anger and opposition of its people to a system they
have never accepted and whose presence they will no
longer tolerate.

10. On 16 September, the murderous armed forces of
South Africa yet again launched a massive invasion of the
People’s Republic of Angola. What a tribute to the fortieth
session of the United Nations!
11. The South African armed forces unleashed a new
major attack on 17 September, with massive air raids and
attacks on Angolan military units in the provinces of
Cunene, Cuando-Cubango and Mexico, 275 kilometres
from the border with Namibia. The racist attack was
directed against FAPLA (People’s Armed Forces for the
Liberation of Angola) units, which were advancing towards
the UNITA (National Union for the TotaZ Independence of
Angola) base at Jamba from Mavinga, in the province of
Cuando-Cubango, 255 kilometres north of the Namibian
border and 180 kilometres from the border with Zambia.

17. Here one sees, lucidly and in sharp focus, the two
aspects of apartheid-the
internal oppression, repression
and denial of human rights, the apartheid State’s terrorism
unleashed upon its own people, within its own borders;
and Pretoria’s outrageous military attack on the territory
and the people of Angola, part of a pattern of similar
earlier attacks and acts of aggression against Angola,
Mozambique and Botswana-the external manifestation
of that saqe apartheid ideology and practices, the apartheid State’s terrorism unleashed outwards upon the sovereign States and peoples of neighbouring States.

12. On 19 September, South African Mirage jets raided
the Mavinga area, and at present not only are the South
African racists bombarding and raiding Angolan territory
but they are also getting ready for more direct confrontation, on Angolan soil, with Angolan troops in the province
of Cuando-Cubango, in the face of UNITA’s inability to
stop the FAPLA advance. Today’s headline says, “Peace
isn’t Pretoria’s top priority’*. The infamous Buffalo Battalion, made up of mercenaries from former Rhodesia and
equipped with armoured vehicles, artillery and mortars,
and also cars and other transport, entered into action with
the brave FAPLA units. The Buffalo Battalion is aided by
five additional South African battalions. Vast quantities of
arms, weapons and other military equipment have been
airdropped by the racist regime in the Cazombo area, in
the east of Angola.

18. It is vital that the Council and the international community see this link between the national and regional
aspects of apartheid, the link between the pass laws of
South Africa and the deaths of Angolan civilians hundreds
of kilometres away across two international borders, the
link, between the disenfranchisement of South Africa’s
majority inhabitants and the sabotage of railroads,
destruction of bridges and ports in Angola and Mozambique, the link between the high death rate of South Africa’s black babies, the exploitation of black labour, the
creation of the abominable homelands and the illegal OCCUpation of Namibia and the destabilization attempts against
2

the sovereign, legitimate Governments in the region. These
are all the manifestations of apartheid, as it originally
sought to entrench itself and grow, and now, as it desperately seeks to survive in an increasingly hostile world.

which is under indictment. Your votes will be votes for or
against apartheid, the implementation of your decision, in
the form of a resolution, will affect apartheid in southern
Africa, not just in. the Republic of South Africa.

19. On 26 September the members of the Council will
bold their own commemorative
session of the fortieth
anniversary of the United Nations-as
well they may,
being the “heart” of the United Nations machinery. At
that meeting next week, will the Council take another close
look at South Africa’s record? This would be a fitting task
and an opportune moment, since it is the Council that is
charged with monitoring international peace and security
and with admitting or expelling Member States.

24. Now, on the fortieth anniversary of the United
Nations, the Council can show in a concrete manner what
the United Nations is all about, and that the world is a
better place because of the creation of the United Nations.
Otherwise, our people in Angola might as well be in the
middle of the third world war.
25. To those who have given their lives for Angola and
who are even now facing South African guns, I have a
duty to demand, as representative of a State Member of
the United Nations, in good standing with the Organization and the international community, that the Security
Council strongly condemn South Africa for its a$ of
aggression, that it demand the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of the racist armed forces from Angotan territory, that it adopt measures for the implementation of its resolutions on the question of South African
aggression against Angola and that, in the face of Pretoria’s continued violations of these resolutions, the Council
consider punitive measures a’gainst South Africa, including action under Chapter VII of the Charter and expulsion from the Organization. Is it not time that the
Council take action to restore meaning to the Charter
and authority to itself!

20. South Africa was one of the original Members of the
United Nations, one of those august few which signed the
Charter of the United Nations in June 1945 at San Francisco. And it is South Africa which is today in contravention
of many of the articles of the Charter. These violations are a
matter of record, the subject of countless resolutions,
including those of the Security Council itself. I will not
impose on the Council the number and details of those
articles of the Charter which Pretoria is guilty of contravening. Article 25 specifically states that “The Members of the
United Nations agree to accept and carry out the decisions
of the Security Council”. But may I be so bold as to suggest
that, despite Article 30, which states that “The Security
Council shall adopt its own rules of procedure”, that is, it is
master of its own rules, the Council is in violation of Article
24 of the Charter. Article -24 specifically confers on the
Council primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security and provides that, in discharging these duties, the Council shall act in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the United Nations. Those purposes and principles are among modem man’s most lofty
ideals-and I quote Article 1 of the Charter:

26. As a State Member of the Organization, my country
appeals to the Council, under all the relevant articles of
the Charter, to come to our assistance. The continuation
of circumstances such as those at present may leave us no
option except recourse to Article 51 of the Charter, a
right enshrined in the “constitution’*
of the United
Nations itself.

“To maintain international peace and security, and
to that end: to take effective collective measures for the
prevention and removal of threats to the peace, and for
the suppression of acts of aggression or other breaches
of the peace.”

27.

The struggle continues. Victory is certain!

28. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of South Africa. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

What meaning do these words have for the dead and dying
in Angola?

29. Mr. von SCHIRNDING
(South Africa): On behalf
of the South African delegation, I congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency for this month.

21. I say this in sorrow and in frustration. It gives me no
joy to make these charges. But my country, my people,
have a duty to themselves to protect their sovereignty and
territorial integrity, to protect the rights of our people, to
further peace in the region.

30. Permit me to inform the Security Council of the circumstances leading to the situation that is currently obtaining in southern Angola.
31. In terms of the agreement reached between South
Africa and Angola at Lusaka on 16 February 1984, South
Af’riea undertook to disengage all its forces from the area
which they had occupied in southern Angola on the understanding that the Angolan side would restrain SWAP0 as
the disengagement process proceeded, and would ensure
that no SWAP0 terrorists or Cuban forces would enter
the territory from which the South African forces had
withdrawn. The Angolan Government did not carry out
this commitment. The territory was repeatedly violated by
SWAP0 terrorists moving southward to attack the civilian

22. Where else shall we turn for justice, for redress, for
compensation? And yet the one organ designed and
created expressly for such situations has been largely blind
to Angola’s pain and deaf to Angola’s cries. The source of
so much tension and danger in southern Africa has
escaped with impunity, beyond a symbolic expulsion from
the General Assembly.
23. At this meeting the issue on trial is not simply the acts
of aggression committed against Angola; it is apartheid
3

’

population of South West Africa/Namibia.
It is to no avail
for Angola to dispute these facts. At sessions of the South
African/Angolan Joint Monitoring Commission, these violations, 145 in all, were brought to the attention of the
Angolan side, which admitted its inability to live up to both
the letter and the spirit of the Lusaka understanding.

this question. The fact is that in 1975 the MPLA (People’s
Movement for the Liberation of Angola) overturned the
Alvor Agreement and deprived the people of Angola of
their right to determine their own future in free and fair
elections, which were to have been held before the end of
October 1975. By so doing it unleashed the civil war which
has wracked the people of Angola ever since.

32 Nevertheless, in an effort to normalize the situation
in that troubled part of the southern African region, South
Africa announced on 18 April 1985 that it had completed
the disengagement of its forces in terms of the Lusaka
agreement in good faith. In order to stabilize the situation
on the border, South Africa explored the possibility of
establishing- some form of joint South. AfricaniAngolan
peace-keeping mechanism. Angola, however, refused to
co-operate in any such’venture. South Africa made it clear
at the time that it would continue to take whatever action
might be necessary to defend the inhabitants of South West
Africa/Namibia
against SWAPO’s terror campaign.

37. South Africa has repeatedly stated that the problems
of Angola should be solved by the people of Angola themselves. It has repeatedly called for the withdrawal of all
foreign forces from Angola. It’believes that there should be
no’ foreign interference from any quarter in the .affairs of
Angola.
:
38. But at this, very moment the Soviet Union and the
Cubans are directing one of their greatest-ever offensives
against the Angolan people. Soviet and Cuban combat
elements are directly involved, in the fighting, and some of
them have been killed or wounded. Soviet advisers have
been allocated to each of the FAPLA brigades to direct the
overall strategy of the campaign. lhey;and their .Cuban
surrogates have deployed the most modem weapons
against the Angolan people, including MIG-23 and SU-22
aircraft, M-24 and M-25 helicopters and T-62 tanks. Nevertheless, the people of Angola are resisting the offensive
courageously.
.’ ;
.,
‘,
:

33. Since -the disengagement of South -Africa’s forces
from Angola, SWAP0 forces have returned to the southem Angola border area in ever-larger numbers and have
announced their intention of increasing their attacks on
civilian targets in South West Africa/Namibia.
Despite
repeated warnings to SWAPO, as well as appeals to the
Angolan Government to control SWAPO’s actions, there
had been an increasing flow of evidence that SWAP0 was
intent on staging some major terrorist operation. Evidence
of this was, for instance, the discovery of 124 kilograms of
explosives at Katatura, near Windhoek, and a further 106
kilograms of explosives in the operational area, destined
for use in South West Africa/Namibia.

39. The front line of freedom in the world today is in the 1
savannah and forests of Angola; The question which will
be decided there is whether or not a.new form of imperialism will be permitted to take root in’Africa, 100 years after
the Congress of Berlin. Does anyone really believe that
once the Soviets and the Cubans have consolidated their
position in Angola they will allow themselves to be
removed? Does anyone imagine that they will not then use
Angola as a base from which to subvert the rest of central,
west and southern Africa? Those who have any doubts in
this regard should study the Brezhnev doctrine again and
ask the peoples of .Afghanistan, Nicaragua, .Cuba. and
Eastern Europe for their opinion.
I

34. More detailed information was obtained from two
terrorists of SWAPO’s Eighth Battalion, who, after their
arrest, admitted that they were part of a reconnaissance
and sabotage.team. On the basis of their information, the
tracks of at least 30 of these terrorists were followed to the
border with Angola. A follow-up operation was immediately put into effect in southern Angola, where further
large arms caches for use in South West Africa/Namibia
were found and destroyed. .The Angolan armed forces
were advised throughout of the South African operation.
The Chief of the South African Defence Force announced
yesterday.that the contingents involved in this operation
have already been ordered to commence their withdrawal.

40. Where does .the Organization lind itself in this conflict? Does its concern for self-determination, free elections
and human rights stop short at the southern banks of the
Cunene River? Is it prepared to stand idly by while the
Soviets and the Cubans extinguish the right of the people of
’
Angola to true independence and selfdetermination?

35. Regardless ,of the serious differences which have
arisen between our countries, ,the South African Govemment remains willing to enter into serious and meaningful
discussions with the Angolan Government as soon as possible. It considers such a dialogue to be an essential
requirement for the peaceful and lasting resolution of the
problems of-our region, and particularly the volatile situation which obtains on the border. between Angola and
South’ West Africa/Namibia.

41. It was on 27 January ,1976 that then President Ford
of the United States noted that:
“This imposition of a military solution in Angola
will have the most profound long-range significance
for the United States. The United States cannot accept
as a principle of international conduct that Cuban
troops and Soviet arms can be used for a-blatant inter-.
vention in local conflicts, in areas thousands of miles
from Cuba *and the Soviet Union, and where neither
can claim a historic national interest. If we do so, -we
will send a message of irresolution not only to the lead-

36. South Africa’s action against SWAPO.elements
in
southern Africa is, however, overshadowed by other developments in Angola. The central facts ofthe situation in
Angola have not’ changed since the Council met last on
4

ers of African nations but to United States allies and
friends throughout the world.”

tern of apartheid, the continued illegal occupation of Namibia or acts of unprovoked aggression against Botswana
and other front-line States. That, in itself, is a telling commentary on the intransigence of the apartheid regime, on
the defiance it flings at the Security Council, the United
Nations, and the entire international
community-we
have had a further demonstration of this in the statement
we have just heard-and on the extent to which the Council’s time and energies are spent in dealing with the threats
to peace and security posed by Pretoria.

42. And where do the leaders of the most powerful
democracy stand today? On 17 February of this year,
President Reagan drew parallels between what he described as the freedom fighters opposing Communist
regimes in Angola, Afghanistan, Ethiopia and Cambodia
and the Contras seeking to overthrow the Sandinists in
Nicaragua. He: said:
“These brave men are fighting to undo the infamous
Brezhnev doctrine, whidh says that once a nation falls
into the darkness of Communist ‘tyranny it can never
again see the light of freedom.”

48. The representative of Angola has, with his customary
eloquence and in tragic detail, apprised the Council of the
latest instance of unprovoked, unjustified and brutal aggression committed by South Africa against the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of the People’s
Republic of Angola.

43. A few days later, the American Secretary of State,
Mr. Shultz, asked why, if Communist dictatorships felt
free to aid insurgencies, must the democracies,‘the targets
of this threat, be inhibited from defending their own interests and the cause of democracy itself. By repealing the
Clark amendment, the United States has acknowledged
the admissibility of rendering support to the democratic
forces in Angola.

49. We are, of course, well aware that South African
troops have for a long time now illegally remained in
occupation of parts of Angolan territory, and Pretoria’s
professions of its desire for peace and coexistence in the
region have hoodwinked nobody. The Council has time
and again condemned South Africa for aggression against
Angola and demanded the immediate and unconditional
withdrawal of all its occupation forces from Angolan territory. The last such occasion was on 20 June this year, in
resolution 567 (1985), following the dastardly raid on the
Malongo oil complex in Cabinda Province.

44. Will this commitment to freedom go further than
phrases, or will the democratic countries stand aside while
the people of Angola fight on alone against overwhelming
odds? And what of the countries of Africa? What became
of the strong support .for FNLA (National Front for the
Liberarion of Angola) and for UNITA which existed in
January 1976, when half the countries of the Organization
of African Unity (OAU) had steadfastly refused to recognize the MPLA? Do they imagine that the ravenous tiger
has changed its objective? Do they not know that, while
they have been throwing stones at South Africa from their
front door, the tiger and her cubs have entered their house
by the back door7

50. Angola has known no peace since its independence
in 1975, and South African aggression against that country has posed a continuous threat to it. Indeed, it is one of
the many ironies of the situation that those who make so
much of the presence of foreign troops in countries of the
region should choose deliberately to turn a blind eye to
the sustained, illegal South African military presence in
Angola.

45. Despite’ their speeches against South Africa in the
Council, many of the African representatives who partici-.
pate and will participate in this debate accept in their
heart of hearts the truth of what I have said, because we,
the people of Africa, have all suffered under imperialism.
We know that Africa fears the tiger. We know that the
African countries waited in vain for the West to help them
chase it away. But they should know also that if they do
not raise their voices now, they will surely one by one fall
prey to Soviet imperialism.
:

51. The Government ‘of India condemns this latest act
of aggression. Equally, the entire Movement of NonAligned Countries condemns the aggression once again
being perpetrated against Angola. The Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the non-aligned countries-and,
I might
add, many representatives of non-aligned countries alsowere in Luanda only a fortnight ago for the Conference of
Foreign Ministers of Non-Aligned Countries, which was
hosted by the Government of Angola. We were able to
witness for ourselves the damage and suffering caused to
Angola by the continuing pressure exerted by South
Africa against it, in violation of the Charter of the United
Nations and United Nations resolutions and the commitments which the South African Government had itself
undertaken. We were also able to experience at first hand
the indomitable courage of the people of Angola and its
Government and their unswerving determination to protect and preserve the sovereignty, independence and terri;
torial integrity of Angola against all attacks and threats
emanating from South Africa. It is no matter for surprise,
therefore, that the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
is united in expressing and committing itself to firm solidarity with the Government and people of Angola.

46. There should be no doubt about where South Africa
stands on these issues; it stands with all true Africans
against the forces of the new imperialists.
47. Mr. KRISHNAN
(India): Once again, exactly three
months since we last met to consider a complaint of
Angola against South Africa, the Council is confronted
with another instance of blatant South African aggression
against Angola. In this year alone, this is the sixth occasion on which the Council has met to consider one or the
other of the transgressions committed by the. Pretoria
regime, be it repression unleashed against innocent people
in an attempt at the consolidation of the repugnant sys5

52. Notwithstanding the vain attempts &de by South
Africa to offer justification for this latest act of aggression, the facts before the Council are clear and leave no
room for ambiguity. South Africa’s action is impermissible and in violation of South Africa’s Charter obligations.
The pretext of so-called hot pursuit advanced by Pretoria
must be rejected with the contempt it deserves. South Africa
has no business to be in Namibia in the first place, to say
nothing of its use of that territory as a springboard for
aggression against independent African States. It is the duty
of the Council, I submit, to censure South Africa.

We hope that it will do so again, this time not merely by
condemning South Africa’s aggression and calling for its
immediate and unconditional withdrawal, not only by
once again upholding Angola’s right to recompense for
the enormous human and material losses it has sustained,
but, most of all, by acting resolutely to implement its own
decisions in that regard.
55. Mr. ALZAMORA
(Peru) (interprerutionfrom
Spanish): The Council has before it an item that in the past
became a matter of tragic periodic routine, when consciences were asleep and impunity was conceded by conformity.. But today, when all the‘ peoples of the world have
finally come to understand the suffering and the hope
involved in the South African tragedy, and when a universal movement of political and moral consciousness is
beginning to mobilize the action of Governments towards
the achievement of a definitive solution, this latest attack
upon peace and security cannot be accepted or condoned.
If it were, if we dealt with it leniently or with indifference,
world public opinion, now so aware of the South African
problem, would rightly demand that we go further in the
search for effective sanctions in order to bring about the
desired results. To that end, it is essential to determine, for
example, the source of the weapons with which South
Africa carries out its attacks. Who is arming South
Africa? We have the inescapable responsibility,
as
members of the Council, to provide that essential
information.

53. I have just referred to the Conference of Foreign
Ministers of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at Luanda
from 4 to 7 September 1985. In the Final Political Declaration of that Conference,
“The Ministers . . . emphasized the special political
significance of convening the Conference in the People’s Republic of Angola, a front-line State in the vanguard of the struggle against the abhorrent system of
apartheid. They expressed the full solidarity of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries with the Government and people of Angola on the occasion of the
tenth anniversary of the independence of that country,
in their efforts to consolidate their national independence, preserve their territorial integrity and freely to
undertake the task of national development” [S/Z76ZO
and Corr.1, annex & para. IOJ.

56. With the aim of doing its utmost to contribute to the
triumph of justice and reason in South Africa and to close
ranks with the countries that are victims of aggression,
Peru a few days ago established formal diplomatic relations with Angola, and it is about to do so with Zimbabwe
and all the other front-line States. The delegation of Peru is
therefore ready to approve the most severe measures and
to respond with the utmost rigour to the latest attack upon
the brother people of Angola. The circumstances of that
attack are such as to make it one more offence not only
against that nation, the whole of Africa, the hundred nonaligned countries, but also against the whole international
community; which today joins in a universal movement of
repudiation of upurtheid and condemnation of the acts of
aggression resulting from the senseless attempts to preserve it, against the tide of history. The delegation of Peru
therefore stands ready to support the action the Council
adopts on this matter.

In the same document,
“The Ministers strongly. condemned the Pretoria
regime for the continued military occupation of part of
the territory of the People’s Republic of Angola and
considered this an act of aggression against the entire
Non-Aligned Movement.
“They called for a complete and unconditional withdrawal of the South African troops from the territory of
Angola and decided to increase material support to the
Angolan Government, to enable it to consolidate its
national independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity.
“The Ministers hailed the Government of the People’s
Republic of Angola for its political will and diplomatic
flexibility in the search for a peaceful and negotiated
solution of the problems of southern Africa . . .

57. Mr. RABETAFIKA
(Madagascar) (inrerpretution
from French): I, have the honour and privilege to address
the Council today in my dual capacity as representative of
Madagascar and Chairman of the Group of African States
for the month of September.

“The Ministers strongly condemned, on the other
hand, the duplicity and bad faith of the racist regime of
Pretoria in its negotiations with the Government of the
People’s Republic of Angola as evidenced by acts of
aggression, such as the recent sabotage attempt on the
oil complex installations of Malongo ,in the Cabinda
Province; and the attempt to supply large quantities of
war material in Malange by aerial means, to the puppet
and mercenary groups [ibid., paras. 76-7!Tj.”

58. Exactly three months to the day after the adoption
of resolution 567 (1985), the Council finds itself obliged,
in spite of itself, to meet once again to consider the armed
invasion committed by the racist armed forces against the
People’s Republic of Angola and the threat that invasion
poses to both regional and international peace and security. The facts have been described cogently and in detail

54. The non-aligned countries have stood by Angola
steadfastly and will continue to do so. TheCouncil, tqo,
has in the past stood by that beleaguered Member State.
6

.by the representative of Angola, and I shall not rehearse
them.

the acts of aggression of the Pretoria regime, which’could
be evaluatedthrough
an investigation-by a fact-finding
committee; and finally, the application of urgent, effective
pressure against South Africa to induce it to respect the
relevant Council resolutions and to meet its obligations
under the Charter.

59. As if the atrocities committed daily ;by the racist
Pretoria regime against the black people were not enough,
South Africa, in keeping with its policy of arrogance and
disregard of the law, again invaded southern Angola on
16 September. The pretext given was that the invasion
was carried out in order to pursue elements of SWAPO.
In our view, that act of aggression committed by the
South African regime constitutes an act prejudicial to
international law and a flagrant violation of the Charter
of the United Nations.

65. The Group of African States hopes that the Council
will heed these demands, which are the bare minimum we
can ask for in view of the gravity of South Africa’s act of
provocation and its harmful implications for the maintenance of international peace and security.
66. In this connection, I wish to recall that the most
recent summit meeting of the OAU vigorously condemned South Africa’s repeated attacks against independent neighbouring African States, expressed the solidarity
of the whole of Africa with the front-line States, and
recommended specifically that needed assistance be provided to the front-line States, including the People’s
Republic of Angola, with a view to strengthening their
capacity to defend themselves against acts of aggression
by South Africa. It also proposed the imposition of binding sanctions against South Africa and expressed the view
that peace in southern Africa can be guaranteed only by
the abolition of the system of apartheid and a negotiated
settlement of the question of Namibia.

60. It is ironic to note that South Africa, which undertook as of April this year to withdraw all its occupation
forces from southern Angola, seeks to justify its latest act
of military aggression by an alleged threat to the security
of Namibia, a Territory that it is occupying illegally.
61. Such a justification, based on the theory of so-called
preventive action, is unacceptable in the framework of
positive international law. Indeed, acting as both judge
and party in its consideration of a situation which it presents as a threat to its own security, South Africa has not
hesitated to use force and to violate the territorial integrity of a sovereign State. Because of its vagueness and
subjective nature, such a theory would permit any State to
consider as dangerous to its security any action taken by
its ‘victim, even if it were in keeping with internationally
accepted norms. That is the antithesis of the right of selfdefence as recognized by Article 51 of the Charter.

67. Mr. KASEMSRI
(Thailand): Members will recall
that on 20 June 1985, the Council adopted resolution 567
(1985), in which, inter alia, it strongly condemned South
Africa

62. The Pretoria regime wishes to divert the attention of
the international community from its domestic difficulties
resulting from the struggle of the South African people to
dismantle the apartheid system. That regime is thus defying the norms of international
law by violating the
national sovereignty of the People’s Republic of Angola
and by launching an attack more than 200 kilometres
deep into its territory from the northern border of Namibia. Those recent events show once again that South
Africa, which claims to be the constable of southern
Africa, is seeking to impose and institutionalize State terrorism to its own benefit while manifesting its scorn for
the resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council.

“‘for its recent act of aggression against the territory of
Angola in the Province of Cabinda as well as for its
renewed intensified, premeditated and unprovoked
acts of aggression, which constitute a flagrant violation
of the sovereignty and.territorial integrity of that country and seriously endanger international peace and
security”. That resolution further strongly condemns
South Africa for its utilization of the international Territory of Namibia as a springboard for perpetrating its
armed attacks as well as sustaining its occupation of
parts of the territory of Angola.
68. Today, after a lapse of only three months, the Security Council has been convened once again to consider
another complaint by Angola against South Africa. In his
letter of 18 September 1985 [&‘/1747rJ, the representative
of Angola drew the attention of the President of the Security Council to “the most recent violent acts of armed
aggression committed against the people and territory of .
the People’s Republic of Angola by the racist regime in
South Africa”, by once again crossing the Angolan
border on 16 September 1985 and engaging in “acts of
wanton destruction and brutality against Angola’*.

63. It is precisely the flagrant nature of this act of aggression which has aroused the reprobation of the entire international community. Even countries which are considered
to be South Africa’s allies have denounced it and have
called upon it to withdraw its forces from southern
Angola.
64. In order to discourage and preempt such acts committed by a Member State in violation of the Charter, we
call upon, the Council to act decisively by making use of
the means available,to it under the Charter. We are thinking in particular of the implementation
by all States of the
arms embargo imposed against,South Africa in resolution
418 (1977); the recognition of Angola’s right to appropriate compensation for losses and damage resulting from

69. According to news reuorts-and.
indeed. in the
statement of Pretoria’s representative this morning-the
South African authorities have admitted that their forces
have in fact invaded Angolan territory. The pretext given
was that they were engaging in so-called pre-emptive
7

strikes from the territory of Namibia
ist forces of SWAPO.

and when a universal campaign of condemnation has
escalated in an unprecedented fashion against the racist
practices of the Pretoria regime.
;77. Although such aggression is not new to the Pretoria
regime, we cannot but wonder at the reason for renewed
acts of aggression being launched at this very time, in
spite of the internal revolt being faced by the regime and
the condemnation of its practices and conduct by the outside world. At the beginning of this meeting, we heard a
statement by the representative of Angola in which he
answered these queries very clearly. He had already
referred to these questions in his letter to the President of
the Council, in which he requested an urgent meeting of
the Council.

against the national-

70. Namibia is not part of South Africa, and it is being
illegally occupied by South Africa. One might then ask,
what business do South African forces have in Namibia in
any case? SWAPO, on the other hand, is recognized by
the General Assembly as the sole authentic representative
of the Namibian. people. SWAP0 forces are waging a
legitimate struggle against the South African presence in
Namibia in order to enable the Namibian people to rid
themselves of the illegal occupier and to exercise their
right of self-determination. All those facts are well recognized by the overwhelming majority of the international
community. Accordingly, any military incursion or act of
aggression by South Africa from Namibian territory
against a neighbouring country, on any pretext whatsoever, constitutes a gross violation of international law
and the Charter of the United Nations.

78. We in turn wonder whether the racist regime, by its
latest aggression against Angola, seeks to demonstrate to
us and to the world that it takes no notice of the denunciation and condemnation of its practices and actions and
will persist in its racist practices and aggression at home
and abroad. If the regime is attempting, by means of this
aggression in contravention of the Charter of the United
Nations to divert attention from what is happening inside
South Africa itself, that attempt is doomed to failure,
because such repeated acts of aggression only serve to
emphasize the aggressive nature of the regime at home
and abroad.

71. Furthermore,
South African actions are yet a
further proof of South Africa’s intransigence, in defiance
of the relevant United Nations resolutions. Indeed, in
South-East Asia a similar situation exists, which continues to threaten not only the territorial integrity and
security of my country, Thailand, but also international
peace and security. It is therefore patently clear where
Thailand stands on the question before us.
72. Thailand has consistently, and in the strongest possi;
ble terms, opposed and condemned South Africa’s acts of
aggression against the front-line and other States, as well
as its illegal occupation of Namibia.

79. The aggression by the Pretoria regime against
Angola and its racist practices against and brutal suppression of the black majority, in addition to its persistence in
illegally occupying Namibia, all reflect ‘the ideology of
that racist regime, which has based its actions solely on
the highest degree of violence in its relations with neighbouring States as well as its attempts to impose its abominable policy on the majority of the people within South
Africa.

73. Today, my delegation wishes to reiterate Thailand’s
steadfast position in this regard. We demand that the
racist Pretoria regime cease its lawless acts and immediately and unconditionally
withdraw its illegal presence
from Angolan and Namibian territories. Moreover, South
Africa must fully compensate the People’s Republic of
Angola for all the damage that the South African forces
have caused, as well as desist from any further violation of
Angolan sovereignty and territorial integrity.

80. The delegation of Egypt would prefer to limit its
statement, because the option before us is to take the
necessary steps rather than to speak at length about that
which we all know full well. Suffice it to say that the
Security Council, in its resolution 567 (1985), strongly and
clearly condemned the aggression committed at the time
by the racist Government of Pretoria against the territory
of Angola and the utilization by that regime of the Territory of Namibia as a springboard for that aggression. It
also demanded that South Africa cease all acts of aggression against Angola and respect its sovereignty and territorial integrity.

74. It ‘is also’incumbent upon the Council to help ensure
once and for all that South Africa comply fully and without further delay with all its relevant resolutions, including resolution 567 (1985) of 20 June 1985.
75. Mr. KHALIL
(Egypt) (interpr&rion
from Arabic):
Hardly three months have passed since the Security Council considered the aggression by the racist Government of
South Africa against Cabinda Province in Angola, before
that same racist Government committed a new act of
aggression in which it used hundreds of soldiers and penetrated deep into Angolan territory, invoking the usual
pretexts to the effect that it launched that action as a
preemptive strike against the Namibian freedom fighters.

81. However, this racist regime repeated its aggression
on 16 September, and did so in yet greater strength. Will
the Security Council still confine itself to condemnation
and appeals, in the face of this blatant .detiance by the
racist regime of Pretoria? Each act of aggression by South
Africa against its neighbours is an act of defiance against
the prestige and authority of the Council as the supreme
international organ for the maintenance of international
peace and security. At the same time, that prestige and
authority is weakened if- the Council fails to adopt the
measures called for by this continuous aggression.

76. This new act of aggression against the territory and
sovereignty of Angola is being committed at a time when
the black majority in South Africa has risen up, calling for
its legitimate right to equality, liberty and human dignity,
8

82. Millions, not only in Africa but in scores of countries in the third world, have their eyes on the Security
Council on the eve of the fortieth anniversary session of
the United Nations. In Egypt’s view, it is high time that
the Council prevents its resolutions from being disregarded and sees to it that they are implemented. The
Charter provides machinery which makes it possible for
the Council to discharge that duty. We consider it incumbent upon us -to show the racist regime of Pretoria the
position of the Council on this aggression against Angola
and the violation of its sovereignty, and to do so in such a
way as to leave no room for doubt. The Council should
adopt the necessary measures to force the racist regime to
heed its resolutions and to respond to the appeal by
Angola, the victim of aggression.

regime is cynically
principles.

flouting

those very purposes and

88. Such provocative behaviour by the Pretoria authorities and the defmnt statement made here today by the
representative of South Africa both are the result of the
patronage and support that the South African racists have
enjoyed and continue to enjoy from their powerful Westem patrons-first
and foremost, the United States. We
can hardly attach serious significance to the limitations on
economic ties with South Africa that were recently put
forward by the United States Administration,
since those
socalled sanctions are accompanied by a host of qualifications and loopholes. There have been absolutely no perceptible changes in the essence of the United States
position with regard to the apartheid regime, excepting
that “constructive engagement” with South Africa is now
being called “active engagement**.

83. Mr. OUDOVENKO
(Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist
Republic) (interpretation from Russian): The racist regime
in South Africa, not content with its brutal treatment of
the indigenous inhabitants of South Africa itself, has constantly and openly committed acts of aggression against
independent African States. Perfectly confident of its
impunity, South Africa has once again committed an act
of aggression against the sovereign State of the People’s
Republic of Angola. Once again, innocent people have
lost their lives. A great number of people have been
seriously wounded and a great deal of material damage
has been sustained, as we were told today by the representative of Angola.

89. Once again, we are forced to note that it is that precise policy of the United States Administration
towards
the Botha regime that is one of the main reasons for that
regime’s increasing aggressivity, and that it has nurtured
the regime’s illusions of being able to act with total
impunity.
90. The delegation of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic vehemently condemns the new and unprovoked
act of aggression by South Africa against Angola and
declares its firm solidarity with the people and Govemment of Angola. We believe that the time has come for the
Council to fulfil its duties under the Charter in a decisive
manner, to adopt effective measures against the apartheid
regime and, in accordance with the Charter, demand that
it call a halt to its aggressive actions.

84. The attack on Angola is just one more link in the
chain of misdeeds committed by the South African militarists and a further proof that the apartheid regime not
only represents an inhuman system of racial oppression
but also poses a constant threat to international peace and
security. In order to eliminate it, urgent international
efforts and action are needed.

91. Events in southern Africa have disturbed people
in many countries. International organizations have condemned the Pretoria authorities. Many Governments
and a broad spectrum of public opinion in many countries
throughout the world have done the same. Many intemational forums now being held have condemned the aggressive policy of the Pretoria regime; last week, parliamentarians of the Western European countries participated in
a seminar held at Amsterdam and issued a condemnation
of that r&ime. Appeals for a boycott against the South
African regime have been heard this year in Bonn, instigated by the Green Party. There have been striking exposures of the role played by transnational corporations and
monopolies in South Africa and Namibia, some of which
were heard at the. hearings held here ‘at United Nations
Headquarters. Last week in Hungary a representative
international seminar was held at which I headed a delegation from the Special Committee against Apartheid. The
participants at that seminar called upon the Security Council to bring its powerful authority to bear in favour of the
restoration of legitimacy and order in southern Africa and
to put into effect comprehensive and binding sanctions
against the Pretoria regime under Chapter VII of the
Charter.

85. There can be no doubt that this new act of aggression against Angola, like all that have preceded it, is
aimed at intimidating
the front-line States and forcing
them to abandon their support for the liberation movements. On the other hand, as pointed out in the letter
from the representative of Angola [ibid.], the expansionism of racist South Africa “is obviously designed to draw
international attention away from the conflagration that
is engulfing the racist apartheid minority regime in
Pretoria’*.
86. This new act of provocation by the South African
racists demonstrates that the ruling regime in that country
is continuing to pursue its policy of destablization against
independent African States. In so doing, the racist Pretoria regime is not only deliberately ignoring the numerous
decisions adopted by the General Assembly and the Security Council with regard to the normalization of the situation in southern Africa, it is openly flouting the norms of
international law.
87. At a time when the world community is celebrating
the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations and ,once
again dedicating itself to the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, the South African

92. It is difficult to find new language to condemn the
aggressive acts and criminal policy of the apartheid regime
9

in words that have not already been uttered here, but we
must search for such words and such language. We need
active and concerted efforts by all members of the
Council
93. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Brazil. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
94. Mr. MACIEL (Brazil): I should like tirst of all to
extend to you, Sir, my sincere felicitations on your assuming the presidency of the Council and thanks for allowing
the delegation of the Brazilian Government to make a
short statement here today.
95. As soon as the Brazilian Government was informed
of the most recent act of armed aggression against the
territory of the People’s Republic of Angola by South
Africa, the Brazilian Minister for Foreign Affairs sent a
telegram to his colleague, the Angolan Minister for Foreign Affairs [S/174751, which I would like to read to the
Council:
“I have just been informed that the aggressive apartheid regime has invaded the south of Angola from the
illegally occupied territory of Namibia. At this crucial
moment in history in which there has been a flagrant
and unacceptable violation both of the sovereignty of
Angola and of the basic principles that govern relations between civilized States. Your Excellency and the
entire Angolan nation may rest assured of the solidarity of the Brazilian Government .and people.*’
96. In fact, the circumstances in which this last South
African attack against Angola has taken place are crucial.
While the entire international community is following with
grave concern the cycle of violence spreading within the
boundaries of South Africa at a moment when intemational opinion seems to be mobilized against apartheid to
an extent never before witnessed, in a year when the Security Council has issued several expressions of condemnation against the aggressiveness of Pretoria towards its
neighbours, the South African regime has retaliated by
striking once again with brutal strength a peaceful country
whose only guilt is the solidarity it offers to its African
brothers.
97. No justification could be acceptable for the present
act of aggression. Just as was the case when South Africa
tried to sabotage economic targets in Cabinda, not even
the physical proximity of a concrete menace to that country can now be alleged. Any violent act by Pretoria aimed
at defending its position in Namibia constitutes a crime in
defence of illegality. No excuse for preemptive strikes
against SWAP0 can be disguised by the notion of selfprotection. South Africa’s presence in Namibian territory
is itself illegal.

against neighbouring States are not only a transgression of
international law; we are hearing the cries of despair of a
regime doomed to fail. In fact, that regime is being dismantled by the antagonistic forces its very existence tends
to generate. We should not, however, fail to take concrete
steps to make Pretoria cease its aggressive acts against
Angola and other countries in the region. The United
Nations has indeed played an important role in mobilizing
international public opinion against the acts of aggression
of the Pretoria regime, and we have to go further in our
concerted action for the total eradication of the racist and
violent policies of South Africa.
99. As a Latin American country, as a sister country of
Angola, Brazil has consistently affirmed its solidarity with
the Angolan people and Government, as well as with the
Several countries have already
people of Namibia.
adopted, at different levels, sets of sanctions against South
Africa. Brazil is one of them. Taken collectively, these
individual actions represent a concrete contribution to the ,
dismantling of the structure of an aggressive Government.
Their reach is, however, limited. Effective measures can
only lead to more tangible results if supported and
adopted by the international community as a whole. We
should not feel discouraged by the brazen attitude of
South Africa in disregard of international law. Common
determination and common deeds will force Pretoria to
abide by the rules of civilized coexistence among States.
100. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Senegal, Mr. Ibrahima Fall. I welcome him and invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
101. Mr. FALL (Senegal) (interpretation from French):
Mr. President, on behalf of Mr. Abdou Diouf, President of
the Republic of Senegal and current Chairman of the
Organization of African Unity, I should like to convey to
you, and through you to the members of the Security
Council, our gratitude for your allowing me to take part in
this very important debate on the repeated acts of aggression of South Africa against the People’s Republic of
Angola. I am not merely following tradition when I say
that my pleasure in so doing is increased by the fact that
you are guiding the work of the Council with a competence and impartiality that is recognized by all on behalf of
the great country which you represent here, the United
Kingdom, with which Africa has special, long-standing
relations based on mutual respect.
102 I also wish to pay a tribute to your predecessor, Mr.
Oleg Troyanovsky, the representative of the Soviet Union,
for the exemplary and responsible manner in which he led
the work of the Council in August.
103. President Abdou Diouf has just addressed a message to the President of Angola which reflects Africa’s
disapproval and condemnation of the State terrorism practised by South Africa. I will now read that message to the
Council:

98. As we approach the fortieth anniversary of the
United Nations, the total defiance by South Africa of the
strong stance taken by the international community on the
crisis in southern Africa should justify effective action by
the Security Council. The recurrent acts of aggression

“The incorrigible supporters of apartheid have once
again deliberately violated the territorial integrity and
10

quantitative and qualitative increase in international
sure for sanctions against Pretoria.

sovereignty of independent Angola. This heinous act of
destabilization, committed under the false pretext of
“hot pursuit” of SWAP0 fighters, constitutes undeniable aggression in the terms of international law.

pres-

106. Refusing to learn the lessons of history, South African President Pieter Botha, in a statement that had been
awaited with hope by those who were beginning to wonder
about his lucidity, has just reaffirmed his resolve to
pursue application of the apartheid policy, thus showing
that blind and bloody intransigence constitutes the only
response of the South African Government to the martyred people of South Africa, to the peoples and the
Governments of Africa and to the conscience of the
world as a whole.

“The segregationist r&ime of Pretoria has chosen the
eve of the session of the General Assembly during
which the fortieth anniversary of the entry into force of
the Charter of the United Nations will be commemorated to show how little it respects the San Francisco
document. Indeed, this raid against southern Angola
rides roughshod over the spirit and the letter of the
most fundamental provisions of the Charter.

107. Externally, this policy of desperation and political
blindness translates in occupied Namibia into the establishment of a so-called interim government, in disregard
of the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council. Externally also, with regard
to the neighbouring
African countries, Pretoria has
established destabilisation, aggression and invasion as
principles of neighbourliness. Thus, after many others, the
aggression against Angola which is now being discussed
here shows once again that Pretoria is resolved to continue
to defy the entire world, including the Powers that still
harbour a slim hope that a glimmer of lucidity will come to
the South African authorities.

“In these serious circumstances, the OAU, through
me, reaffirms to the courageous people of Angola the
active solidarity of Africa, which is saddened and
revolted by such atiogance. But let there be no
mistake-no
acts of intimidation,
however barbarous
and wanton, can enable the apartheidrbgime to escape a
truth which has been clearly established by history. As
shown yesterday in Asia and more recently in this same
southern part of our continent, the will and the determination of peoples struggling to conquer or safeguard
their independence and dignity have been irresistible.
The last bastion of denial of the rights of the black man
will not escape this historical truth.

108. Only a few days after the holding at Luanda of the
Conference of Foreign Ministers of Non-Aligned Countries, a meeting during which the most important group of
States in the world expressed its active solidarity with
Angola in the face of Pretoria’s acts of aggression against
it; only a few days after the decision on limited economic
sanctions taken by the United States, Canada and the
countries of the European Community; a few weeks after
the meeting of the Security Council held at the request of
France at which important measures were adopted that
were seen by all those who continue to have confidence in
the United Nations as conveying a formal warning to the
Republic of South Africa; and finally, coming on the occasion of the fortieth anniversary of the San Francisco Charter, which is the fundamental basis of current international
relations, South African aggression against Angola offers
further evidence that South Africa does not and will not
take into account any decision of the Council other than
mandatory and binding sanctions in accordance with the
serious responsibilities conferred upon it by the Charter of
the United Nations.

“I reaffii to the brother people of Angola the determination of Africa to continue to give it its firm support
and solidarity in its struggle.”
104. The serious act of aggression South Africa has just
committed against Angola is part of a context that is clear
in its true dimensions. Indeed, faced with the resolute
stand of the vast majority of the South African people
against the odious and inhuman policy of apartheid,
imposed in violation of all norms of national and intemational objective law and rejected by the community of
States as a whole, the Pretoria r&ime has made of the state
of emergency decreed since 21 July 1985 a situation of
principle in support of which it has intensified repression
against the legitimate aspirations of the South African
people.
105. The international
community
has reacted by
unanimously condemning that escalation, which is arbitrary and has worsened the situation prevailing in South
Africa as a result of Pretoria’s acts-a situation that was
already a cause for concern. The Council itself, reflecting
the general reproach, has condemned the establishment of
the state of emergency. Far from complying and understanding that, as is obvious to everyone, the only way to
preserve a viable future in southern Africa is the establishment of a system of equality, democracy and fraternity
with freedom for all, the South AfriFan Government has
preferred the relentless pursuit of the same policy of arbitrary massive repression, marked by arrests and deliberate
assassinations against the anti-apartheid forces. The failure
of that policy is obvious today, as is shown internally by
the glorious resistance of political forces, trade unions and
religious, student and other forces, and externally by the

109. The statement just made here by the representative
of Pretoria attests to the fact that not only does South
Africa persist and will continue to persist in its policy of
aggression against Angola and against other front-line
States, but also, ironic as this may be for the country of
apartheid, it claims that its action against the legitimate
Government of Angola is an action in favour of the socalled liberation of the Angolan people, a people for which
the Pretoria representative has even claimed to speak here.
This is no more and no less than brazenly overt
imperialism.
110. The South African Government’s internal and
external policy of obstinancy and defiance of reason and
11

law creates an increasingly explosive situation in the southern part of the African continent, a situation that is without question seen as a threat to international peace and
security.
111. The OAU, whose support for the cause of the liberation of Namibia, the cause of the struggle against apartheid
in South Africa and the cause of solidarity with the frontline States is based on its constituent charter, once again
appeals to international opinion, and in particular to the
Governments of countries to which the Charter of the
United Nations confers primary responsibility for’ the
maintenance of peace in the world and to which South
Africa continues to show its ill will and blind obstinacy.
The Organization of African Unity, presided over by President Abou Diouf, whom I have the honour to represent
here, echoes the call of African peoples addressed to the
international
community
represented .by the Security
Council. It asks, must we wait for Pretoria to set ablaze the
entire African continent before we consider that South
Africa’s actions endanger international peace and security
and before taking appropriate measures?
112. The time has certainly come to respond to the legitimate aspirations of the African peoples and, beyond that,
the peoples of the whole world, by taking the decision to
condemn South African aggression against Angola and to
implement global and mandatory economic sanctions, the
only steps capable of bringing the leaders of Pretoria to
reason. In so doing, the Security Council would be advancing the cause of human rights and peace in the world,
fundamental aims of the Charter.
113. The Council is in duty bound fully to shoulder its
responsibilities towards Angola, the front-line States and
the international community in order to avoid a repetition
of such actions. This would also be the occasion for the
Council to determine ways and means to implement the
relevant decisions of the United Nations on Namibia.
114. Mr. President, I finish as I began by thanking you
and, through you, the Council as a whole for having given
me the opportunity to address you in the name of the
current Chairman of the Organisation of African Unity.
115. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is Mr. Joseph
Garba, Chairman of the Special Committee against Apartheid. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

117. Once again the Security Council is meeting to consider the acts of aggression committed by the Pretoria
regime against one of its neighbouring independent Afiican States. It was as recently as 20 June that the Council
adopted resolution 567 (1985) condemning the apartheid
regime’s criminal acts of aggression against Angola. On
that occasion [259&h meeting], the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Angola told the Council that the South African
regime’s operation was a calculated effort to destabilize
Angola and suffocate it economically. Earlier, in May, the
Secretary-General issued a statement expressing concern at
South Africa’s military operation in Angola.
118. Since gaining independence a decade ago, Angola
has been invaded by South Africa more than a dozen
times. This and other acts of aggression by South Africa
have been repeatedly and strongly condemned by the Security Council, which has demanded the immediate withdrawal of the invading South African forces and has
affirmed the right to prompt and adequate compensation
from South Africa. The Council has also requested
Member States to extend all necessary assistance to the
victims of South Africa’s aggression.
119. Yet the Council’s resolutions have not had the
slightest impact on the apartheid regime. In June last,
within the space of 48 hours, South Africa was condemned
three times by the Security Council for its acts of aggression against Angola and Botswana and for its continued
illegal occupation of Namibia and installation of a socalled interim government in that Territory.
120. In May, the South African army tried to sabotage oil
installations at Malongo, in Cabinda Province. A captured
South African soldier then confessed that his unit had
sabotaged other strategic installations in Angola. In the
same month, Angolan authorities intercepted two South
African night parachute drops of weapons to UNITA. All
these criminal and dastardly acts took place despite the
Lusaka understanding, which was signed in February 1984
between Angola and South Africa and which required the
withdrawal of South African forces from Angola. South
Africa’s acts of aggression and the rebel UNITA attacks
supported by South Africa have cost Angola billions of
dollars, caused the deaths of tens of thousands of people,
displaced hundreds of thousands others and devastated the
country’s economy.
121. Today! the South African army is’still in Angola,
purportedly m self-defence, but in reality subverting and
destabilizing the Angolan Government. The Pretoria
regime has dishonestly argued that it has launched a preventive action in selfdefence because SWAP0 was planning a campaign of terror in Namibia. A South African
armoured battalion has gone 150 miles deep into Angola,
accompanied by air strikes as far as 50 miles into the
country and the bombing of Angolan forces which were
attacking UNITA. The complicity of South Africa is demonstrated by the fact that a South African medical orderly
was with the rebel UNITA forces when he was killed in the
offensive by the Angolan troops against the UNITA
rebels.

116. Mr. GARBA
(Chairman,
Special Committee
against Apartheid): Mr. President, let me first of all thank
you and members of the Council for giving me this opportunity to participate in this meeting on behalf of the Special Committee against Apartheid. I should also like, on
behalf of the Special Committee, to congratulate you on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of September. The Special Committee and, indeed,
the international community, look forward to the adoption by the Council under your leadership of meaningful
measures against the criminal and aggressive regime of
South Africa.
12

122. The South African regime has once again put forward the excuse of hot pursuit or pre-emptive action to
justify its latest act of aggression. The right of self-defence
is governed by Article 51 of the Charter, which can in no
way be invoked by South Africa. There has been no threat
to South African territory. On the contrary, South Africa
has throughout been the source of aggression and destabilization against its neighbours. The question of self-defence
or hot pursuit simply cannot arise in the present case.
South Africa has no business in Angola. Its presence there
has been declared illegal, repeatedly condemned by the
Council and, indeed, is an infringement of international
law.

towards the elimination of apartheid, the independence of
Namibia and the maintenance of peace and security in
southern Africa. It is long past the time to continue to
repose hope in such policies as “constructive engagement**
or “active engagement”. The repeal of the Clark amendment can now be seen clearly as a tragic mistake.
128. For many years, the Special Committee has urged
the adoption of concrete measures to combat the Pretoria
regime’s defiance of the United Nations and the intemational community. No longer should the Security Council
delay the adoption of meaningful action under Chapter
VII of the Charter. We have clearly seen that unless there
is some effective pressure, internal or external, the apartheid regime shows no disposition to make the slightest
move. Undoubtedly there is going to be no peace in southem Africa unless apartheid is eliminated and Namibia
liberated.

123. This attack on Angola is not an isolated case. It is
part of a deliberate policy of deceit and aggression aimed
at destabilizing the neighbouring countries. Thus,< the
apartheid regime’s acts of aggression and destabilization
continue against Mozambique despite the Accord of Nkomati [S/164.51 of 30 March 1984, annex 4, South Africa
has all along supplied weapons to the rebel national resistance movement. Just a few days ago, on 16 September,
Mozambique’s
President confronted the South African
Minister for Foreign Affairs with proof of the continued
involvement of South Africa in the destabilization of
Mozambique. President Samora Machel protested to Minister Botha about the serious and repeated violations of the
Accord of Nkomati, which was supposed to be’ a peace
agreement. The seriousness of the situation in Mozambique was discussed at meetings this year among southern
African States. A few days ago, leaders of six front-line
States met in Mozambique to consider the gravity of developments in South Africa.

129. The situation in South Africa is fast deteriorating.
Not a day passes without blacks being killed by South
African security forces; not a day passes without violence
and brutality being inflicted on blacks. The emergency
measures which were imposed on 20 July, giving unlimited
powers to the policy and the army, have worsened a situation which was already irretrievable.
130. The United Nations has a special responsibility
towards the peoples of South Africa and Namibia. This
responsibility flows from the Charter. The need for effective international action is greater today than ever, particularly on this fortieth anniversary of the United Nations and
the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. The Security Council has no choice but to condemn
racist South Africa, punish it, consistent with the Charter,
and demand that that illegal Government render immediate and equitable reparations to the people of Angola.
At a time when Member States are increasingly adopting
sanctions against South Africa on an individual basis, the
Security Council can do no less.

124. The Lusaka understanding and the Accord of Nkomati were heralded by the racist minority regime as peace
initiatives. But they have brought no peace, only more
devastation. They were frauds, as are all other changes and
so-called reforms offered by that regime, whose purpose is
to mislead world public opinion. Now the veil has been
lifted, and faced with irrefutable evidence, the racist Minister for Foreign Affairs was compelled to admit that South
Africa had brazenly violated the Accord of Nkomati several times since it was signed in March 1984.

131. Mr. BASSOLl?. (Burkina Faso) (interpretationfrom
French): My delegation has already had an opportunity to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency for September. I should like, however, to add my
own congratulations and to vouchsafe to you my readiness
to co-operate with you as you discharge your delicate functions. I take this opportunity also to pay a well-deserved
tribute to your predecessor, who, as usual, presided over
the Council with tact and competence.

125. I hope that this’will convince the major Western
supporters of the racist regime that that illegal Government does not respond to rational and progressive
initiatives.
126. I said at the meeting of the Council on 11 June last
[Zsssth mbeting] that no dialogue is possible with the Pretoria regime, which has all along defied the resolutions and
calls of the United Nations, reneged on its undertakings,
committed repeated acts of aggression and destabilization
against its neighbours, is bent on perpetuating the criminal
system of aparrheid and continuously violates the Charter.
The apartheid regime should be dealt with in the manner
that it deserves.

132. In June 1985, racist South Africa added to its misdeeds the successive violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of two Member States, Angola and
Botswana. The Council, whose faith and commitment to
exercise its prerogatives under the Charter of the United
Nations had been hurt, met and, with is customary wisdom, adopted appropriate resolutions designed to remedy
the damage done to those two States and to prevail upon
the Pretoria regime to respect the Charter of the United
Nations, in the drafting of which the South African racist
State may have participated.

127. The Security Council must now answer fittingly the
Pretoria regime’s defiance of all United Nations efforts
13

133. Those resolutions, like the ones previously adopted
by the Council in similar circumstances, had no effect on
South Africa’s blind and arrogant policy. Pretoria has just
committed another act of defiance of the Council by again
using force and violating once more the territorial sovereignty of Angola. It is therefore up to the Council, in all
objectivity and wisdom, to determine the most appropriate
means to meet this challenge. It is time-as we have constantly stated-to stop the South African racist regime in
its folly. The Council’s decisions must finally show the
firmness which has so far been dramatically lacking
because of an absence of cohesion within it.
134. The fallacious pretext of the right of hot pursuit,
constantly invoked by Pretoria to justify the repeated violations of the Charter of which it has so often been guilty,
should not sway the Council in its determination to put an
end to these acts of aggression and to ensure and guarantee
scrupulous respect for the, Council Charter by the most

Litho in United Nations, New York

appropriate means, specifically those available to it under
the Charter.
135. The racist leaders of Pretoria, in the throes of an
explosive internal situation, are seeking, in vain, to divert
the international community’s attention from the true
problems faced by the regime of apartheid which they have
institutionalized and which they intend to maintain at all
costs. The Council should not pay attention, to such.delaying tactics. It is in duty bound not only to condemn the
cowardly and barbarous act of aggression of which
Angola has just been the victim, but also, and above all, to
apply economic sanctions against Pretoria in order to do
justice to the peoples of Angola and southern Africa whose
dignity has been flouted.
The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.

00300

90-61439-January 1995-1.925
