UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICh4L

RECORDS

THIRTIETH

YEAR

m LB&Ry
MAY2 19&j
wsi

1848”’

MEETING:

17 OCTOBER

~LLEcTjQN

1975

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

agenda (S/Agenda/ 1848) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of New Members concerning the
application of the Comoros for membership in the United Nations (S/ 11’850)

1

Provisional

zyPV.1848

:,

‘*
. ” ‘..NOTE

::

. i.,
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol,indicates
a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Slcpplements of the Official Records of the’Secwity Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which infor..
mation about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes .of R&oh&ions
and
Decisions of the Security’ Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1848th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday,
President:

Mr. Olof RYDBECK

(Sweden).

Adoption

2.

Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee
on the Admission of
New Members concerning the application of the
Comoros for membership in the United Nations
(S/ 11850)
The meeting

3.

LECOMPT
(France) (interpretation
from
I should like first, Mr. President, to express
to you my congratulations
on your accession to
the presidency of the Council for the month of
October. You are, if I may say so, a model of the
personal division of labour, since you have succeeded
in assuming with considerable mastery, the conducting
of various functions, both economic in the Second
Committee and political as President of the Security
Council.

of the agenda

4. In addition I should like to pay tribute to the
authority, competence and fairness with which you
have prepared for our consideration the items on our
agenda; I should like to say how appreciative
my
delegation is of the links of friendship which unite our
countries and of the disinterested and constructive
activities
which the Swedish delegation has been
making for the benefit of the United Nations.

was called to order at 3.35 p.m.
Adoption

Mr.

French):

agenda (S/Agenda/l848)

1.

1975, at 3 p.m.

cerning the application of the Comoros. The Council
will now consider the Committee’s
report.

Present:
The representatives
of the following
States: Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China,
Costa Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy, Japan,
Mauritania,
Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Cameroon, United Republic of Tanzania and United States of America.
Provisional

17 October

5. I should like also to congratulate and thank your
predecessor, Ambassador El Hassan, who very skilfully and tactfully conducted the work of the Council
during the month of September.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission
of New
Members concerning the application of the Comoros
for membership in the United Nations (S/11850)

6. As Mr. Sauvagnargues,
Minister
for Foreign
Affairs of my country, said in the General’ Assembly;
on 26 September,* France recently consulted the people of the Comoros concerning its future. That people, the great majority of which were in favour of
independence decided through its deputies, without
awaiting the conclusion of the constitutional
process,
to manage its own affairs. The French Government
took note of that and made it known that it was
prepared immediately
to initiate negotiations on the
transfer of authority. The French Government is still
hopeful that an agreement among the Comorians
will make is possible to establish a framework
within which this new State will become responsible
for its own destiny. In this case as in others, Mr. Sauvagnargues concluded, France has remained faithful
to its constant policy of respecting the right of selfdetermination.

1. The PRESIDENT:
The Security Council will now
consider the report of the Committee on the Admission of New Members (S/11850). In paragraph 3 of
its report the Committee
has recommended
that the
Council have recourse to the provisions of the last
paragraph of rule 60 of the provisional rules of
procedure. Given the fact that the ‘thirtieth session
of the General Assembly
is now in progress, I
believe that such a course of action by the Council,
in immediately
making its recommendation
to the
General Assembly, will meet the wishes of all members of the Council. If I hear no objection I shall
take it that the Council decides to waive the timelimit set out in the penultimate paragraph of rule 60.

7. The fact that the Security Council has on its
agenda the item entitled “Admission
of the Comoros
to the United Nations” gives rise to a serious problem for the French delegation,
one which cannot
for the time being be resolved, inasmuch as. the

It was so decided.

2. The PRESIDENT:
In paragraph 4 of its report
the Committee
has recommended
to the Security Council the adoption of a draft resolution con-1

request submitted by the Comoros presents, in our
case, grave difficulties relating to France’s institutional order.

13. This Organization
has witnessed the emergence
of nations whose freedom and independence were
attained in different ways. We have witnessed liberation attained through victory of the people in armed
struggle against their oppressors. We have witnessed
independence
attained following sustained political
struggles. In the past few weeks we have witnessed
the admission to our Organization of nations which
have lived through both of these experiences. Thus,
in the case of Mozambique,
we welcomed a new
Member that had to liberate itself through armed
struggle; whereas, for example, the political struggle
of the people of Papua New Guinea ensured their
birth as a sovereign,
independent
nation. The
Comoros belongs to the latter category. The proclamation
of independence
by the people of the
Comoros on 6 July 1975 represented a logical culmination of the long and persistent struggle of the people
of those islands for self-determination
and independence.

8. Since my Government,
which has set this new
State on the road to independence,
would not like
to see the first steps of the Comoros in international
life give rise to a contradiction
which, in our view,
it would be inappropriate
to bring before this Organization, we do not feel that we can participate in either
the discussion or the voting on this item of the agenda.
9. Although we shall not be participating
in today’s
vote, France would voice the hope that the Comoros
and the international
community
will construe that
attitude as proof of its desire to assist, as soon as
possible, in the adoption of a final solution acceptable. to all the parties concerned.
Negotiations
between the French and the Comorian representatives
have just taken place in Paris. For the time being,
they have been suspended so as to provide both
parties with additional time for reflection.

14. In all cases, what comes out clear is that severance of the links imposed by the colonial Power, or,
if you will, the metropolitan
Power, was achieved as
an expression of the desire of the overwhelming
majority of the people for their independence.
Our
Charter recognizes the attainment of these aspirations.

10. It goes without saying that my country, as it
has always proved in the past, has at all times been
aware of the particular
responsibilities
incumbent
upon it by virtue of the application of the principle
of self-determination.
It likewise
goes without
saying that in this matter France is not seeking any
particular advantage.

15. Thus the United Nations, consistent with its
Charter and faithful to the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
has steadfastly and unequivocally
supported the
struggle of the people of the Comoros for selfdetermination
and independence.
And it was only
logical that the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, elated at the news of the proclamation
of independence by the Comoros, unanimously
considered the declaration of independence as “a logical
fulfilment
of the clearly expressed wishes of the
people of Comoro as manifested in the decisive
results of the popular referendum”.
The Committee
also extended its “support to the people of Comoro
on their achievement
of the goals set forth in the
Declaration and the Charter of the United Nations”.*

11. Mr. SALIM
(United
Republic of Tanzania):
Allow me, Mr. President, to join my French colleague in expressing our particular satisfaction in
seeing you presiding over. the deliberations
of this
important
body. I do so in both my personal and
my official capacity.
As representative
of the
United Republic of Tanzania, it has been a rewarding
experience to work with you, and for me as a person
and an individual,
it has also been a fine experience
to have known you. I need hardly dwell at length
on the excellent relations that prevail between Sweden
and the United Republic of Tanzania. Suffice it to
say that it is a relationship based on friendship and
understanding,
and on respect for each other’s policies and an identity
of views on a number of
subjects.

16. The Assembly of the Heads of State and Government of the Organization
of African Unity, held in
Kampala from 28 July to 1 August 1975 as well as
the Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Non-Aligned
Countries held at Lima from 25 to
30 August 1975, similarly welcomed the independence
of the Comoros.

12. Perhaps it is not much of an accident that you
are presiding over our deliberations at this particular
moment
when yet another
Non-Self-Governing
Territory has acquired its sovereignty and desires to
become a Member of our Organization.
The position
of your Government
and people in the struggle
against colonialism
and racism is well known to us
in Tanzania, and indeed is well known in this Organization. We think, therefore, that you will consider
the particular
application
of the Comoros and its
subsequent
membership
in the Organization
as,
perhaps, one of the rewarding experiences of your
Presidency.

17. In supporting the application
of the Comoro
islands to membership in our Organization,
therefore,
we are in fact echoing not only the wishes of the
people of that new nation, but also the expectations
of the international
community.
At the same time,
we are, I submit, giving further reinforcement
to the
Charter of our Organization.
Obviously,
it is self2

people was clearly reflected in the referendum held
on 22 December 1974, in which 94.56 per cent of the
population voted for independence. That referendum
was held in a particular context and on the clear
understanding that its results would be taken globally
and not on an island-to-island,
or province-toprovince, or for that matter district-to-district,
basis.
That is an important, indeed crucial, point in evaluating
the meaning of the referendum. To the people of the
Comoros, as indeed to us here in the United Nations,
the message was clear and unambiguous: Comoro was
to emerge as a sovereign, independent nation with its
territorial integrity intact.

evident that the Comoros fully qualify for membership
in the United Nations.
18. The United Republic
of Tanzania has consistently supported the struggle of all peoples to
attain their inalienable
right to freedom and inde.pendence. In the case of the Comoros, Tanzania
has spared no effort to render all forms of support
to the Comorian people’s struggle to eliminate the
shackles of colonialism. This position not only has been
maintained out of our own convictions, but has been
pursued in consonance with the Charter of the
Organization
of African Unity, as well as with the
principles and aims of the Charter of this Organization.

23. In that connexion it is significant to recall that
that was also the understanding of the French Government-judging
by the many statements made by that
Government. Here I should like to recall the statement
of the spokesman of the Government
of France on
26 August 1974 to the effect that Comoro would
retain “the frontiers that it had as a colony” and
that for the French Government
“a multiplicity
of
different statuses for the various islands of the
archipelago is inconceivable”.
That was indeed a
positive and responsible position taken by France, a
position that was certainly welcomed by the international community.

19. The United Republic of Tanzania, moreover, has
had the privilege of enjoying close historical and
cultural ties with the people of the Comoros. The
continual contacts between our two peoples and the
fact that our nations are tied by geographical
proximity
has also been a factor, we are happy to
record,
enabling
us better
to understand,
to
sympathize with, and to express fraternal solidarity
with the people of the Comoros in all their efforts
to attain what is sacred to all peoples-their
freedom. That the Comorian people have now attained
that goal opens new possibilities
and horizons not
only for them, but for the international
community
as a whole. We look forward, in this new chapter
of the Comorian people’s history, to yet closer and
eventually
more beneficial collaboration
with the
fraternal African people of the Comoros.

24. More importantly,
I should like to refer to the
pertinent remarks made by the President of France,
Mr. Giscard d’Estaing,
concerning the unity of the
Comoros. The President of the Republic of France
stated on 24 October 1974 during a press conference:

20. That should have been the end of my statement,
for the case of the Comoros’ membership
of this
Organization
does not need too much elucidation.
But, for the purpose of clarity in the light of the
background of this problem, we need to make a few
remarks concerning the status of that new’ nation
and how we in this Organization should view it.

“The Comorian population
is a homogeneous
one, in which there does not exist a settlement of
French origin-or
at least a very limited
one.
Will it be reasonable to imagine one part of the
archipelago becoming independent while one island,
no matter what sentiments we may cherish for its
inhabitants, retains a different status? I believe we
have to accept the contemporary
realities. The
Comoros are one; they have always been one; it is
only natural that they should have acommon destiny,
even if some of them may have wished for another
solution. We have no right, on the occasion of the
independence
of one Territory,
to propose the
breaking up of a unity that has always characterized
the unique Comorian Archipelago.”

21. It may sound rather rhetorical, but it is perhaps
necessary in the present circumstances
to assert
unequivocally
that we are supporting the membership
of the Comoros in the clear knowledge that the
Comoros comprises four islands-namely,
Grande
Comoro, Moheli, Anjouan and Mayotte. Those four
islands are an inseparable entity of the new Comoro
nation, whose membership we are today recommending.
It would, of course, be inconceivable for this Organization to accept anything which tends to question the
unity and territorial
integrity of the Territory.
For
any such attempt at partial or total disruption of the
national unity and territorial integrity of the country
would be in contravention
of the purposes and principles of the Charter, as clearly asserted by the
Declaration
on the Granting of Independence
to
Colonial Countries and Peoples.

25. In the light of that important statement by the
President of the Republic of France and the remarks
made this afternoon by our French colleague, it
is our hope and we are confident that the institutional
problem alluded to by our colleague will soon be surmounted, thus enabling France to join all of us in
welcoming the new State of the Comoros.

22. Any such attempt would also blatantly violate
the wishes of the overwhelming
majority of the people of Comoro. This manifestation
of the will of the

26. In that respect it is ,important
to stress once
again the attachment of the United Nations, like that
of the Organization
of African Unity, to scrupulous
3

resuect for the national unity, territorial
independence of the Comoros.

integrity
. -:

and

Nations we are recommending
‘today,’ is not as yet
independent.&
the eyes of the administering
Power.,
‘
1
33. My delegation would like to reiterate its total
support for the position taken by the Organization
of African Unity and to-declare its resolute opposition
to any manceuvre, from whatever quarter, that is
designed, through the secession of the island of
Mayotte, to.dismember the Comoros. Recently, in his
statement made on 26 September during the thirtieth
session of the General’ Assembly, the head of the
French delegation Stated3 clearly that France had
taken note of the massively expressed will on the part
of the Comorian people to accede to independence.
He reaffirmed also that France remained faithful to
its constant policy of respect for the right of selfdetermination.

.’
27. In conclusion, I would be remiss if I did not avail
myself of this auspicious occasion to salute the
brotherly people of the Comoros and express our
confidence that very soon we shall be working and
collaborating
with the representatives of that, new
State in our Organization.
28.

Mr.

OYONO

Republic of Cameroon)
Mr. President, it is a great
pleasure for me, following the representatives
of
France and the United Republic of Tanzania, to extend
to you my warmest personal congratulations,
as well
as those of my delegation, on the important responsibility
which is now yours as you assume the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October.’ I am gratified at this because you are a
man of feeling, a talented ,diplomat with a wealth of
experience, who does not shy away from obstacles.
We- are convinced that under your enlightened direction the reins of the Council will be in steady hands.
It is a pleasant task for me to assure you of the
entire co-operation of my delegation.

(interpretationfrom

(United

French):

34. We are very mindful of that statement made
by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of France which
corroborates the statement in which the representative of France affirmed that the Comoros was ready
for independence
and that France intended
to
respond faithfully to the aspirations of the Comorian
people. That statement is reproduced in General
Assembly resolution 3291 (XXIX)
of 13 December
1974.

29. I should like to- take this opportunity
also to
pay a brotherly tribute to Ambassador Hassan for the
intelligence
and wisdom he displayed as President
of the Council during the month of September last.

35. For the delegation of the United Republic of
Cameroon, the independence of the Republic of the
Comoros implies respect for that State’s national
unity, territorial
integrity and sovereignty, pursuant
to resolutions adopted by the Organization of African
Unity, the Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs
of Non-Aligned
countries held at Lima, and the
United Nations General Assembly.

30. The delegation of the United Republic of Cameroon is prepared to vote without any hesitation in
favour of the draft resolution
recommending
the
admission of the Comoro Archipelago to the United
Nations. That attitude is the specific embodiment both
of the brotherly feelings of solidarity that the people
of. the United .Republic of Cameroon have :towards
the Comorians and of my Government’s determination
to promote the total liberation of Africa from the
colonial yoke.

36. That is why we appeal to France to respect its
commitments
in the interest of international peace and
security in that part of the world. The administering
Power cannot validly evoke difficulties which only
relate .to the organic functioning
of its institutions
to keep waiting for over 10 months a people desirous
of exercising its full sovereignty ‘as soon as ,possibte,
and securing respect,of its territorial integrity.
.
#.>
37. My ‘delegation considers that, since the application for admission of the Comoros to the United
Nations is in accordance with the conditions
laid
down ;in f4rticle ?,,paragraph
1 of the Charter for a
State to become a Member of the .United Nations,
and since the Government
of the Comoros has
already agreed to assume all the obligations imposed
by the ,Charter on .Member States, it is incumbent
upon the Security Council warmly to welcome the
independence of that country and recognize its rightful place in the United Nations.

31. The act by which the delegation of Cameroon
will cast its vote in favour of ‘the admission of the
Republic of the Comoros to the Organization would
have been for us-and I am sure that this is equally
true of the great family of nations-an
act of unmixed
joy if some serious uncertainties
had not subsisted
to this very day regarding the context in which the
young Republic of the Comoros will assume the full
responsibility
for its destiny.
32. Indeed, the people of the Comoro Archipelago
unanimously
came out in favour of independence on
22 December 1974-that
is, almost 10 months ago;
On 6 July 1975 the Comoro Archipelago became independent,
but the administering
Power-that
is,
France-has
not as yet ratified that event. It follows
that the Republic of the Comoros, which has been a
member of the Organization
of African Unity since
18 July -1975 and whose ,admission to the United

38. We earnestly hope that the French Governmerit,. which has won the praise of the international
community
for its, bold work of decolonization
accomplished
over .the last ‘15 years, will be able :
4

,,

.: .I

this time again to discharge its responsibilities
in the
Comoros , with the dignity and disinterestedness
which are the most noble and honourable marks of
its genius.
39. It is thus with great hope that we invite all
the members of the Security Council and more specifically the French delegation, to vote in favour of
the draft resolution contained in document S/11850,
of 17 October 1975, which recommends the admission
of the Comoros.t? the United Nations.
40. The PRESIDENT:
‘.If no other member of the
Council wishes to speak at this stage, I shall take it
that the Security Council is prepared to prbceed to
the vote on the draft resolution recommended by the
Committee
on the Admission
of New Members
in document S/11850. I
.
41. There seems ,to be no further requests to speak,
at this stage. Accordingly I shall ask members of the
Council to vote now on the draft resolution in paragraph 4 of the Committee’s
report, which relates to
the application
of the Comoros for admission
to
membership of the United Nations.
A vote wus taken by show of hands.
The draft resolution
none.4

was adopted

by 14 votes to

One member, France, did not participate

in the vote.

42. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance
with the
provisions of rule 60 of the provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council, I shall immediately
request the Secretary-General
to forward this recommendation to the General Assembly.
43. At this stage I want to inform the members of
the Security Council that I have received a letter of
17 October, from the representative of Dahomey, in
which he requests to be invited to participate in the
current discussion in the Security Council on the
application
of the Comoros for ‘membership
in the
United Nations.
44. In conformity
with the relevant provisions of
the Charter, that is, Article .31, and in accordance
with rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure,
and the usual practice of the Council, I propose to
invite the representative
of Dahomey to participate
in the Council’s discussion without the right to‘vote.
At the invitation
of the President, Mr. Adjibade
(Dahomey), took the place at reserved for him at the
side of the Council chamber.
45. The PRESIDENT:
A number.of members of the
Council have asked to speak following the voting.

._

:.I

.._

46. Mr.
HUANG
(China)
(translation
from
Chinese): On 6 July 1975, the Comoro Islands
proclaimed
its independence.
This is an important
achievement
of the people of the Comoros and the
whole of Africa, who have long persisted in the
struggle against imperialism
and colonialism and for
national liberation and independence.
The Chinese
Government
and people warmly, greet the independence of the Comoros islands. The Chinese
Government
already declared its recognition of the
Comoros islands on 12 July.
47. On 29 September the Comoros islands formally
applied for admission to membership in the United
Nations.
The Chinese delegation
holds that in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
bf the United
Nations the Comoros islands are
qualified for membership
in the United Nations.
Therefore,, we fully support its application and consider it entirely proper for the Security Council to
recommend to the General Assembly the admission
of the Comoros islands to membership in the United
Nations.
48. We sincerely wish the Comorian people continuous new successes in their struggle against
imperialism
and coldnialism
and for the defence of
national indepe,ndence and territorial
integrity.
We
believe that upon admission to membership
in the
United
Nations,
the Comoros islands will ‘make
positive contributions to the realization of the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
together with all other justice-upholding
Member
States.
49. Mr, MOYNIHAN
(United States of America):
Mr. President, I should like to begin, as have so
many of my distinguished
colleagues, by congratulating you on your succession to the presidency of
the Council in what promises to be an eventful
month and which, I know, will be one marked by
your own distinctive
form of peaceableness and
constructive dialogue. And I should like to express,
what I know many feel, appreciation
for the fine
leadership. we had under Ambassador
El Hassen
in the preceding month.
50. The Security Council has met today to consider
the application of the Comoros islands for membership in the United
Nations.
The United
States
Government has followed closely the evolution of selfdetermination
in the Comoros. And in that connexion,
we recognize the important
role which has been
played in, that process.by France. We hope that the
reasons for France’s inability to sponsor Comorian
membership’
will soon be overcome, and that the
two will enjoy good relations.
51. The United States was pleased to vote for the
admission to the United Nations of the Comoros,
beautiful
islands whose rich volcanic soil is so
productive
of the fruits of the earth, and whose

location
at a crossroads of the Indian
Ocean
has brought the islands cultural diversity and richness. We extend the Comoros a warm welcome and
all good wishes as they take on the duties and
’ privileges of membership in the United Nations.

as manifested by an overwhelming’
majority in the
referendum held last December. Today my delegation
responded to the aspirations of the people of the
Comoros by supporting their application for membership in the United Nations.

52. Mr.. THOMAS
(United Kingdom):
Mr. President, on behalf of. my delegation may I say what a
pleasure it gives us to serve on this Council under your
wise Presidency. May I also say how much my delegation appreciated the skill with which your distinguished predecessor, the Ambassador of Mauritania, guided our work in September.

58. It is a matter of gratification to my delegation
that the Security Council approved the resolution and
expressed its complete confidence that the applicant
is fully qualified for membership
under the United
Nations Charter. My delegation had wanted to see the
‘Comoros’ application approved unanimously, and now
my delegation
is looking
forward to unanimous
acceptance by the General Assembly of the Council’s
recommendation.

53. My delegation voted in favour of the resolution
in which this Council has recommended
the admission of the Comoros to the United Nations. It is
always pleasant to welcome a new Member, and I
do so today. We have watched with understanding
the progress of the Comoros towards independence.
The joint declaration of the French and Comorian
Governments.on
June 1973 on the Comoros’ accession to independence,
the law of November
1974
concerning the organization of a referendum in the
islands, and the referendum itself, which took place
in December of that year, all marked important steps
in the process of peaceful decolonization;
and we
welcome that process. My delegation has listened
with understanding
and respect to the admirably
clear statement made today by the representative of
France.

59. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation
from Russiun): First of all,
may I congratulate
you, Sir, on assuming the
responsible post you occupy and wish you success
in the activities connected therewith.
May I also
convey our gratitude to your predecessor in this
post, the Permanent
Representative
of Mauritania,
Ambassador El Hassen, under whose guidance the
Security Council held a number of important meetings
last month.
60. Since the Security Council is today considering
the question of the admission of new Members to the
United Nations, we can only express regret that last
month, for a well-known and artificial reason, the
Security Council was unable to take a decision on
the question of the admission of the Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam
and the Republic of South
Viet-Nam to membership of the United Nations.

54. We are glad to welcome to this Organization
a
new Member which has links not only with Africa
but with its sister island Territories
in the Indian
Ocean. In this connexion, I should like, if I may, to
mention that my delegation expects the Comoros’ to
be joined in independence next year by the Seychelles,
which has just obtained full internal self-government.

61. The delegation of the Soviet Union is pleased
to support the recommendation
of the Security
Council on the admission of the Comoros to United
Nations membership.
The admission of a new State
Member to our Organization
is always a welcome
event, since whenever this occurs the United Nations
is in effect taking a new step towards the achievement of the principle of universality, which is one of
the most important features in the effectiveness of
this Organization.

55. The leaders of the Comoros face many important
tasks, not the least of which is economic development. I am sure, that in this task, the Comoros
will have the support both of the international community and of the specialized agencies of the United
Nations.
56. Mr. KANAZAWA
(Japan): Mr. President, first
of all may I congratulate you on your assumption
of the high office of President of the Security Council for the month of October. It is my personal
pleasure to present my congratulations
to you since
I have been sitting in the Second Committee,
which
has been so ably and successfully presided over by
you. We are confident that your distinguished qualities and wealth of experience will enable you to guide
the Council to constructive
achievements.
May I
also take this opportunity
to express my sincere
appreciation to Ambassador El Hassen of Mauritania
for his outstanding service as President last month.

62. The attainment of independence by the people
of the Comoro islands is a new and important stage
in the process of the final downfall of colonialism.
Both in the Security Council and in the General
Assembly, we have on many occasions emphasized
that one of the principles in the foreign policy of
the Soviet Union is its consistent and resolute struggle
for the speedy removal of the vestiges of the colonial
system and the giving of comprehensive
support to
those peoples which are struggling for their independence and national liberation.
63. It is noteworthy that this year, at a time when
we are celebrating the fifteenth anniversary of the
historic United Nations Declaration on the Granting

57. My delegation welcomed the expressed desire
of the people of the Comoros for independence
6

of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples
-of
which our country was the iniator-United
Nations membership has already been enriched by a
fifth State which has emerged in the place of former
colonies. ,Thus, the resolution adopted by the Security Council further goes to prove that the process
of the abolition of the colonial system is moving
towards a successful ,culmination.
64. In, voting for the admission of the Comoros to
membership in the United Nations, the Soviet delegation has taken due note that that country’s appli-cation fully meets the requirements
of the United
Nations Charter, and we voice the hope that this new
Member of our Organization
will make a worthy
contribution
to this Organization’s
activities.
65. I should like to take this opportunity,
on behalf
of my delegation, once again heartily to congratulate
the Comoros on achieving independence and to wish
the people of that country every success in strength-.
ening their national unity and their territorial integrity,
and in raising the standard of their well-being.
66.

Mr. SALAZAR (Cos.ta Rica) (interpretation
from
Mr. President, my delegation would ‘like
to.place on record its pleasure at seeing you, a worthy
representative
of a nation with which Costa Rica
maintains close links of friendship, presiding over the
meetings of the Security Council this month. We hope
that the successes promised by your intelligence
and fine sense of diplomacy
will be achieved. In
Costa Rica we admire the political and social system
of Sweden, which skilfully combines two great aspirations of contemporary
man: respect for his human
dignity and his right to enjoy, on an equal footing,
the fruits of the work of society as a whole so as to
satisfy adequately all his social requirements. In many
respects my country has a deep admiration for your
country. Our admiration was just recently made clear
during the visit to Sweden last month by the President
of Costa Rica, Mr. Daniel Oduber, as a guest of Prime
Minister Oiaf Palme.

Spanish):

67. 1 should like to take this opportunity
to pay a
tribute to Ambassador El.Hassen of Mauritania for the
brilliant
way in which he discharged the difficult
duties of President of the Council during the past
month of September.
68. With regard to the item before us, my delegation
would ,like to express our satisfaction at having contributed, by our -vote, to the adoption of the Council
resolution
recommending
the admission
of the
Comoros, a new nation which has recently emerged
to independent life.
69. With the gradual disappearance
of all forms
of colonial domination,
the United Nations has come
closer to the ideal of universality.
This trend has
always met with enthusiastic and militant co-operation on the part of my country because we believe

that as the scope of universality
is. expanded so is
strengthened the commitment
of all States, under.the
Charkr of the United Nations, to find forms,of international coexistence, safeguarding peace and security
in the world under the rules and procedures,of
the
Charter.
70. We should like to reiterate the’,fact that our
concept of universality is as br.oad as permitted by the
Charter. In other words, the basis pf our .opinion
is the principle.that
every independent and sovereign
State has the right to be admitted as a ,Member
whenever it agrees to respect and,abide by the obligations flowing from the Charter. .We find therefore,
that the time has passed’ when, in ‘considering any
request for admission,.
political
or 1. ideological
judgements can be. allowed td prevent the entry. of
a given State.
71. Our position has been made clear in the Co&:
cil and in the General Assembly. ‘We are filled with
happiness at the admission of every new State.which
desires to join the international
community
in the
United Nations. We rejoice again today because the
Council has agreed to recommend the admission of
the Comoros, a nation to which we extend our good
wishes for a successful future.
72. Mr. JACKSON (Guyana): Mr. President, the contribution of Sweden towards the progressive development of an international
society based o.n the
principles
of freedom,
equality,
justice and the
independence of peoples everywhere have long been
applauded.
Coming from such a background,
Sir,
we have a right to expect.from you a s&t upholding
of those principles. In the discharge :of your responsibilities as representative of Sweden in this Council,
and more recently during this month as our President,
Guyana has come to appreciate the personal activism
and commitment
which you .have brought to your
task. It is thus with great pleasure that we see you
occupying the chair ‘today and we look forward to
serving under your presidency for the remainder of
this month.
May I also take this opportunity,
Mr. President, to express on my own and my delegation’s behalf our gratitude to your predecessor,
Ambassador El Hassen of Mauritania,’ for the very
skilful and amiable ‘way in which he guided our
deliberations,
both formal and informal, during- the
month of September.
I.
73. This has on ‘the whole been, a good year for
those who valu,e the provisions.of General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV) and earnestly pursue the goal
of universality of membership in the ‘United Nations;
We have’ seen Cape Verde, ‘Mozambique,:
and .Sao
Tome and Principe take their pfaces as Members
of this Organization,
‘We have recently welcomed
Papua New Guinea to membership and we have now
taken the penultimate
step leading to the admission
of the Comoros to membership of the United Nations.
The one and only blot on the record, of the Council

‘,

of late in this regard has been its inability to recommend the two States in Viet-Nam ‘for membershin.
However, the responsibility
for this cannot be placed
on most of the membersof
this Council.- Indeed
it is only one Member, the United States of America,
which .has adopted an intransigent and illogical position in this matter. The serenity, the dignity, and the
feeling for history with which the two Viet-Nams
have reacted to. the ,imperious American veto confirms
us in ‘our knowledge
that ,right and .:justice., will
prevail and that in ‘time the Republic of South VietNam and the Democratic
Republic
of Viet-Nam
will take-their rightful places,@ this Organization.
,74. It wa’s on 6 July ‘1975 -that, in an act ‘of
courage and boldness, the leaders of the Comorian
people declared. thsit country’s independence
from
France. One week later the Government
of Guyana
announced its ;decision to accord recognition to the
Comoros. The Government
of Guyana said at that
time:
i
..;
.
‘ ‘,.
i -1’The decision to accord recognition is in keeping
with,. the Guyana Government’s
commitment
to the
,strugglg against all forms of colonialism as well as
.with its policy of support for the attendant right
of peoples still under colonial domination to govern
~..themselves and to be masters of their own destiny.“.
,, ,.
.i;
*
?.
,
75.3, My .delegation,
therefore, welcomes the decision .of the Comoros Government
to apply for
membership
of the United Nations, and we were
indeed happy to vote in favour of the resolution,
recommending
that membership
to the General
Assembly? which this’ Council
has
just
‘adopted.
:
76. The road to independence for ‘the people of the
Comoros has been a long and tortuous one. In their
maich‘along that road, the people of the Comoros have
had the support of the United ,Nations. which played
an important role in ensuring that their right to selfdetermination
and independence would be recognized
by the erstwhile metropolitan
Power. It is possible
that the United Nations may still’ have a role to
play,: however, in ensuring that the exercise of that
right by the people of the Comoros is fully respected
by all Members of the ‘United Nations for there
are noises’eabroad which give rise to anxieties about
the’ preservation of the unity and territorial integrity
of the Comoros.
“.
77. Guyana notes that in the letter of 29 September
from the President of the National Executive Council and Head of State of the Comoros, ,it is pointed out
that on 22 .December .1974 the. population
of the
Comoros Archipelago, that is the territory as a whole,
declared themselves ’ overwhelmingly,
in favour, of
independence by 94.56 per,,cent of the votes cast, and
that,93 per cent of those eligible took part in the vote.
:

.

.._

*.,

78. Guyana also notes that the Chamber of Deputies
of the Comoros is concerned lest the French Parliament

introduce further delays and impose new conditions
which will .compromise
their independence.
The
feeling of the Government of the Comoros clearly is
that an attempt might still be ‘made to tamper with
the territorial integrity of the Comoros,..My delegation
has listened with keen interest to.the statement made
by the representative
of France in explaining
the
decision of his delegation not to ,participate in. the
.vote recommending..the
Comoros for membership
of the .United Nations. We have noted from the
statement that the consultations
which have been
taking place in Paris have temporarily come to a halt,.
but we have; also -noted his statement on the oonstitutional position of France in relation to this question.
Guyana wishes to affirm its belief, nevertheless, that
the .people of the Comoros
have resoundingly
declared their desire to be an independent and unified
State with its territorial integrity preserved intact.
.1_ ’ , ‘.
79. It will ,be recalled .that in.,its resolution;3291
(XXIX). of 13 December 1974 the ,General .Assembly
had taken note of the statement by the Government
of France that the consultations and the independence
of the Comoros archipelago .would be organized on
an archipelago-wide
basis and that France intended
to respond faithfully to, the aspirations of the Comorian people,, My, delegation expects .that that clear
and proper position will be honoured, and would
only wish to state at this stage that it should, be
clearly understood. Any attempt at dismemberment
of the State would be totally unacceptable.
:
80.. Mr. VINCI (.Italy): Mr. President, I should like,
first of, all, to express to you the congratulations
and best wishes of the Italian delegation on your
presidency during the present month of October. We
have the fullest confidence in you, Sir, knowing very
well, from long association with your, constructive
work in several bodies of the United Nations, all
your outstanding professional and personal qualities.
You have shown -them again in the first consultation
that we had under your enlightened guidance. I wish
to assure you of our full co-operation.
% i
81.1 ,I should also like to associate &-&ii with the
well-deserved thanks and congratulations
that have
been conveyed to your ,predecessor,’ Ambassador
El Hassen ,of Mauritania.
Ambassador El Hassen,. in
fact, brilliantly presided over.our meetings during the
month of .September when this Council met to ,deal
with items which raised seine problems.
We. are
sincerely indebted
to him for.. the fairness and
objectivity
which he I demonstrated
throughout
till
-,
those meetings.
’ .. ‘;,
‘:
.. .

,I.,_

;,

82.., Having cast ‘the positive ivote of Italy on the
resolution recommending
to the General Assembly the
admission. of the Comoros to the Organization of the
United Nations, I <wish to express a cordial and
friendly welcome to the people and Government
of
those i.slands.. The’ Comoros,. by / their particular
geographic location, have been in the long run of
8 .;

_.
‘,;.

.e.;.
..

:

.:

..A!,’

-/
j,.

,.
I_

‘.

history at the crossroads of various civilisations.
The
African soul’ and the ftiith of Islam form the core
of the nation, creating an original culture which
constitutes a very special and valuable heritage of
the .Comorian people.

various forums of the United Nations, the right of the
people of the Comoros to self-determination
and
independence,
but is rooted much deeper. Iraq
believes that it has special historical links with the
people of the Comoros.
Our common
Islamic
heritage is yet another element in the ties between
our two peoples.

83., In recent years we have witnessed the rise of
many new young States on ,the international
scene.
Their concern for the cause of progress, peace and
justice has been most valuable, and we are looking
forward with’ confidence to an equal contribution
from the Comoros to our common cause,. to the
achievement of the goals for which our Organization
was founded 30 years ago.

89. The Iraqi delegation has expressed ‘its unequivocal support for the aspirations of the Comoran .people.
and strongly called for the speedy.realization
of their
right to freedom and independence. The national unity
of the people of the Comoros was emphasized during
the debates held in the Special Committee and in the;
Fourth Committee.
It was considered as one of the
essential responsibilities
of the administering
Power.

84. My delegation wishes to express at the same time
its appreciation. for the assistance that France has
given to the new Comorian State and for its stated
will to respect the right of self-determination
of
those people. I can understand, as the representative
of a democratic society which is guided by the rule
of law and its own democratic ‘constitution,
some of
the legal difficulties with which the French Government
is confronted and the scrupulous way in which it is
trying to overcome those difficulties. We are confident
that France will once again act in accordance with
its ,great democratic tradition, remaining faithful to its
vocation and dedication to the ideals of freedom and
,’
independence.
<
85. We trust, ,therefore, that France and the Comoros will be able to find the best way out of the
problems-minor
legal ‘problems,
as we understand
from the statement which was made to us- by the
representative
of France-which
are still pending,
and that the Comoros will therefore soon be in a
position to enjoy its full status as an independent,
sovereign and democratic Member of the international
community.’

90. My delegation would like to reiterate its support for the Government of the Comoros in its efforts
to maintain the territorial integrity and national unity
of its country. We have great confidence in its ability
to administer
the affairs of the new independent
State. We believe that in joining the United Nations
the Comoros will spare no effort in taking part in
the endeavours of Member
States in building
a
new world where justice ,and equality will form the
basis for our cooperation.
,My delegationis
looking
forward to co-operating with the Comorian representatives in the United Nations as well as within the
sphere of Afro-Arab co-operation.
” ,
91. Finally, I should like to convey to the, Govemment and people of the Comoros the .best .‘wishes
of the people and Government
of Iraq, and to wish
them progress and prosperity.
.,
‘.
92. Mr. TCHERNOUCHTCHENKO
(Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist Republic) (interpretation
from RUS-.
sian): Mr. President, may I, on behalf of the Byelorussian delegation sincerely congratulate you on your
assumption of the responsible post of President of the
Security Council, and may I also .wish you success
in discharging
the responsible
functions
thus
entrusted to you. We should also like to express
our gratitude to the representative
of, Mauritania,
Ambassador El. Hassen, for his skilful’ guidance of
the work of the Security Council last month.
.i
1
93. The delegation of the Byelorussian
SSR was
pleased to vote in favour of the resolution, just’
adopted by the Council which con&ins a recommendation to the General’ Assembly to ‘admit a new
independent
and sovereign
State, the
Comoros
Islands, to membership
of the United Nations. .The
application of that State for membership of the United
Nations meets all the provisions laid down in Article 4
of the Charter., The proclamation
of independence
of the Comoros was the result, first and foremost,.
of the stubborn .and .constant struggle to rid themselves of colonial dependence which has been waged

86. Mr. AL-SHAIKHLY
(Iraq): Mr. President, I
should like to join the other members-of the Council
in extending
to you our ‘warmes congratulations
on your ,assumption of the presidency of the Council. We are fully confident that under your guidance
the Council will fulfil its :duties in the best possible
manner. I should also like to convey to my brother,
Ambassador Moulaye El .Hassen of Mauritania,.our
deep appreciation for the excellent’way
in which he
presided over the deliberations
of the ‘Council during
the month of,September.
87. The Council has witnessed -this year the admission of a number of States. This represents an
important
step towards the universality
of this
OrganiTation and enhances peace and security in the
world. It is therefore a source ‘of pleasure for us
that the Council has recommended the admission of the
Comoros
. ._to membership of *Ithe ,, United Nations.’
88. Our joy at this decision stems not only from
the fact that Iraq has’consistently’.supported,
in the
9

for many years by the national
the Comoros.

liberation

forces in

100. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of Mauritania for the kind words he addressed
to me.

94. At the same time there should be pointed out
the role which has been played by the United Nations,
particularly
the Special Committee
which made its
own useful contribution
to the cause of the people
of the Comoros islands in achieving the goals set
.forth in the Declaration on decolonization
and in the
United Nations Charter.

101. I should like now to make a brief statement
in my capacity as representative of SWEDEN.
102. Today,.we once again, have on our agenda an
application for membership by a newly independent
country, now leaving colonial status. The question
of the Comores has now for some two years been
on the agenda of the General Assembly. Last year,
in a consensus decision, the Assembly reaffirmed
the inalienable right of the people of the Comoros to
self-determination
and independence and the unity and
territorial
integrity of the Comoros. It is therefore
an entirely logical step that the Comoros should this
year enter the United Nations as a new Member.
My delegation has found the application for membership in full accordance with the requirements of the
Charter and has therefore supported with pleasure
the resolution containing the recommendation
of the
Security Council to the General Assembly to admit
the Comoros as a Member of the United Nations.

95. The delegation
of the Byelorussian
Soviet
Socialist Republic would like to take this opportunity
to convey to the people of the Comoros their genuine
and sincere congratulations
on this important event
and to wish them all success in the building of a new
life of social and economic progress.
96. Mr. EL HASSEN
(Mauritania)
(interpretation
from French): Mr. President, my first.words will be
to express to you our congratulations
as you take up
the task of President of the Security Council. We
know that your talents, your diplomatic
ability,
courtesy and firmness will make it possible for you
to guide our work constructively.
I should like also to
express my thanks for the very kind words addressed
to me. I should like also to thank the other members
of the Council for the courtesy and friendship which
they extended to me in their statements and for their
co-operation
and understanding
during the month
in which I discharged the duties of President of this
Council.

103. The admission
of the Comoros will mark
another step towards the realization of the desired
universality of the United Nations. In that context,
my delegation expresses the hope that the problems
remaining between the Comoros and France will find
a negotiated solution in the near future.
104. Sweden will cordially welcome the delegation
of the Comoros to the United Nations. The Swedish
delegation
looks forward to co-operating
closely
with it in the future, in the conviction
that the
Comoros will make an essential contribution
to the
work of the United Nations.

97. The delegation of Mauritania was very pleased
to give its support to the decision taken by the
Security Council recommending
the admission of the
Comoros to the United Nations. Our satisfaction is
the deeper because we have followed with attention
the political
evolution
in the archipelago
of the
Comoros and we had hoped for this result. The
result achieved today by the Comorian people is a
source of deep pleasure to us because that people
has achieved its independence
in peace and, we
hope, understanding
with the administering
Power,
France, on the basis of scrupulous respect for the
national unity and territorial integrity of the Comoros.

105. The next speaker is the representative
of
Dahomey,
and in my capacity as PRESIDENT,
I now invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
-106. Mr. ADJIBADE
(Dahomey)
(interpretation
from French): Mr. President, I should like to cdngratulate you as you take up your task as President
of the Council for this month. Your personal qualities
and your tact in dealing with the problems of our
Organization assure us that under your guidance the
Security Council will be able to make progress. The
decision just taken by the Council is a clear demonstration of that belief.

98. Our satisfaction is justified also by the fact
that the accession to independence of the Comoros is
occurring
within the process of decolonization,
a process which we hope will be pursued and accelerated daily. The decision just taken by the Security
Council, which will I am sure be ratified by the
General Assembly, expands the African family and
at the same time brings our Organization
closer to
its ideal of universality.

107. I should like very sincerely to thank you,
and through you all members of the Council, for
having given me the opportunity
to speak at this
time in the Council’s discussion, as Chairman of
the group of African States for the month of October
and as the representative of the Revolutionary
Military
Government of Dahomey.

99. In conclusion
I should like to express our
heartfelt wishes for success to the Government
and
people of the Comoros and to assure them of Mauritania’s complete support in the achievement of their
national independence and territorial integrity.
10

108. The decision just taken by the Council is of
particular
importance
to Africa and the Group ‘of
African States as a whole. The entire group of African
States is pleased that the Council has taken such
a decision. Following its meeting on 16 October,
the group, of which I have the honour of being
Chairman, issued the following press release:

112. The group chooses rather to believe that France;
a friend and a champion of decolonization
remains
convinced of the necessity to move with the trend
of history and to respond to the true aspirations
of the people of the Comoros.
113. The group would not wish to see, in the position taken by France, an expression of any desire to
mameuvre, in the future, in the Archipelago of the
Comoros, where governments
could be made and
unmade, or indeed, of any encouragement,
intentional
or unintentional,
to any urge for secession. We prefer
to regard the non-participation
of France as indicating
that France is not opposing the independence of the
Comoros as an entity, one and indivisible,
in accordance with the official statements made by various
high authorities of France for the global independence
of the archipelago of Comoros.

“ 1. In accordance
with resolution
CM/421
adopted by the Twelfth Conference of Heads of
State and Government,
the group of African States
expresses its full support for the request for
admission of the Comoros to the United Nations.
“2. The group states that it will do all within its
power to ensure the admission as a Member of the
United Nations of the Comoros, with the territorial
integrity
of the archipelago,
including
the four
islands composing
the colony of the Comoros,
without delay.

114. We regret the fact that the Council has recommended the admission of the Comoros without the
participation
and effective support of France. However, the group none the less regards the French
position as positive inasmuch as that country .did not
feel obliged to use its right of veto and abstained
from creating another deadlock that could only be
condemned by the international
community.
By its
gesture, France has thus lived up to its traditions
and is deserving
of congratulations
for having
responded, in one way or another, to the appeal of
the group.

“3. In that context, the group believes that it is
imperative
for the French Republic,
the former
administering
Power, to abstain from any action,
gesture or statement
which might ‘compromise
the independence and the territorial integrity of the
archipelago of the Comoros.
“4. The group has given a mandate to its
representatives
to the Security Council to follow
this question with close attention and to report to
it in due course.”

115. The group expresses its appreciation
to all
members of the Council, without whose co-operation
the decision you have just taken would not have been
taken. The whole of Africa appreciates the full worth
of this action.

109. Having heard the position taken by my group
the Council will understand that the important decision
it has just taken gives us deep joy, despite the fact
that some shadows still exist because of the nonparticipation
of France. By this recommendation
the
United Nations marks a step further towards achieving
that universality
which. is a prerequisite
for true
international
peace and security.

116.. In conclusion,
I should like to congratulate
our brothers of the Comoros on their admission and
on the co-operation
they will very soon be giving
to the United Nations in general and to the group
of African States in particular.

110. The group finds in the Council’s decision a
gesture of conciliation
by France, whose reputation
concerning decolonization
is well known. It also
demonstrates an attitude consistent with the motto,
LihertP,

EgalitP,

The meeting

rose at 4.55 p.m.

FraternitP.
Notes

111. The group would like to believe that the fact
that France did not participate
in the discussion
and the vote on the admission of the Comoros to the
United Nations is due to, and can be explained
solely by administrative
or institutional
difficulties,
and that those difficulties will soon disappear.

’ Official
Records
of the General
Assemblv. _ Thirtieth
Session.
P/en&
meetings,
2364th meeting.
2 See Official
Records
of the General
Assemblv,
Thirtieth
Session,
S&plement
No. 23;vol.
II, chap. XII, para. 6 (4).
’ Official
Records
of the General
Assembly.
Thirtieth
Session,
Plenary
meetings,
2364th meeting.

4 See resolution 376 (1975).

11

*.c
_,;

!

.:

.,.

..

:::

i
,..

:..

,:’
:

‘.

‘.
i..

;

_’

I.

.,
‘i

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United Nations
‘wodc$,Consult
COtitiENT

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

publications
may be obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
your bookstore
or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UMES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les libtairies et ies agences depositaires du
monde entier. lnformcz-vous
aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
A : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Get&e.

:

3

COMO

bONSECUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas esdn en venta en lib&as
todas panes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Nacidnes
Nueva York o Ginebra.

UNIDAS
p casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas, Seccibn de Ventas,
.

‘/

Litho

in United

Nations.

New York

00300

82-61202-November

1983-2.200
