A /76/PV.61

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-sixth session

61st plenary meeting

Tuesday, 15 March 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Shahid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Maldives)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: I now invite the attention of the
General Assembly to draft resolution A/76/L.40,
circulated under agenda item 29, entitled “Advancement
of women”. Members will recall that the General
Assembly concluded its consideration of agenda item
29 at its 53rd plenary meeting, on 16 December 2021.
In order for the Assembly to take action on the draft
resolution, it will be necessary to reopen consideration
of agenda item 29.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen its consideration of agenda item 29?
It was so decided.
The President: Members will also recall that at
its 2nd plenary meeting, on 17 September 2021, the
General Assembly decided to allocate agenda item 29
to the Third Committee. To enable the Assembly to
take action expeditiously on draft resolution A/76/L.40,
may I take it that the Assembly wishes to consider
agenda item 29 directly in plenary meeting and proceed
immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided (decision 76/506 B).

Agenda item 29 (continued)
Advancement of women
Draft resolution A/76/L.40
The President: The General Assembly will now
resume its consideration of agenda item 29, to take
action on draft resolution A/76/L.40. I give the floor
to the representative of Nigeria to introduce the draft
resolution on behalf of the Group of African States.
Mr. Muhammad Bande (Nigeria): I have the
honour to introduce draft resolution A/76/L.40, entitled
“Addressing the situation of widows”, on behalf of the
Group of African States.
Let me begin by thanking all colleagues for their
support, constructive engagement and flexibility
during the negotiations. It has been a very interesting
experience. I would like to share some insights and
perspectives on the issue of widowhood and the
rationale for the draft resolution.
The practice of harmful widow rites and rituals is
one of the complex problems that women — in countries
on other continents as well as in Africa — currently
contend with. Depending on the social status of a
widow at the time of her husband’s death, a recently
widowed woman may become economically vulnerable
and suffer undue hardship. Most of the harmful
practices involving widows are essentially another
aspect of violence against women. They are rooted
in cultural and traditional practices, as well as the
socialization processes that subject women to passivity
and dependence.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-28936 (E)

*2228936*

A/76/PV.61

The draft resolution therefore acknowledges the
additional harm and human rights violations that may
result from a woman becoming widowed and seeks
to mainstream recognition of their vulnerabilities
and marginalization within the United Nations
system. To that end, the draft resolution recalls
existing international obligations that Member States
have committed to upholding by acknowledging
the violations of their rights that widows suffer,
such as disinheritance, harmful cultural practices,
discrimination and the effects that they have on
widows. As we speak, many countries across the globe
continue to contend with record levels of insecurity and
conflict in addition to the current coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, making the draft resolution
incredibly timely, since the number of widows who are
at risk of human rights violations is growing, owing to
beliefs related to gender inequality that hinder their full
enjoyment of those rights.
In that regard, the draft resolution seeks to
concretize and expand on the commitments made in
resolution 65/189, adopted in 2010, which recognized
23 June as International Widows Day. The resolution
was aimed at providing Member States with specific
and actionable steps to raise awareness of, mainstream,
legitimize and protect the rights of widows within
the United Nations system and at home. Despite that,
since that resolution’s adoption there have been no
coordinated efforts to address the situation of widows or
violations of their human rights. The lack of information
on the issue has compelled Secretary-General António
Guterres to call for quality data, disaggregated by age,
sex and disability, to ensure that widows are counted
and supported now and in future.
In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is
imperative to ensure that widows receive attention
from the international community if their particular
problems are to be addressed. That will be a step
towards closing the gap in our collective understanding
of progress on our goal of gender equality, the
empowerment of women, the achievement of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the inclusion
of a group that is routinely left on the margins of
development programming.
The African Group is conscious of the fact that
many of these issues were previously unknown to most
members, and we are grateful for the openness and
constructive engagement they showed with regard to the
issue during the informal consultations. Our efforts to
2/22

15/03/2022

achieve gender equality and women’s empowerment will
be woefully wanting if we do not address issues related
to widowhood, particularly harmful practices such as
grave violations of human rights, disinheritance and the
institutional discrimination that limits widows’ ability
to access justice, decent work and social protections.
I would like to thank UN-Women and the Global
Fund for Widows for their support and collaboration.
Their encouragement throughout the process is very
much appreciated. I am therefore deeply grateful to the
delegations that have sponsored the draft resolution and
call on those that have yet to do so to become sponsors
before its adoption.
Yesterday the sixty-sixth session of the Commission
on the Status of Women opened with pomp and pageantry.
Women from all over the world gathered here in New
York to once again add their voices to the promotion of
gender equality and the empowerment of women and
to efforts to advance them. Today’s adoption of draft
resolution A/76/L.40 by consensus will ultimately be
a fitting tribute and the best gift we can all give to our
women. Let us fight against bias, discrimination and
stereotypes. However diverse we may look, let us work
for a more inclusive and equitable society. Let us stand
up for our women by taking action on gender equality
and women’s empowerment so that we can collectively
eradicate all harmful practices involving widows. Let
me therefore invite delegations to support the draft
resolution by joining the consensus.
The President: The Assembly will now take action
on draft resolution A/76/L.40, entitled “Addressing the
situation of widows”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. Sharma (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution and in
addition to the delegations listed in the document, the
following countries have also become sponsors of draft
resolution A/76/L.40: Angola, Bangladesh, Brazil,
Burundi, China, India, Maldives, Pakistan, Thailand,
Trinidad and Tobago and the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/76/L.40?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 76/252).

A/76/L.40

was

adopted

22-28936

15/03/2022

The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of position after adoption, I would like
to remind the Assembly that statements are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
I call on the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Ghadirkhomi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
The Islamic Republic of Iran is dedicated to removing
the barriers that are obstacles to women and girls’
full enjoyment of their human rights, and that applies
particularly to women, including widows, in vulnerable
situations. The empowerment of women and girls,
particularly widows, is a high priority on the economic,
legislative and political agenda of the Islamic Republic
of Iran. In that regard, the Government has established
several programmes addressing women`s rights in the
light of the coronavirus disease pandemic, including by
providing health-care and financial assistance packages
such as cash transfers or relief loans to female heads of
households, including widows. During the pandemic the
Government has also supported home-based businesses
launched by female heads of households.
With regard to resolution 76/252, on addressing the
situation of widows, we would like to further clarify
that the Islamic Republic of Iran recognizes and takes
into consideration the provisions of the resolution
only insofar as they accord with its national priorities,
regulations, legislation and policies, as well as Islamic
principles, instruction and teachings and the religious
norms, traditions and values of Iranian society.
The President: We have heard the only speaker
in explanation of position after adoption. We will now
hear statements after the adoption of the resolution.
Mr. Turay (Sierra Leone): Sierra Leone aligns
itself with the statement made by the representative
of Nigeria on behalf of the Group of African States,
and I would like to add the following remarks in my
national capacity.
Sierra Leone is profoundly grateful to the African
Group for embracing this initiative when it was first
introduced to the Group in July 2021. I am pleased
to say that since then our engagement on the issue
has been positive and constructive. Sierra Leone
has been a torchbearer for it, and we will continue
to stand steadfastly with the many delegations that
have responded similarly, as well as all those joining

A/76/PV.61

the consensus on this ground-breaking resolution
(resolution 76/252).
As Sierra Leon commemorates the more than two
decades that have elapsed since our civil war ended, it
is regrettable that we have to note that the combination
of our country’s 10-year conflict, the Ebola epidemic
we experienced from 2014 to 2015 and the current
coronavirus disease pandemic has created countless
widows. The adoption of resolution 76/252 is therefore
an opportunity for us to show global solidarity and
cooperation in addressing the plight of widows. Based
on our interaction with the Global Fund for Widows,
my delegation acknowledges that one major concern
surrounding the issue has been a dearth of accurate
data. If that lack of information is not addressed after
today’s adoption of this resolution, it will prevent us, the
international community, from adequately addressing
the unique needs and human rights challenges that
widows face in the areas of sustainable development,
programming, policymaking and, of course, human
rights and gender equality. The resolution calls for
collective efforts to leave no one behind and envisions
widows as powerful actors in our communities
and countries.
In conclusion, by adopting resolution 76/252
today, we are reaffirming our shared values and our
commitment to a more gender-equal world, addressing
critical gaps in policy and practice to achieve gender
equality and the Sustainable Development Goals,
particularly where the plight of widows is concerned, as
well as reaffirming our promise to leave no one behind.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the Holy See.
Monsignor Murphy (Holy See): The Holy See
congratulates the Group of African States on the
adoption of resolution 76/252, “Addressing the situation
of widows”. My delegation is grateful to the facilitator,
Mr. Nnamdi Nze, of the Permanent Mission of Nigeria,
for his efforts in leading the negotiations. The Holy See
welcomes a number of positive elements in the final
text that will help address the situation of widows.
They include the condemnation of violence and
harmful practices against women, including those that
affect widows in particular, as well as their children;
recognition of the important role of the family and familyoriented policies in promoting inclusion and supporting
widows and their children; and acknowledgement of
the need for social protection, particularly for widows

22-289363/22

A/76/PV.61

who experience isolation and exclusion. The resolution
calls for the elimination of legal discrimination and
other barriers, particularly with regard to property
and inheritance rights and to ensure financial security
for widows. Efforts to respond to widows’ specific
needs are considered in the implementation of existing
relevant global commitments.
While grateful for those positive aspects, the Holy
See finds it unfortunate that the resolution includes
ambiguous terminology related to health, discrimination
and exclusion, as well as pregnancy. The Holy See
is obliged to make two reservations concerning the
adopted text, reiterating those that we expressed at the
fourth United Nations World Conference on Women
and the International Conference on Population and
Development, all of which remain valid and in force.
The Holy See interprets the terms “sexual and
reproductive health” and “sexual and reproductive
health-care services” and related terms as applying
to a holistic concept of health. We do not consider
abortion, access to abortion or access to abortifacients
as a dimension of those terms. And the term “gender”
is understood by the Holy See as grounded in biological
sexual identity, male or female.
The President: We have heard the last speaker
under this item. May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 29?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 15 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolution (A/76/L.36)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mongolia to introduce draft resolution
A/76/L.36.
Mr. Vorshilov (Mongolia): My delegation has the
honour to introduce draft resolution A/76/L.36, entitled
“International Year of Rangelands and Pastoralists,
2026”. We are most grateful to all the delegations that
actively engaged in the informal consultations and
contributed through their constructive engagement.
4/22

15/03/2022

Pastureland currently accounts for more than
half of the world’s land area and plays a vital role in
pastoralism. Rangelands and pastoralism support
millions of people’s livelihoods and food security,
while delivering nature-based services benefiting
all. Pastoralism generates significant employment
and economic contributions to many countries’ gross
domestic product. The number of people raising
livestock in pastoral and agropastoral systems is
estimated at more than 200 million across every region
of the world, and their practices vary according to the
diversity of their ecosystems.
Pastoral systems rely on the seasonal mobility of
animals and people within and across borders. Border
issues can disrupt mobility and access to land and
water and lead to reductions in workforces managing
herds and landscapes. Having suffered for generations
from benign neglect, pastoralists and rangelands are
facing challenges and threats, including increasing
climate variability, land degradation, insecure tenure
rights and changes in land use, as well as reduced
access to markets, education and health services.
Given the importance of rangelands and pastoralists
for global nutrition, healthy ecosystems, income and
employment generation and other relevant aspects of
sustainable development for the pastoral populations
and humankind, the Government of Mongolia proposes
observing 2026 as the International Year of Rangelands
and Pastoralists in order to raise awareness of the
perceived natural and cultural values of rangelands and
pastoral livelihood systems.
Mongolia pursues a policy that combines traditional
and modern ways of life. We have set ourselves the
goal of preserving traditional nomadic heritage and
ecologically friendly, sustainable and organic animal
husbandry and promoting nomadic animal heritage to
the world, as laid out in Mongolia’s Vision 2050 longterm development policy document, adopted in 2020.
Our key socioeconomic sectors, including agriculture,
animal husbandry and the natural ecosystem, are being
adversely affected by changing climate conditions
and require urgent and timely action. Some 77 per
cent of our land is currently facing desertification and
overgrazing to some extent, and that area is continuing
to expand. And we realize that it is a problem for other
pastoral and nomadic countries as well as our own. The
Government of Mongolia has therefore been working
since 2018 to realize the International Year initiative.
22-28936

15/03/2022

A/76/PV.61

We are confident that the proclamation of the
International Year of Rangelands and Pastoralists in
2026 will encourage more countries to spread awareness
and knowledge of the sustainability of rangelands and
pastoralists during and beyond the designated year. We
consider that pastoralists are not mere victims but also
strong allies who can play a vital role in overcoming our
global challenges, including the coronavirus disease
pandemic and climate change. My delegation would
therefore like to underscore the essential support of
the Food and Agricultural Organization of the United
Nations (FAO) and the International Support Group,
which are taking proactive actions to raise awareness
on that crucial aspect. I also want to underscore that
the text of the draft resolution is based on relevant
documents of the FAO, the United Nations Environment
Programme, UNESCO, the International Federation of
Agriculture Producers and other organizations.
In conclusion, on behalf of all the sponsors, I would
like to express our sincere hope that the draft resolution
will enjoy unanimous support at this plenary meeting.
The President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/76/L.36,
entitled “International Year of Rangelands and
Pastoralists, 2026”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. Sharma (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to the delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors
of draft resolution A/76/L.36: Andorra, Argentina,
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Burkina Faso, China, Costa
Rica, Cuba, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Fiji, Guatemala,
Guyana, India, Iraq, Japan, Kyrgyzstan, the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Maldives,
Mali, Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua,
Pakistan, Peru, the Philippines, the Republic of Korea,
the Russian Federation, Senegal, Singapore, Spain, the
Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, the United Arab Emirates, the United
Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Zambia.
Bangladesh, Botswana, Chad, Djibouti, Ghana,
Kenya, Mauritania, the Niger, Suriname and Uruguay
have also become sponsors.

The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/76/L.36?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 76/253).

A/76/L.36

was

adopted

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 15.
Agenda item 16 (continued)
Culture of peace
Draft resolution A/76/L.41
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan to introduce draft resolution
A/76/L.41.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): On behalf of the member
States of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC), I have the honour to introduce draft resolution
A/76/L.41, entitled “International Day to Combat
Islamophobia”, which has been submitted under agenda
item 16, on the culture of peace.
Islamophobia is a reality. If I may speak for a
moment in my national capacity, I would like to recall
that the issue of Islamophobia was first raised by
my Prime Minister, Imran Khan, in his first address
to the General Assembly on 27 September 2019 (see
A/74/PV.9) and he has since repeatedly called for
international attention and efforts to address this
adverse phenomenon.
Islamophobia and its manifestations in hate
speech, discrimination and violence against Muslims
are proliferating in several parts of the world. Such
acts of discrimination, hostility and violence towards
Muslims — individuals and communities — constitute
grave violations of Muslims’ human rights and violate
their freedom of religion and belief. They also cause
great anguish within the Islamic world. In his report
dedicated to the issue of Islamophobia last year
(A/HRC/46/30), the Special Rapporteur on freedom
of religion or belief stated that since the terrorist
attacks of 11 September 2001, “institutional suspicion
of Muslims and those perceived to be Muslim has
escalated to epidemic proportions”. In such a climate of
exclusion, fear and distrust, Muslims often feel stigma,
negative stereotyping and shame and a sense that they
are suspect communities that have been forced to bear
a collective responsibility for the actions of a small,

22-289365/22

A/76/PV.61

fringe minority. The spread of Islamophobia, both in
terms of its momentum and outreach, is particularly
alarming these days, for it has emerged as a new form
of racism characterized by xenophobia and the negative
profiling and stereotyping of Muslims.
The rise in hate crimes against Muslims, both offline
and online, as well as discrimination in education,
citizenship, immigration, employment, housing and
health care, among other things, is well documented.
Unfortunately, the gender aspect of Islamophobia is
also gaining prominence, with girls and women being
targeted for their mode of dress and the general notion
that Muslim women are oppressed and must therefore
be “liberated”.
What is indeed worrisome is that Islamophobia
continues to find strong resonance in the political
arena, ultimately leading to the institutionalization
of Islamophobia through new legislation and policies,
such as discriminatory travel bans and visa restrictions.
Various academic studies have revealed that
Islamophobia is most visible in certain media and in the
discourse of far-right groups and political parties that
tend to exploit and build on the general fear of Islam
for electoral gains. In some countries, anti-immigration
and anti-refugee rhetoric has taken on anti-Muslim
overtones and has often become the central theme of
political campaigns. We have also noted with grave
concern that a number of media outlets continue to
propagate fear and negative stereotypes against Islam
and Muslims, and especially by acting as a platform for
the widespread dissemination of anti-Muslim rhetoric.
Despite its pervasive effects, Islamophobia remains
poorly understood and discussions on how to address
them are often fraught and complex. It seems essential
to promote improving the information available
about it, as well as solutions to the problem, through
greater understanding and full respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms. Numerous United
Nations officials, including the Secretary-General,
the High Commissioner for Human Rights, several
special rapporteurs of the Human Rights Council and
world leaders, have noticed this disturbing trend in
recent years and have underscored the importance of
collectively addressing the problem of Islamophobia.
The OIC’s obligation to address Islamophobia
is based directly on the organization’s Charter.
At its third extraordinary session in Makkah, the
Islamic Summit Conference stressed the necessity
6/22

15/03/2022

of combating hate and fear of Islam and Muslims. In
the aftermath of the deadly attack on two mosques in
2019, the forty-seventh session of the OIC Council of
Foreign Ministers, held in Niamey, adopted a resolution
calling for the General Assembly to designate 15 March
as the International Day to Combat Islamophobia. In
accordance with that mandate, the OIC has submitted
draft resolution A/76/L.41.
From the OIC’s perspective, the draft resolution
we have presented serves to achieve the following
objectives. First, it seeks to raise international awareness
about the growing phenomenon of Islamophobia and
anti-Muslim hatred. Secondly, it sends a clear message
that the world opposes all forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia, negative stereotyping and
stigmatization. Thirdly, it seeks to promote a message
of tolerance, peaceful coexistence and interfaith
and cultural harmony among all religions, races and
nations. Fourthly, by commemorating this day it aims to
demonstrate unfettered solidarity with all humankind,
convey a strong message of respect for human dignity
and reiterate our common commitment to unity in
diversity. The objective of observing this day is about
uniting, not dividing.
In view of that constructive approach, the members
of the OIC have held extensive exchanges on the proposal
over the past 12 months with all interested delegations.
A draft text was circulated a month ago. The OIC
conducted three rounds of open informal consultations
on the draft resolution throughout February. Following
the conclusion of the open informal consultations,
the OIC also held extensive bilateral consultations on
the draft resolution with the delegations concerned.
Based on the responses received, the text of the draft
resolution was streamlined and revised multiple times
to accommodate all concerns. Even after submitting
the resolution, the group remained engaged with all the
delegations concerned. Based on further consultations
with them, the OIC agreed to orally revise the text of
operative paragraph 3 of the draft resolution, which
will now read as follows,
“invites
all
member
States,
relevant
organizations of the United Nations system,
other international and regional organizations,
civil society, private sector and faith-based
organizations to observe the International Day in
an appropriate manner”.
22-28936

15/03/2022

A/76/PV.61

We believe that the final text is balanced and
should garner the widest possible support of the States
Members of the United Nations. We are hopeful that it
will be adopted by consensus. Through the observance
of this Day, the OIC wishes to build a better global
understanding of Islam and Islamic precepts. We hope
to convey a message of international solidarity and
cooperation through the General Assembly. We count
on the full support of all Member States and their
possible sponsorship of this important draft resolution.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/76/L.41, entitled
“International Day to Combat Islamophobia”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. Sharma (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to the delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors of
A/76/L.41, as orally revised: China, Cuba, Nicaragua,
the Philippines, the Russian Federation, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Uruguay and the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/76/L.41, as
orally revised?
Draft resolution A/76/L.41, as orally revised, was
adopted (resolution 76/254).
The President: Before giving the floor for
explanation of vote after the voting, I would like to
remind delegations that explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): I am taking the floor to
explain India’s position on resolution 76/254.
At the outset, allow me to express our deep
concern about the rise in instances of discrimination,
intolerance and violence directed against members of
many religious communities in various parts of the
world. As a pluralistic and democratic country that
is home to almost all religions of the world, over the
centuries India has always welcomed people who are
persecuted around the world for their faith or belief.
They have always found in India a safe haven, free of
persecution or discrimination. That is true whether

they are Zoroastrians, Buddhists, Jews or people of any
other faith. We are therefore deeply concerned about the
growing manifestations of intolerance, discrimination
and violence, including sectarian violence, against the
followers of religions in some countries.
Let me also state that we condemn all acts
motivated by antisemitism, Christianophobia or
Islamophobia. However, such phobias are not restricted
to the Abrahamic religions. In fact, there is clear
evidence that such religiophobia has in fact also
affected the followers of non-Abrahamic religions
over decades. That has contributed to the emergence
of contemporary forms of religiophobia, especially
anti-Hindu, anti-Buddhist and anti-Sikh phobias.
These contemporary forms of religiophobia can be
witnessed in the attacks on religious places of worship
such as gurdwaras, monasteries, temples and so on, or
in the spreading of hatred and disinformation against
non-Abrahamic religions in many countries. Examples
abound — the destruction of the Buddhas of Bamiyan,
the violation of gurdwara premises, the massacre of
Sikh pilgrims in a gurdwara, attacks on temples, the
glorification of the breaking of idols in temples, and so
on — and contribute to the rise of contemporary forms
of religiophobia against non-Abrahamic religions.
Hinduism has more than 1.2 billion followers.
Buddhism has more than 535 million and Sikhism more
than 30 million, spread around the world. It is time that
we acknowledged the prevalence of religiophobia rather
than singling out one religion. It is in that context that
we are concerned about elevating the phobia against
one religion to the level of an international day to the
exclusion of all others. Celebrating religion is one thing
but commemorating the combating of hatred against
one religion is quite another. In fact, this resolution may
well end up downplaying the seriousness of phobias
against all other religions. Let us not forget that in
2019 we proclaimed 22 August as the International Day
Commemorating the Victims of Acts of Violence Based
on Religion or Belief, which is fully inclusive in nature.
We even have an International Day for Tolerance,
observed on 16 November. We are not convinced that
we need to elevate a phobia about one religion to the
level of an international day. We need to always be
inclusive, especially at the United Nations.
India is proud that pluralism is at the core of our
existence, and we firmly believe in the equal protection
and promotion of all religions and faiths. It is therefore
unfortunate that the word “pluralism” finds no mention

22-289367/22

A/76/PV.61

in the resolution and the sponsors have not found it fit
to take on board our amendments to include it in the
text, for reasons best known to them. We hope that
the resolution adopted today does not set a precedent
leading to multiple resolutions on phobias based on
selected religions and dividing the United Nations into
religious camps. It is important that the United Nations
remain above such religious matters, which may seek to
divide us rather than bring us together on one platform
of peace and harmony and treat the world as one family.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): France
aligns itself with the statement to be delivered on behalf
of the European Union.
First of all, I would like reiterate that France stands
unequivocally against all forms of discrimination.
Article I of our Constitution states that the French
Republic ensures the equality of all citizens before the
law, without distinction of origin, race or religion. It
respects all faiths, and that article compels us to do so.
That said, the text before us today raises several
challenges concerning our determination to combat
discrimination based on religion or belief. There is
no definition of the term “Islamophobia” anywhere in
international law, unlike that of freedom of religion or
belief. It is that freedom that France defends, just as
we defend all public freedoms, for example freedom of
expression or opinion. The text also suggests that the
religion itself is protected but not its adherents. But the
fact is that it is the freedom to believe or not believe, as
well as the right to change one’s religion, that we must
promote. Furthermore, by establishing an International
Day to Combat Islamophobia, resolution 76/254 does not
respond to the concern we all share, that of combating
all forms of discrimination, because it undermines
the fight against religious intolerance by singling out
one religion to the exclusion of all others, without any
mention of the freedom to believe or not believe.
Societies are made up of diversity, with individuals
who practise various religions and those who practise
none at all. Should we expect an international day to
be established for each religion or level of belief or
unbelief? There might not be enough days in the year
for that. A few years ago, we adopted resolution 73/296
establishing the International Day Commemorating the
Victims of Acts of Violence Based on Religion or Belief.
Along with the European Union, France proposed
making the text more universal. We proposed to refocus
it on freedom of religion or belief and the fight against
8/22

15/03/2022

discrimination that affects individuals. The European
Union proposed compromises based on texts agreed
by everyone to demonstrate that discrimination and
violence of all kinds deserve equal condemnation and
should be fought with the same vigour. France deplores
the fact that none of those constructive proposals were
taken on board. These issues are sufficiently serious to
merit an in-depth discussion and attention that France
and the EU were not afforded during consideration of
the draft resolution. Nonetheless, because we hope to
be able to resume a calm discussion of these important
subjects, and despite the fact that the resolution as it
stands is very unsatisfactory, France has decided not to
oppose its adoption.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the voting. We will now hear
statements after the adoption of the resolution.
I give the floor to the representative of the European
Union, in its capacity as observer.
Mr. Gonzato (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States on resolution 76/254.
The EU is strongly opposed to all forms of
discrimination, hostility and violence, including those
based on religion or belief. In many parts of the world,
people are killed, attacked, persecuted or discriminated
against because of their alleged race, religion or belief
or other aspects of their personality. As the main
sponsor of the annual resolutions on freedom of religion
or belief, in New York and Geneva, the EU advocates
a comprehensive and universal approach that seeks to
eliminate all forms of incitement to discrimination,
hostility, violence and intolerance directed against
people because of their religion or belief, including
non-believers.
For that reason, we are concerned about an approach
that addresses only one religion through a General
Assembly initiative. In our view, rather than singling
out a specific religion, the United Nations should be
impartial. By singling out a particular confession, we
risk undermining the very universality of our approach.
In addition, by using the term “Islamophobia” instead of
“anti-Muslim discrimination” or “anti-Muslim hatred”,
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation’s initiative
focuses on protecting religion as such, which is an
approach that undermines the protection of people’s
individual human rights, such as the right to freedom
of opinion and expression, including the right to debate
22-28936

15/03/2022

and criticize religion, as enshrined in article 19 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
That includes democratically elected politicians.
The United Nations should focus on the protection
of the right of persons to freedom of religion or belief
as a human right, including the right not to practise a
religion. In the spirit of the United Nations, we should
speak up against injustice and abuse because it is
individuals who suffer. Based on that approach, the
United Nations recently adopted resolution 73/296,
establishing the International Day Commemorating
the Victims of Acts of Violence based on Religion or
Belief. That International Day addresses all forms of
violence and hatred against victims of all religions and
beliefs. It covers all aspects of anti-Muslim hatred, and
the initiative before us today presents an unnecessary
duplication in that regard.
Moreover, the EU has a long-standing position in
opposition to the multiplication of international days.
For the EU, there were four priorities throughout the
negotiation process. The first was religion neutrality
with regard to any initiative related to freedom of
religion or belief. The second was the need to use the
internationally agreed definition of freedom of religion
or belief, as stated in article 18 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which is the
freedom to have or to adopt a religion or belief of one’s
choice, including the right to change religions or not to
believe. The third related to addressing the situations
of people, not the situation of religions as such. The
fourth priority was not infringing on other fundamental
freedoms, such as the right to freedom of opinion
and expression.
In our view, the best way to achieve that would have
been to make the title more inclusive and universal by
not singling out one religion. Our proposal was to call
it an international day for the elimination of all forms
of intolerance and discrimination, based on religion
or belief, which would correspond to the United
Nations Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms
of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion
or Belief, adopted in 1981. Such an international
day would have addressed all individuals facing
discrimination, regardless of their religion or belief.
Our proposals sought to correct the imbalance in the
text through provisions that would clarify that the
concept of freedom of religion or belief protects every
human being’s right to believe or to hold an atheistic or
non-theistic belief and to change religions or beliefs. It

A/76/PV.61

does not protect any religion or belief as such. To that
end, the EU engaged constructively in the negotiation
process from the outset, and it is regrettable that not all
of our main concerns were taken into account. However,
notwithstanding the reservations that we continue to
maintain with respect to the resolution, the EU decided
not to oppose the consensus today.
Mr. Keçeli (Turkey): We would like to
thank all Member States for their support for the
adoption of resolution 76/254. For us, any form
of discrimination — including Islamophobia and
antisemitism — based on religion or belief is
unacceptable and must be condemned. The resolution
is aimed not at dividing but uniting us. For the members
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, it is
reassuring to see that the threat of Islamophobia has
not gone unnoticed, and it is very encouraging to know
that the international community is united against it.
Islamophobia is an injustice plaguing humankind
today, especially in certain parts of the world. It is a real
and growing threat. It is experienced by individuals and
by communities. It takes many forms, be they vulgar
racism, xenophobia or lethal violence. Institutional
Islamophobia is found even in State policies
encouraged by irresponsible politicians. Examples can
be seen almost everywhere in textbooks, pop culture
and social media. Yet the majority of those human
rights violations often go undocumented and receive
little attention. Minority groups and women, who are
disproportionately affected, rarely receive protection,
support or even sympathy.
The penholders of the Charter of the United
Nations realize that we have far more in common than
that which divides us. It is critical for the nations of
the world to continue working together to promote the
values of peace, tolerance, justice and human rights.
Today our conversation is focused on Islamophobia,
but the source of that scourge is one that imperils us all.
We can never allow hatred to take hold of society. The
answer to all acts of violence motivated by religious
hatred is solidarity, equality and respect for the equal
dignity and entitlement to fundamental human rights of
every individual.
It is incumbent on each of us to take every
measure necessary to combat direct and indirect forms
of discrimination and attacks on places of worship
and persons on the basis of their religion or belief.
Every one of us has an individual responsibility to

22-289369/22

A/76/PV.61

be vigilant, to call out any injustices we witness, to
defend democracy and human rights and to condemn
intolerance, incitement and harassment based on
ethnic origin or religious belief. It is in that spirit
that we have turned to the General Assembly in our
fight against Islamophobia. We are grateful for the
Assembly’s support for the resolution’s adoption, which
demonstrates to the world that we are united against
hate and violent extremism in all its forms.
Mr. Koba (Indonesia): Indonesia welcomes today’s
adoption of resolution 76/254, designating 15 March
as the International Day to Combat Islamophobia. As
a member of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
Indonesia is concerned about the staggering increase in
incidents and manifestations of Islamophobia globally.
We need to work together to address it. This resolution
is therefore timely and we are heartened by the support
that many countries have shown to the initiative. The
essence of commemorating the International Day is to
foster global dialogue, promote our shared values of
tolerance and interfaith harmony and reinvigorate the
international community’s commitment to unity and
diversity. Through the International Day, we want to
promote a greater understanding of human rights and
freedoms and full respect for them.
Indonesia has the world’s largest Muslim
population in one country, living side by side with
adherents of other religions and beliefs. A message
of tolerance, moderation and pluralism is one that we
want to pervade our society. We believe that each of
us is responsible for promoting and spreading that
message, and we should therefore promote sustained
dialogue to establish trust among people of different
faith and cultures. We also need to harness the power
of education and the media to counter hatred, prejudice
and negativity and to reconstruct positive narratives
around Islam and Muslims.
Finally, for us as Muslims, the commemoration
of the International Day also presents an opportunity
to accentuate our humanity and to show Islam as a
blessing for the entire world, as well as to mainstream
an understanding of the scriptures of Islam for the good
of all creation. Through this commemoration, Indonesia
hopes that we can stand united against Islamophobia and
realize a world of harmony among faiths and nations.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
The growing trend of intolerance and prejudice
against Islam and Muslims worldwide is a daunting
10/22

15/03/2022

challenge to the international community. Over the
past few decades, harmful stereotypes and prejudices
regarding Muslims and Islam have been constantly
reinforced by certain media outlets, politicians and
influencers of popular culture and within academic
discourse. At the same time, we have seen numerous
discriminatory practices implemented in various parts
of the world, including measures that prevent Muslims
from living in accordance with their belief system; the
securitization of religious communities; restrictions on
access to citizenship; socioeconomic exclusion; and
pervasive stigmatization.
As responsible States Members of the United
Nations, we bear a heavy burden in fighting
discrimination, racism and xenophobia. We should
strongly condemn hate speech and acts of hate against
Muslims, while taking the necessary measures to
prevent the violation of Muslims’ basic human rights.
It is critical to ensure that the United Nations is united
against attempts to embrace Islamophobia, including
through such measures as Muslim travel bans, bans
on the hijab and Muslim symbols and the abhorrent
use of such ignorant terms as “Islamic terrorism”. It is
our firm conviction that terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations cannot and should not be associated with
any religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic group.
The Islamic Republic of Iran affirms its full support
for Organization of Islamic Cooperation initiatives to
combat Islamophobia, in particular the designation
of 15 March as the International Day to Combat
Islamophobia by the General Assembly. Through its
observance, we can build a better global understanding
of Islam and Islamic precepts and convey a message of
international solidarity and cooperation via the General
Assembly. In that regard, we welcome the Assembly’s
adoption by consensus today of resolution 76/254. It
demonstrates our determination to effectively and
constructively address Islamophobia as one of the main
challenges facing the international community. We urge
all Member States to shoulder their responsibilities and
live up to their legal obligations in order to advance
the shared values of peaceful coexistence, tolerance
and mutual understanding. Let us keep striving for
justice, dignity and inclusion for our Muslim brothers
and sisters and for all humankind.
Mrs. Rodrigues-Birkett (Guyana): The Government
of Guyana recognizes that any form of discrimination
against individuals on the basis of their religion is a
violation of their human rights and contrary to the
22-28936

15/03/2022

purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, as well as the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights. In that context, we note with concern
the rising incidence of manifestations of religious
intolerance across the globe, sometimes evidenced by
acts of violence and discrimination against individuals
or religious communities. As a pluralist society where
Islam is one of the main religions practised, Guyana
is supportive of global action that seeks to stem that
tide of intolerance, discrimination and violence. My
delegation was therefore pleased to sponsor resolution
76/254 and is grateful to the General Assembly for
supporting its adoption by consensus.
The designation of an International Day to Combat
Islamophobia is an important step towards addressing
that scourge and its growing adverse effects on the lives
of many Muslims. My delegation has taken note of the
report of the Special Rapporteur on freedom of religion
or belief to the forty-sixth session of the Human Rights
Council, in which there was a focus on countering
Islamophobia. The Special Rapporteur observed that
“widespread negative representations of Islam, fear
of Muslims generally… [and] security and counterterrorism policies have served to perpetuate,
validate and normalize discrimination, hostility
and violence towards Muslim individuals and
communities” (A/HRC/46/30, p. 2).
At the core of such behaviour is a lack of
understanding of the religion and an acceptance
of negative stereotypes about its adherents. The
consequences of Islamophobia often translate into
negative socioeconomic impacts, including reduced
employment opportunities, which in turn result in
Muslims as a group being disproportionately affected
by poverty and its attendant effects. Islamophobia has
also affected Muslims’ access to education, health care
and housing in some parts of the world. Those trends
are all contrary to the aspiration expressed in the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development to leave no one
behind. It therefore behoves us to be more systematic in
our efforts to eliminate Islamophobia and every form of
religious intolerance.
Islamophobia remains poorly understood and
efforts to combat it should therefore include awarenessraising at the national, regional and international levels.
The designation of the International Day to Combat
Islamophobia is a welcome step in that direction.
Additionally, all Member States, including those where

A/76/PV.61

Muslim populations live, should be encouraged to
respect the religion of Islam, its adherents and their
places of worship as part of efforts to promote cultural
enrichment within their society and, more broadly, a
global culture of tolerance and peace.
Mr. Yahiaoui (Algeria): Algeria welcomes the
Assembly’s adoption by consensus of resolution 76/254,
by which we proclaim 15 March as the International
Day to Combat Islamophobia and resolutely commit
to strengthening international efforts to foster global
dialogue on the promotion of a culture of tolerance and
peace at every level.
Addressing the growing scourge of Islamophobia
has always been at the heart of the main objectives of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC). In line
with the commitments made by the Foreign Ministers
of the members of the OIC in November 2020, a further
step was taken by OIC member States to level up in the
fight against the threats emanating from Islamophobia
and to build momentum within the United Nations to
that end. In that regard, Algeria welcomes the spirit and
purpose of the resolution as a contribution to upholding
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, as well as the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, so as to promote and protect every human right
and fundamental freedom for all. That contribution
complements and further reinforces the need to
implement the various resolutions that the Assembly
has rightly adopted in noble causes, in particular those
aimed at combating intolerance, negative stereotyping,
hate speech, stigmatization, discrimination and violence
against individuals based on their religion or belief.
It is high time that the international community
committed to taking concrete action to fight the scourge
of Islamophobia that continues to threaten our societies.
The proliferation of manifestations of Islamophobia,
hate speech, discrimination and violence against
Muslims in many parts of the world remains an issue of
deep concern. Indeed, the serious violations of human
rights and of freedom of religion or belief through a
variety of acts of discrimination, hostility and violence
against Muslim individuals and communities must no
longer be ignored.
In its belief in the value of living together in peace
and the virtue of peaceful coexistence among peoples,
Algeria took the initiative in this area in December
2017 through its submission of resolution 72/130,
which declared 16 May the International Day of Living

22-2893611/22

A/76/PV.61

15/03/2022

Together in Peace as a way to mobilize the international
community’s efforts to promote peace, tolerance,
understanding and solidarity. Against that backdrop,
Algeria is firmly convinced that the proclamation of
the International Day to Combat Islamophobia will be
a major contribution to developing an understanding of
Islam as a religion of peace and tolerance.

infringement of human rights. The defamation of any
religion constitutes a derogation of the right to freedom
of religion or belief and is intimately linked to the
incitement of racial and religious hatred. My delegation
continues to underscore that our rights should not be in
competition with one another, nor should one right be
seen as superior to another.

In conclusion, Algeria reiterates its commitment to
further promoting the values of peaceful coexistence
and mutual respect among all religions and faiths.

History and the world today remind us of the danger
of racial discrimination, xenophobia and prejudice.
The spread of hatred through speech and media, as
well as propaganda messaging and cartoons, in order
to disparage, alienate and target a group of people
based on their race, religion or faith is nothing new.
The international community must push for greater
efforts to combat and eliminate Islamophobia, racism,
intolerance, hate speech and other prejudices. Such
bigotry has no place in today’s pluralistic society and
must be countered. We therefore celebrate the adoption
by consensus of resolution 76/254 and the International
Day to Combat Islamophobia. It is indeed timely,
if not decades late. The adoption of this important
resolution does not signal the end of efforts to counter
Islamophobia. It is just the beginning. Islam is a religion
of peace and Malaysia will not rest in the fight against
ignorance and the continuing prejudices against Islam
and Muslims.

Mr. Abd Aziz (Malaysia): Islamophobia is not a
new phenomenon. Muslims around the world have been
on the receiving end of racism, religious discrimination
and xenophobia for many years. That intensified in the
wake of the 11 September 2001 attacks, when incidents
of Islamophobia increased, fuelled by hate speech,
misinformation and unfounded suspicions. Muslims
around the world continue to face various forms of
hostilities and discrimination. The coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic has amplified that. Sadly, as
communities around the world have struggled in the
face of waves of COVID-19 variants, Muslims have also
faced a surge in Islamophobia during the pandemic.
The waves of Islamophobia have never ebbed.
Malaysia condemns Islamophobia. It is a perversion
of the truth and a manifestation of intolerance that
feeds into extremism. Islamophobia is clearly a form of
racism and religious discrimination. We are concerned
about the growth of the phenomenon and of the religious
intolerance and stigmatization that Muslims face,
particularly as the COVID-19 pandemic continues to
spread across the globe. Malaysia calls on all individuals,
organizations and countries to reject Islamophobia. We
continue to urge all countries to refrain from policy
statements and practices that associate Islam with
terrorism, extremism or dangers that pose a threat
to society. Malaysia will continue to promote mutual
respect among religions and prevent the spread of
misleading ideologies or teachings, as well as practices
that deviate from Islam’s true meaning. It is important
that we work together to combat Islamophobia and
promote harmonious relations and peaceful coexistence
among peoples of different faiths and beliefs and in the
context of a diverse global community.
While Malaysia acknowledges individuals’
exercise of freedom of speech and expression as a
fundamental human right, we strongly disagree with
the notion that the defamation of religion is not an
12/22

In its Preamble, the Charter of the United Nations
reminds us to reaffirm our faith in fundamental
human rights and in the dignity and worth of the
human person. The Charter also reminds us to practise
tolerance and live together in peace with one another
as good neighbours. To achieve that, we must protect
the inalienable rights and fundamental freedoms of all
peoples. We must protect those who are oppressed or
subjugated and whose human rights are violated. We
must intensify our efforts to enhance and promote a
culture of peace. As a family of nations, we need to
create a world that believes in a culture of inclusivity
and shared prosperity. Only then will the United
Nations live up to its raison d’être.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan): The adoption of resolution
76/254, initiating commemoration of the International
Day to Combat Islamophobia, is a landmark event that
sends a message that hate speech and discrimination
against followers of the Islamic religion will not and
should not be tolerated by the international community.
Incidents of attacks on Muslims and their social and
institutional exclusion are on the rise. The justification
22-28936

15/03/2022

and arguments used by the instigators of such attacks
and discriminatory acts are becoming sophisticated,
and guilt by association is often used as a reason to
advance such narratives. That is why it is important
that the international community stand together to
confront such arguments and narratives and combat the
growing phenomenon of Islamophobia. The resolution
is an important step towards achieving that goal and
enhancing the values of social inclusion and a culture
of peace, tolerance and coexistence. Jordan regards
freedom of expression as a core value that should be
respected in the same manner as freedom of religion.
They are not mutually exclusive, and the right of every
State to protect itself and its citizens is also established
under international law.
However, that right is not a licence to challenge
a particular social or religious group in its beliefs
and convictions or a pretext for veiled discrimination
against that group’s members by defaming their religion.
In order to protect its citizens, a State necessarily has
a duty to prevent and combat incidents of attack and
discrimination against the members of that group,
for whatever reason, including Islamophobia, which
is a term well established in literature, writings and
doctrine. It is also well established that isolationism,
exclusion, negative stereotyping and marginalization
are sources of radicalization and tools for recruitment
by extremists and terrorist organizations.
It is against that backdrop that Jordan has been
at the forefront of combating Islamophobia and has
been a leader in interfaith dialogue. We have invested
significantly in promoting freedom of religion, mutual
respect, inclusion and social cohesion. We will continue
to do so and to hope that the adoption of this resolution
will solidify our common resolve to protect human
rights and the principles of the United Nations and
make the world a better place for future generations.
Mr. Al-Kuwari (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Mr. President, for your work in convening this
meeting. I also thank the delegation of Pakistan for
introducing resolution 76/254, entitled “International
Day to Combat Islamophobia”, on behalf of the member
States of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC),
including Qatar. I also thank the Pakistani delegation for
facilitating the consultations on the resolution, whose
adoption by consensus we welcome. The State of Qatar
welcomes all the measures that have been taken in the
United Nations system to promote a culture of peace
and dialogue among religions, especially considering

A/76/PV.61

the spread of fear, misleading information, increasing
divisions among communities and polarization that has
been caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic and
that threatens international peace and security.
Today I am pleased to be able to highlight a number
of initiatives through which my country is contributing
to promoting a culture of peace at the national,
regional and international levels. They emanate from
our social, religious and cultural heritage and include
the establishment of a number of institutions, such as
the Doha International Center for Interfaith Dialogue,
concerned with promoting a culture of peace and
dialogue, accepting differences, combating extremism
and enhancing non-violence. The Center embodies
Qatar’s belief that building nations starts with building
human beings through cooperation in building societies
based on mutual respect and living together in harmony,
regardless of religion, culture or race. Since its creation,
the Center has organized an annual international
conference to consider many emerging issues, helping
to promote dialogue among followers of different
religions in order to gain a better understanding of
religious concepts and teachings for the benefit of the
whole of humankind, based on mutual respect and the
acceptance of differences, in cooperation with relevant
individuals and institutions. The fourteenth Interfaith
Dialogue Conference, which was delayed due to the
coronavirus disease pandemic, will be held in Doha on
24 and 25 May, under the theme “Religions and Hate
Speech: Practice and Scriptures”.
As an active member of the OIC, Qatar was
delighted to sponsor the resolution presented today
under the agenda item “Culture of peace” and entitled
“International Day to Combat Islamophobia”. We
fully support the resolution, which reflects our deep
concern in the light of the increase in acts of violence,
incitement to violence and discrimination against
Muslims resulting from Islamophobia, which we are
seeing repeatedly and increasingly around the world.
We believe that commemoration of the International
Day to Combat Islamophobia will make a significant
contribution to strengthening international dialogue
on the promotion of a culture of tolerance and peace
at all levels, based on respect for human rights and the
diversity of religions and beliefs. We emphasize that the
resolution also reflects the international community’s
commitment to promoting dialogue among religions and
cultures, enhancing peace, social stability, diversity,

22-2893613/22

A/76/PV.61

mutual respect and creating an environment conducive
to peace and mutual understanding at all levels.
In conclusion, the State of Qatar reiterates
its commitment to supporting all efforts aimed at
promoting a culture of peace and non-violence for the
benefit of all humankind.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to take this opportunity to
welcome the Assembly’s adoption by consensus of
resolution 76/254, introduced by Pakistan on behalf
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, entitled
“International Day to Combat Islamophobia”. I
would also like to express my warmest thanks to all
States Members of the United Nations for supporting
this important resolution. Its adoption reflects the
international community’s commitment to countering
all forms of Islamophobia and working to promote a
culture of peace.
The Kingdom of Morocco welcomes the
designation of 15 March as the International Day to
Combat Islamophobia, which should also be a day
of reflection promoting dialogue among religions,
cultures and civilizations. At the same time, in line with
the aspirations of King Mohammed VI, Commander
of the Faithful, we affirm our tireless commitment
to promoting international and regional cooperation
in furthering the values of mutual respect, tolerance,
coexistence, a culture of peace and the acceptance of
others, based on respecting and promoting human rights.
Resolution 76/254 will contribute to combating
Islamophobia. It is incumbent on us, as part of the
international community and as individual countries,
to combat all forms of hatred and discrimination
based on religion or belief, including antisemitism
and Christianophobia. The Kingdom of Morocco was
actively involved in the negotiation process for the
resolution and reiterates its gratitude to all delegations
and partners for their laudable and constructive efforts
demonstrating their commitment to the interests of all
in order to achieve a consensus text.
Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation appreciates the consensus reached by the
countries participating in this Hall on the adoption
of resolution 76/254, entitled “International Day to
Combat Islamophobia”. Acts of hatred related to religion
or belief are totally unacceptable and unjustifiable
wherever and by whomever they are committed.
14/22

15/03/2022

Hate speech and blind intolerance towards Islam is
on the rise throughout the world. The Islamic religion
advocates tolerance and coexistence with other religions.
Today’s resolution is therefore a clear example of that
message and an initiative that can build bridges between
Islam and other religions. It sends a clear message that
coexistence among religions is vital to the continuation
of humankind and human civilization. Hate speech and
incitements to violence against other religions result in
acts of violence against defenceless people and their
safe communities and undermine their security and
stability. They have the potential to spread from local
to regional and international contexts, threatening
international peace and security. Today’s resolution
clearly demonstrates the solidarity and cooperation that
exists among Member States to counter such acts, which
every society rejects and finds unacceptable, as they
contravene all religions and threaten the maintenance
of international peace and security.
In conclusion, I reaffirm that my country is
committed to combating all forms of hate speech and
incitement to violence against other religions. We
support coexistence and a culture of tolerance. In that
regard, Pope Francis’s visit to Iraq on 6 February was
commemorated as a day of tolerance in Iraq.
My country’s delegation would like to thank the
delegation of Pakistan and those of all the Member
States that participated in drafting, preparing and
discussing the draft resolution.
Mr. Shahin (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
expresses its gratitude and appreciation to the States
Members of the United Nations for their consensus
adoption of resolution 76/254, sponsored by the
members of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
designating 15 March as the International Day to
Combat Islamophobia and contributing to fighting an
abhorrent and destructive phenomenon, one that aims
to destroy the foundations of our contemporary human
civilization, which rejects discrimination against any
human being based on religion or belief.
Egypt once again categorically rejects every form
and manifestation of racism and discrimination. We
are deeply concerned about the continuing increase
in discrimination against Muslims, documented in a
number of international reports that assert the reality of
Islamophobia as a cause of suffering for many Muslims.
It is used as a pretext to justify discrimination, hostility
and violence against them, with serious consequences
22-28936

15/03/2022

for Muslims’ enjoyment of their human rights, including
freedom of religion or belief. It also purveys negative
stereotypes associated with Islam, as well as hatred and
fear of Muslims.
Resolution 76/254, adopted by consensus today,
reflects the international community’s firm rejection
of the phenomenon of Islamophobia and reiterates
the importance of concerted international efforts
to seriously counter the hate speech and negative
stereotypes that fuel it. In that context, we urge all
Member States to fully implement the resolution and
commend the efforts of the Secretary-General in that
regard, as well as the initiatives of the representative of
the Alliance of Civilizations.
We stress that Egypt will continue to cooperate
in good faith and transparency with Member States
and the Secretariat in implementing United Nations
resolutions against Islamophobia, while highlighting
the major role that Egypt plays in supporting dialogue
among civilizations and peaceful coexistence among
human beings and in promoting religious tolerance and
human brotherhood, in particular through the Al-Azhar
Al-Sharif.
Mr. Moharram (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
My delegation expresses its thanks and gratitude to the
Member States supporting the adoption of resolution
76/254, which designates 15 March as the International
Day to Combat Islamophobia. It is a step that helps
to reinforce understanding of the Islamic religion as
one of tolerance and to correct mistaken concepts and
distance Islam from the actions of self-proclaimed
adherents whose behaviour and actions run counter
to Islam’s spirit as a religion of peace, coexistence
and moderation. The resolution also reaffirms the
separation between Islam and terrorism.
Saudi Arabia is the cradle of Islamic holy sites and
its attitude to followers of other religions, ideologies
and cultures is one of tolerance and moderation. My
country also rejects extremism in any religion and in all
its forms. As one of the sponsors of the resolution, Saudi
Arabia sought to reflect that attitude in the text, which
emphasizes the importance of mobilizing international
efforts to launch a global dialogue promoting a culture
of tolerance and peace at all levels, based on the
principle of respect for human rights and the diversity
of religions and beliefs, and on the rejection of all forms
of violence and discrimination against anyone based on
religion, denomination or belief.

A/76/PV.61

The adoption by consensus of resolution 76/254 is
a clear demonstration of the international community’s
willingness and genuine determination to engage
in dialogue and build on common ground in order to
achieve coexistence without discrimination based on
race, religion, or cultural background.
Mr. Al Hassan (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): In
December 2020 the General Assembly adopted
resolution 75/187, reaffirming the collective, constant
and united position of all Member States on combating
intolerance, discrimination and incitement to violence
against people based on their religion or belief. In his
report on the subject (A/75/369), among other things the
Secretary-General encouraged all actions, measures
and policies aimed at strengthening respect for and
protecting places of worship and believers.
Regrettably, the problem of Islamophobia
confronting the international community, which has
been discussed in previous reports of the SecretaryGeneral and reflected in many resolutions adopted by
this Organization, is clearly a growing reality affecting
the lives and rights of millions all over the world. It
is unacceptable, and particularly pernicious if we
let it go without addressing it while in certain cases,
unfortunately, minimizing its effects under a pretext of
support for freedom of expression or other freedoms.
That runs counter to the foundations and noble principles
on which our Organization was established and to the
relevant resolutions of international legitimacy.
My country welcomes the Assembly’s adoption by
consensus of resolution 76/254, entitled “International
Day to Combat Islamophobia”, especially because the
text calls for respect for human rights and the diversity
of religions and beliefs, as well as the promotion of
a culture of peace and tolerance, while stressing the
importance of eliminating all forms of discrimination,
intolerance and violence.
In conclusion, we would like to stress the need to
refrain from insulting the symbols of any religion or
belief, which has serious consequences for the people
it targets. We believe that such actions run counter to
the founding principles of the Organization and cannot
be considered exemplary of freedom of expression or
of the press. Respect is an obligation. Coexistence is
essential if we are to reconcile our ideas and promote
the cooperation and coexistence that can end intolerance
and prevent conflicts. From this rostrum, my country
urges all States to adopt the means and measures

22-2893615/22

A/76/PV.61

15/03/2022

necessary to address these phenomena and hold their
instigators accountable.

transportation, thereby helping to cut energy usage and
greenhouse-gas emissions worldwide.

The President: We have heard the last speaker on
this item. The General Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 16.

The idea of integrating bicycles into public
transportation systems has been ignored for many
years. However, it is now playing an important role as
we are tackling the climate crisis and the pandemic.
The concept is gradually being implemented in
developed countries, but many developing countries are
still experiencing some difficulties with it. Research
has been done on integrating bicycles into public
transportation systems since the beginning of the 1990s.
One of the obstacles has been the mistaken view of the
bicycle as merely a form of sport rather than a mode
of transportation. We firmly believe that we should
change that so that bicycles are viewed as a means of
everyday transportation around the world, especially
when we take the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic and climate change into account. Integrating
bicycles into public transportation systems is not just
a good idea. It has achieved the status of satisfying a
greater human need.

Agenda item 20 (continued)
Sustainable development
(i) Harmony with Nature
Draft resolution A/76/L.35
The President: The Assembly will now proceed to
take action on the draft resolution issued as document
A/76/L.35. I give the floor to the representative of
Turkmenistan to introduce draft resolution A/76/L.35.
Mrs. Ataeva (Turkmenistan) (spoke in Russian):
On behalf of the delegations of Bahrain and my
country, Turkmenistan, I would like to introduce draft
resolution A/76/L.35, on the integration of mainstream
bicycling into public transportation systems for
sustainable development.
We thank all delegations for their constructive
and productive negotiations, thanks to which we
have developed a substantive draft text. We note with
satisfaction the continued broad interregional support
for the draft resolution. Besides the authors, 56 States
hav become sponsors of the draft. Throughout the
negotiations thereon, we made every effort to maintain
a constructive atmosphere and achieve consensus.
We all know that the bicycle was invented more
than 200 years ago and has been one of human beings’
main means of movement for more than 140 of those
years. According to current estimates, there are more
than 1 billion bicycles in the world and more than
50 per cent of the world’s population can ride a bike.
The global objectives set forth in the Sustainable
Development Goals are aimed at ensuring that we can
all enjoy our human rights. Cycling has already allowed
us to achieve some of those aims around the world, and
that is sufficient reason for increasing investment in
cycling. Ensuring that we have more sustainable modes
of transportation is hugely important to humankind
and the planet. The bicycle plays an important role in
mobility around the world. Considering the bicycle’s
convenience, health benefits and availability, it could
account for a much larger share of urban public
16/22

Since the COVID-19 pandemic began, transport
needs and behaviours have changed, leading many
cities to rethink their transport systems. The further
development of cycling should be accompanied by
more active efforts to increase road safety and to
integrate cycling into sustainable transport planning
and projections and design. We need investment in
urban infrastructure, including dedicated cycle lanes
and other measures to make cycling safer and to combat
car dominance.
In today’s draft resolution, it is proposed
that all Member States — both developing and
developed — integrate bicycling into public transport
in urban and rural regions. Member States should
also increase road safety and facilitate people’s and
businesses’ use of bicycles in order to increase the
number of trips made by bicycle. That in turn will
help us to achieve sustainable development, including
by reducing greenhouse-gas emissions. The draft
resolution also encourages Member States to pay
particular attention to bicycling in the context of
cross-cutting development strategies, including shared
use, and, depending on the circumstances, to include
cycle concepts and a bicycle network infrastructure
in international, regional, national and subnational
development policies and programmes.
22-28936

15/03/2022

A/76/PV.61

We firmly believe that the draft resolution offers
more opportunities for integrating mainstream
bicycling into public transportation systems for
sustainable development as a means of reliable and safe
transport. We encourage all members to support the
draft resolution and to join the list of-sponsors, which
will give an additional impetus to our joint efforts in
the area of transport.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/76/L.35.
The Assembly will now take a decision on
draft resolution A/76/L.35, entitled “Integration
of mainstream bicycling into public transportation
systems for sustainable development”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. Sharma (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to the delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors
of draft resolution A/76/L.35: Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belarus,
Burkina Faso, the Central African Republic, Chad,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Cuba,
Djibouti, the Dominican Republic, Egypt, El Salvador,
Fiji, Guatemala, Honduras, Iraq, Japan, Kazakhstan,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Madagascar, Maldives,
Mauritania, Monaco, Mongolia, Nicaragua, Oman,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, the Russian
Federation, Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Sri
Lanka, the Sudan, Togo, Tonga, Tunisia, the United
Arab Emirates, the United Republic of Tanzania, the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Yemen.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/76/L.35?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 76/255).

A/76/L.35

was

adopted

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (i)
of agenda item 20.

Agenda item 116 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections
(e) Election of members of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law
The President: The 30 outgoing Member States
are as follows: Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belarus,
Brazil, Burundi, Chile, Colombia, the Czech Republic,
India, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Italy, Kenya,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Mauritius, Nigeria, Pakistan,
the Philippines, Poland, Romania, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Thailand, Turkey, Uganda, the United States of America
and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela. Those
Member States are eligible for immediate re-election.
I should like to inform members that the
following States will continue to be represented on the
Commission: Algeria, Belgium, Cameroon, Canada,
China, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, the Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Finland, France, Germany, Ghana, Honduras,
Hungary, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, Mali, Mexico,
Peru, the Republic of Korea, the Russian Federation,
Singapore, South Africa, Switzerland, Ukraine, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Viet Nam and Zimbabwe. Those 30 States are not
eligible for election.
Members will recall that the Assembly, by its
resolution 76/109 of 9 December 2021, decided to
increase the membership of the Commission from
60 to 70 States. Of the 10 additional members, five
States — that is, one from each regional group — will
be elected during the election to be held during the
seventy-sixth session of the General Assembly, which
will take place today. That will increase the number of
seats to be filled by each regional group in this election
as follows: for the African States, from seven to eight;
for the Asia-Pacific States, from seven to eight; for the
Eastern European States, from four to five; for the Latin
American and Caribbean States, from five to six; and
for the Western European and other States, from seven
to eight seats. The remaining five additional members
will be elected during the seventy-ninth session of the
General Assembly.
The General Assembly will now proceed to the
election to replace those members whose term of office
will expire on 26 June 2022, as well as to elect the five
additional members pursuant to resolution 76/109. In
accordance with rule 92 of the rules of procedure, the

22-2893617/22

A/76/PV.61

election shall be held by secret ballot. I should like to
recall, however, paragraph 16 of General Assembly
decision 34/401, whereby the practice of dispensing
with the secret ballot for elections to subsidiary bodies
when the number of candidates corresponds to the
number of seats to be filled should become standard,
unless a delegation specifically requests a vote on a
given election.
In the absence of such a request, may I take it
that the Assembly decides to proceed to this election
on the basis of dispensing with the secret ballot
where applicable?
It was so decided.
The President: I would like to give members some
information with regard to candidatures. For the eight
seats from among the African States, the names of eight
endorsed candidates from the following countries have
been communicated to the Secretariat: the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Kenya, Malawi, Mauritius,
Morocco, Nigeria, Somalia and Uganda. For the eight
seats from among the Asia-Pacific States, the names of
eight endorsed candidates from the following countries
have been communicated: Afghanistan, India, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia,
Thailand and Turkmenistan. For the five seats from
among the Eastern European States, the names of five
candidates from the following countries have been
communicated: Armenia, Belarus, Bulgaria, the Czech
Republic and Poland. For the six seats from among the
Latin American and Caribbean States, the names of
six candidates from the following countries have been
communicated: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia,
Panama and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela. For
the eight seats from among the Western European and
other States, the names of seven endorsed candidates
from the following countries have been communicated:
Australia, Austria, Israel, Italy, Spain, Turkey and the
United States of America.
Since the number of candidates corresponds to, or
is fewer than, the number of seats to be filled from each
Group, may I take it that the General Assembly wishes
to elect those candidates for a six-year term, beginning
on 27 June 2022, which corresponds to the first day of
the fifty-fifth session of the Commission, and expiring
on the last day prior to the beginning of the sixty-first
session of the Commission in 2028?
It was so decided (decision 76/416).
18/22

15/03/2022

I congratulate the following States, which
have been elected members of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade law for a sixyear term beginning on 27 June 2022: Afghanistan,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belarus,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile, Colombia, the Czech Republic,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, India, Iraq, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Italy, Kenya, Kuwait,
Malawi, Mauritius, Morocco, Nigeria, Panama, Poland,
Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Spain, Thailand, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, the United States of America
and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Members are reminded that one vacancy remains to
be filled from among the Western European and other
States for the term beginning on 27 June 2022 and
expiring on the last day prior to the beginning of the
sixty-first session of the Commission in 2028.
I now give the floor to delegations wishing to make
statements after the election.
Mr. Ludchak (Ukraine): I would like to inform the
Assembly that the delegation of Ukraine dissociates
itself from the consensus on the election of Belarus to
the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law. The Assembly’s adoption by an overwhelming
majority on 2 March at its emergency special session
of resolution ES-11/1, entitled “Aggression against
Ukraine”, reaffirmed its strong commitment to the main
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, which
have been flagrantly violated by the Russian Federation.
In particular, in the wake of Russia’s unprovoked and
all-out invasion of Ukraine, the resolution also clearly
deplores Belarus’s involvement in the unlawful use
of force against Ukraine. In that regard, we consider
Belarus’s election to the Commission to be unethical
and immoral.
Mr. Fodda (France) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union
and its member States. Albania, Andorra, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Georgia, Iceland, Liechtenstein,
Moldova, Monaco, Montenegro, North Macedonia and
Norway also align themselves with this statement.
The States Members of the United Nations share the
responsibility for upholding the fundamental principles
of the Organization enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations and defending the credibility of the
United Nations system. The unprovoked and unjustified
military aggression by the Russian Federation against
Ukraine, with the participation of Belarus, represents
22-28936

15/03/2022

a flagrant violation of international law and the
Charter and undermines international security and
stability. Russia and its accomplice, Belarus, bear full
responsibility for this war of aggression. Resolution
ES-11/1, adopted by the General Assembly on 2 March,
deplores the fact that Belarus is complicit in the illegal
use of force against Ukraine and demands that it uphold
its international obligations.
In the circumstances, the Member States on behalf
of which I am speaking dissociate themselves from
the consensus on the election of Belarus to the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law and
reaffirm their full solidarity with Ukraine and the
Ukrainian people.
Mr. Fogarty (United States of America): The
United States dissociates itself from the consensus on
Belarus’s election to the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law, in the light of that country’s
role in Russia’s unprovoked further invasion of Ukraine,
which is in direct violation of international law and the
international principles that we as Member States have
all pledged to respect.
Mr. Yates (Australia): I would like to make a brief
statement on behalf of Australia, Canada and New
Zealand (CANZ). CANZ joins others in the General
Assembly in condemning in the strongest possible terms
Russia’s unprovoked and unjustified attack on Ukraine.
Furthermore, we condemn Belarus for its role in aiding
and abetting Russia’s aggression, including allowing
Russia to launch attacks from its territory. While we
have joined others in supporting the consensus on the
nomination of the candidates from the Group of Eastern
European States to the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law, that should not be interpreted
as our Governments’ tacit approval of Belarus’s
appointment to the Commission. Australia, Canada and
New Zealand choose to dissociate themselves from that
appointment. Together we reiterate our staunch support
for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and people
of Ukraine.
Mr. Croker (United Kingdom): The States
Members of the United Nations have a responsibility
to uphold the Charter of the United Nations and
defend the credibility of the United Nations system.
Belarus is joining the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law while facilitating Russia’s
illegal invasion of Ukraine. Resolution ES-11/1,
adopted by the General Assembly on 2 March, deplores

A/76/PV.61

the involvement of Belarus in the unlawful use of force
against Ukraine. The Belarusian regime stands in clear
violation of international law in its support of Russia.
We therefore join others in dissociating ourselves from
the consensus on the election of Belarus to the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
With regard to sub-item (e) of agenda item 116,
on the election of members of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law, and the
nomination of candidates from the Group of Western
European and other States, my delegation would
like to state that the Islamic Republic of Iran values
the work of the Commission as a subsidiary body of
the General Assembly that is responsible for helping
facilitate international trade and investment. With
that understanding, my delegation did not object to the
candidates endorsed by the Group of Western European
and other States and did not request a secret ballot for the
election of new members from that region. Meanwhile,
we would like to state that joining the consensus on
endorsing new members from that Group should not
be construed as expressing recognition of the Israeli
regime. Furthermore, we would like to dissociate
ourselves from the consensus on Israel’s election to
the Commission.
Mr. Shaev (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): We call
on our colleagues to refrain from politicizing issues
in the General Assembly when they are not relevant to
the subject of the meeting. We are once again seeing
a biased approach from a group of countries, mainly
from the West, whose accusations against us we
consider unjustified. The Republic of Belarus remains
committed to the norms of international law.
Mr. Kawase (Japan): Belarus has allowed Russian
troops to pass through its territory and is clearly
involved in the recent aggression against Ukraine,
which is a blatant violation of international law and the
Charter of the United Nations. Japan strongly condemns
it. At this time, unfortunately, Japan is therefore
compelled to dissociate itself from the consensus on
Belarus’s election to the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL), as there
are doubts surrounding its qualifications to function
properly in an institution such as UNCITRAL that
aims to support the rule of law. I would like to take this
opportunity to call on Belarus to heed the overwhelming
voice of the international community as reflected in

22-2893619/22

A/76/PV.61

15/03/2022

resolution ES-11/1, adopted on 2 March during the
emergency special session of the General Assembly.

Lozinskiy of the Russian Federation and Ms. Sukai
Prom-Jackson of the Gambia.

Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We have once again been confronted with
an unacceptable example of politicization in the work
of the General Assembly. Elections to a subsidiary
body of the General Assembly should be conducted
in line with the Assembly’s rules of procedure. Any
State that has the right to participate in a meeting of
the Assembly has the right to be elected. What we have
heard today are nothing but political insinuations with
entirely lawless motives. Right now, the very States that
are claiming that Belarus should not be on the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law are
themselves trampling on that same international trade
law by using commercial mechanisms and leverage to
settle scores.

In accordance with the procedures described
in paragraph 1 of article 3 of the statute of the
Joint Inspection Unit and with resolution 61/238
of 22 December 2006, the President of the General
Assembly, having held the necessary consultations with
the regional groups concerned, requested Antigua and
Barbuda, Botswana, Iraq and the Russian Federation to
propose candidates to serve for a period of five years
beginning on 1 January 2023.

We are all very familiar with the history of the
conflict in Ukraine. What is going on with regard to
Belarus is an orgy of a shabby kind of vengeance that is
unworthy of discussion in this forum, and it is a great
pity that it is taking place here. Our calls for getting
on with our work continue to go unheeded. Peace will
absolutely be restored in Ukraine, and at that point
many States will regret their attitude towards their
partners and comrades at this very difficult time.
The President: We have heard the last speaker for
this item. The General Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of sub-item (e) of agenda
item 116.
Agenda item 117 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(g) Appointment of members of the Joint
Inspection Unit
Note by the President of the General Assembly
(A/76/637)
The President: As indicated in the note by the
President of the General Assembly circulated in
document A/76/637, the General Assembly is required
during the current session to appoint four members to
fill the vacancies on the Joint Inspection Unit that will
arise from the expiration on 31 December 2022 of the
term of office of Mr. Gopinathan Achamkulangare of
India, Mr. Jean Wesley Cazeau of Haiti, Mr. Nikolay
20/22

As indicated in document A/76/637, the
candidates, in accordance with resolution 59/267
of 23 December 2004, should have experience in at
least one of the following fields: oversight, audit,
inspection, investigation, evaluation, finance, project
evaluation, programme evaluation, human resources
management, management, public administration,
monitoring and programme performance, as well as
knowledge of the United Nations system and its role in
international relations.
As further indicated in document A/76/637, as a result
of the consultations held in accordance with paragraph
2 of article 3 of the statute of the Joint Inspection
Unit, including consultations with the President of the
Economic and Social Council and with the SecretaryGeneral, in his capacity as Chair of the United Nations
System Chief Executives Board for Coordination, the
President of the General Assembly has submitted to the
Assembly the candidature of Mr. Conrod C. Hunte of
Antigua and Barbuda, Mr. Gaeimelwe Goitsemang of
Botswana, Mr. Mohanad Ali Omran Al-Musawi of Iraq
and Mr. Pavel Chernikov of the Russian Federation for
appointment as members of the Joint Inspection Unit
for a five-year term of office beginning 1 January 2023
and expiring on 31 December 2027.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to appoint Mr. Conrod C. Hunte of Antigua
and Barbuda, Mr. Gaeimelwe Goitsemang of Botswana,
Mr. Mohanad Ali Omran Al-Musawi of Iraq and
Mr. Pavel Chernikov of the Russian Federation as
members of the Joint Inspection Unit for a five-year
term of office beginning on 1 January 2023 and expiring
on 31 December 2027?
It was so decided (decision 76/417).
The President: I now give the floor to delegations
to make statements after the appointment.
22-28936

15/03/2022

Mr. Fodda (France) (spoke in French): I once again
have the honour of speaking on behalf of the European
Union and its member States. Albania, Andorra, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Georgia, Iceland, Liechtenstein,
Moldova, Monaco, Montenegro, North Macedonia and
Norway align themselves with this statement.
Russia’s unprovoked and unjustified military
aggression against Ukraine, in blatant violation of the
founding principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
is inflicting indescribable suffering on the Ukrainian
people. There are serious concerns that the Russian
army may have committed war crimes. Here in this Hall
the Russian Government is demonstrating its disdain for
human life and international humanitarian law, as well
as for the Assembly. On 2 March the Assembly adopted
resolution ES-11/1 by an overwhelming majority,
demanding that Russia immediately cease its military
action and withdraw all its forces from Ukraine’s
territory within its internationally recognized borders.
In the circumstances, the member States on
behalf of whom this statement is delivered dissociate
themselves from the consensus on the appointment to
the Joint Inspection Unit of the candidate presented by
the Russian Federation. We would like to add that as
a member of the Joint Inspection Unit, Mr. Chernikov
should carry out his duties in an independent manner
and free of any politics that might prevent him from
doing his job objectively.
Mr. Ludchak (Ukraine): Under no circumstances
do we support the appointment of Mr. Chernikov to the
Joint Inspection Unit.
As the large-scale aggression against Ukraine is
only intensifying, with its inhumane cruelty to civilians,
direct shelling of critical civilian infrastructure and
hostage-taking of women and children, we consider the
appointment of the representative of the aggressor State
to be unethical and immoral. Moreover, Russia’s very
presence in the United Nations, both politically and
legally, is open to question. The full responsibility for
the appointment of the Russian representative lies with
the leadership of the United Nations and its agencies,
which are continuing to appoint Russian nationals
during the ongoing war against Ukraine. In that regard,
I want to inform the Assembly that the delegation of
Ukraine dissociates itself from the consensus regarding
the appointment of the Russian Federation’s candidate
to the Joint Inspection Unit.

A/76/PV.61

Mr. Croker (United Kingdom): The Russian
Federation’s unprovoked and unjustified military
aggression against Ukraine is a flagrant violation of the
Charter of the United Nations and Ukraine’s territorial
integrity. The Assembly condemned Russia’s actions on
2 March (see A/ES-11/PV.5), calling on Russia to cease
its military actions immediately and withdraw all of its
forces from the territory of Ukraine. It has not done so.
No amount of disinformation or lies — such as those
we heard earlier today and will no doubt hear again from
Russia and its allies, here or in other forums — will
change that. Russia remains in breach of the Charter of
the United Nations. We therefore dissociate ourselves
from the consensus, and specifically with regard to the
appointment of the candidate presented for the Joint
Inspection Unit by the Russian Federation.
Mr. Yates (Australia): I would like to make another
brief statement on behalf of Canada, Australia and
New Zealand.
As we said earlier in this meeting, we condemn
Russia’s unprovoked and illegal attack on Ukraine. Our
joining the consensus on the appointment of members
of the Joint Inspection Unit should not be interpreted
as tacit approval or endorsement of the appointment
of a Russian national to the Joint Inspection Unit.
Australia, Canada and New Zealand choose to
dissociate themselves from the Russian national’s
appointment to the Joint Inspection Unit and reiterate
our staunch support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity.
Mr. Chumakov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Since the Russian delegation has already
spoken on the issue of elections, I am not going to
repeat what was said. I would simply like to express
regret about the politicization of the elections and the
lying accusations made about my country. I would also
like to remind the Assembly that Russia’s candidate,
Mr. Pavel Chernikov, is a prominent expert and a true
professional with a great deal of experience — more
than 38 years, in fact. There can be no doubt that he will
make a valuable contribution to the work of the Joint
Inspection Unit.
Mr. Alshahin (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): Some delegations are trying to take
advantage of this meeting to distract attention from
its main purpose, which is elections and appointments
to subsidiary bodies of the General Assembly. The
issues they are raising today are purely political, but

22-2893621/22

A/76/PV.61

there are other forums available to discuss them rather
than in today’s meeting. I would therefore like to urge
you, Mr. President, to ask the representatives of those
countries to stick to the main topic of the meeting.
We condemn the words of some representatives
criticizing the Russian Federation. Considering that the
chief topic of today’s discussions is elections, if Russia
is being condemned we should be condemning Israel’s
repeated acts of aggression against my country, along
with the occupation by Turkey and the United States
of territories in north-eastern and north-western Syria.
The President: We have heard the last speaker for
this item. May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (g)
of agenda item 117?
It was so decided.
(h) Appointment of members of the Board
of the 10-Year Framework of Programmes
on Sustainable Consumption and
Production Patterns
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly, by its resolution 67/203 of 21 December
2012, decided to establish a 10-member Board of the
10-Year Framework of Programmes on Sustainable
Consumption and Production Patterns, consisting of
two members from each United Nations regional group.
Members will also recall that the Assembly, by its
resolution 69/214 of 19 December 2014, decided that
the duration of subsequent terms for members of the
Board should continue to be two years, starting on
16 September of every second year, and that the United
Nations regional groups may renominate one of their
existing two members of the Board for one consecutive
term, while ensuring that no Member State may be
eligible to serve more than two consecutive terms
and taking into account the importance of ensuring
continuity and rotation in the work of the Board.
As outlined in the letter from the President of the
General Assembly dated 31 January 2022, I propose
that the two-year term of members of the Board shall

22/22

15/03/2022

begin on the date of appointment, that is, 15 March
2022, taking into account resolution 69/214.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
proceed accordingly?
It was so decided.
The President: In that regard, the Secretariat
has received nominations from Costa Rica, Croatia,
Kuwait, Mauritius, Senegal, Sweden and the United
States of America for the term beginning on 15 March
2022 and ending on 14 March 2024.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes
to appoint Costa Rica, Croatia, Kuwait, Mauritius,
Senegal, Sweden and the United States of America
as members of the Board of the 10-Year Framework
of Programmes on Sustainable Consumption and
Production Patterns for a term beginning on 15 March
2022 and ending on 14 March 2024?
It was so decided (decision 76/418 B).
The President: Members are reminded that
vacancies remain to be filled for a term beginning on
the date of appointment and expiring on 14 March 2024
by one member from among the Asia-Pacific States,
one member from among the Eastern European States
and one member from among the Latin American and
Caribbean States.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (h) of agenda
item 117.
Agenda item 67 (continued)
The situation in the temporarily occupied
territories of Ukraine
The President: I have been informed that the
remaining speakers carried over from the 59th plenary
meeting, on 23 February, no longer wish to take
the floor.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 67.
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.

22-28936
