Ill.

Raolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee _

3. Expresses the conviction that such a treaty would
constitute a vital element for the success of efforts to halt
and reverse the nuclear-anns race and the qualitative im­
provement of nuclear weapons, and to prevent the expansion
of existing nuclear arsenals and the spread of nuclear weap­
ons to additional countries;
4. Notes that the Committee on Disarmament, in the
exercise of its responsibilities as the multilateral disanna­
ment negotiating forum, established on 21 April 1982 12 an
Ad Hoe Working Group under item 1 of its agenda, entitled
"Nuclear-test ban", and, considering that discussion of spe­
cific issues in the first instance might facilitate progress
towards negotiation of a nuclear-test ban, requested the Ad
Hoe Working Group:
(a) To discuss and define, through substantive exami­
nation, issues relating to verification and compliance, with
a view to making further progress towards a nuclear-test
ban;
(b) To take into account all existing proposals and future
initiatives and report to the Committee on the progress of
its work before the conclusion of the session in 1982;
5. Also notes that the Committee on Disarmament agreed
that it would thereafter take a decision on subsequent courses
of action with a view to fulfilling its responsibilities in this
regard;
6. Further notes that the Ad Hoe Working Group has
initiated consideration of the issues under its mandate;
7. Requests the Committee on Disannament to continue
the consideration of those issues and to take the necessary
steps to initiate substantive negotiations in order that the
draft of a comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty may be
submitted to the General Assembly at the earliest possible
date;
8. Urges all members of the Committee on Disarma­
ment, in particular the nuclear-weapon States, to co-operate
with the Committee in fulfilling these tasks;
9. Also requests the Committee on Disannament to de­
termine, in the context of its negotiations on such a treaty,
the institutional and administrative arrangements necessary
for establishing, testing and operating an international seis­
mic monitoring network and an effective verification system;
I 0. Calls upon the Committee on Disarmament to report
on progress to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth
session;
l l . Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session an item entitled "Urgent need for a
comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty''.
98th plenary meeting
9 December 1982
37n4.

Implementation of the Declaration on the
Denuclearization of Africa
A
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE DECLARATION

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the Declaration on the Denuclearization
of Africa 13 adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity at its first
ordinary session, held at Cairo from 17 to 21 July 1964,
Recalling resolution 1652 (XVI) of 24 November 1961,
its earliest on the subject, as well as resolutions 32/81 of
12 Ibid., para. 39.
"Ibid.. Twentieth Session, Annexes, agenda item 105, document
A/5975.

12 December 1977, 33/63 of 14 December 1978, 34/76 A
of 11 December 1979, 35/146 B of 12 December 1980 and
36/86 B of 9 December 1981, in which it called upon all
States to consider and respect the continent of Africa as a
nuclear-weapon-free zone, in particular resolution 33/63 in
which it vigorously condemned any overt or covert attempt
by South Africa to introduce nuclear weapons into the
continent,
Noting with concern that South Africa's continued pursuit
of a nuclear-weapon capability seriously jeopardizes the
realization of the objective of a denuclearized Africa and
poses a grave danger not only to the security of African
States but also to international peace and security,
Taking note of the report of the Security Council Com­
mittee established by resolution 421 (1977) concerning the
question of South Africa on ways and means of making the
mandatory arms embargo against South Africa more effec­
tive, 14 in particular its recommendation that all forms of
nuclear collaboration with South Africa should cease,
Expressing its indignation that certain Western States and
Israel have, in flagrant and defiant violation of its relevant
resolutions and in utter disregard of international concern
on the subject, continued to collaborate with South Africa
in the nuclear field, despite the risk and danger of prolif­
eration of nuclear weapons which the nuclear programme
of the racist regime represents and poses to the legitimate
right of African States to live in peace within secure borders,
Recalling its decision, contained in the Final Document
of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, the
first special session devoted to disannament, that the Se­
curity Council should take appropriate steps to prevent the
frustration of the objective of the Organization of African
Unity for the denuclearization of Africa, 1 5
Recalling that in the Final Document it noted that the
accumulation of annaments and the acquisition of anna­
ments technology by racist regimes, as well as their possible
acquisition of nuclear weapons, present a chalJenging and
an increasingly dangerous obstacle to a world community
faced with the urgent need to disarm, 16
l. Once again reiterates its call upon all States to con­
sider and respect the continent of Africa and its surrounding
areas as a nuclear-weapon-free zone;
2. Condemns all forms of nuclear collaboration by any
State, corporation, institution or individual with the racist
regime of South Africa since such collaboration enables it
to frustrate, inter alia, the objective of the DecJaration on
the Denuclearization of Africa which seeks to keep Africa
free from nucJear weapons;
3. Calls upon all States, corporations, institutions and
individuals to terminate forthwith all military and nuclear
colJaboration with the racist regime of South Africa, in­
cJuding the provision to it of such related dual-purpose ma­
terials as computers, electronic equipment and related
technology;
4. Requests the Security Council, for the purposes of
disannament, to take enforcement measures, through strict
adherence by all States to its relevant decisions, to prevent
any racist regimes from acquiring any anns or arms
technology;
5. Requests the Security Council in this connection to
concJude expeditiously its consideration of the recommen­
dations of its Committee established by resolution 421 (1977)
concerning the question of South Africa with a view to
14
Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-fifth Year, Supplement
for July, August and September 1980, document S/14179.
"Resolution S-10/2, para. 63 (c).
16
Ibid .. para. 12.

56

General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

blocking the existing loopholes in the arms embargo, ren­
dering it more effective and prohibiting in particular all
forms of co-operation and collaboration with the racist re­
gime of South Africa in the nuclear field;
6. Demands that South Africa submit all its nuclear
installations and facilities to inspection by the International
Atomic Energy Agency;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session the item entitled "Implementation of
the Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa''.
98th plenary meeting
9 December 1982
B
NUCLEAR CAPABILITY OF SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 34/76 B of 11 December 1979,

35/146 A of 12 December 1980 and 36/86 A of 9 December
1981,
Bearing in mind the Declaration on the Denuclearization
of Africa 13 adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity at its first
ordinary session, held at Cairo from I 7 to 2 I July I 964,
Recalling that, in its resolution 33/63 of 14 December
1978, it vigorously condemned any overt or covert attempt
by South Africa to introduce nuclear weapons into the con­
tinent and demanded that South Africa refrain forthwith
from conducting any nuclear explosion in the continent of
Africa or elsewhere,
Recalling also that in the Final Document of the Tenth
Special Session of the General Assembly it noted that the
accumulation of armaments and the acquisition of arma­
ments technology by racist regimes, as well as their possible
acquisition of nuclear weapons, presented a challenging and
an increasingly dangerous obstacle to a world community
faced with the urgent need to disarm, 16
Alarmed that South Africa's nuclear programme has en­
abled it to acquire a nuclear-weapon capability and that that
capability has been enhanced by the continued support and
active collaboration which certain Western States and Israel
have readily given to it in pursuance of their economic
interests and geostrategic designs, in gross violation of the
relevant resolutions and decisions of the United Nations,
Taking note of the report of the Security Council Com­
mittee established by resolution 421 (1977) concerning the
question of South Africa on ways and means of making the
mandatory arms embargo against South Africa more effec­
tive, 14 as well as the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolution 473 ( 1980), 17
Having examined the report of the Group of Experts on
South Africa's Plan and Capability in the Nuclear Field 18
as well as the reports of the Secretary-General of 3 Septem­
ber 198119 and 20 September 198220 submitted pursuant to
General Assembly resolutions 35/146 A and 36/86 A on the
nuclear capability of South Africa,
Gravely concerned that South Africa, in flagrant violation
of the principles of international law and the relevant pro­
visions of the Charter of the United Nations, has continued
its military attacks against independent States of southern
Africa, in particular Angola, part of which still remains
occup1e<1 by South African forces, and has increased its acts
of subversion aimed at destabilizing those States,
17
Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-fifth Year, Supplement
for July, August and September 1980, document S/14167.
'" South Africa's Plan and Capability in the Nuclear Field (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.81.1. JO).
19
N36/430.
20
N37/432

Expressing its utter disappointment that certain Western
States have continued to collaborate with the racist regime
of South Africa in its nuclear and military build-up and
have, by a ready recourse to the use of the veto, consistently
frustrated every effort at the United Nations to deal with
the South African question,
1. Deplores the massive build-up of South Africa's mil­
itary machine, including its frenzied acquisition of a nuclear­
weapon capability for repressive and aggressive purposes
and as an instrument of blackmail;
2. Reaffirms that the acquisition of nuclear capability
by the racist regime constitutes a very grave danger to in­
ternational peace and security and, in particular, jeopardizes
the security of African States and increases the danger of
the proliferation of nuclear weapons;
3. Requests the Disarmament Commission to consider
substantively the question of South Africa's nuclear capa­
bility pursuant, inter alia, to the findings contained in sec­
tion VII of the report of the Group of Experts on South
Africa's Plan and Capability in the Nuclear Field; 18
4. Requests the Security Council, for the purposes of
disarmament, to take enforcement measures, through strict
adherence by all States to its relevant decisions, to prevent
any racist regimes from acquiring arms or arms technology;
5. Calls upon all States, corporations, institutions and
individuals to terminate forthwith all military and nuclear
collaboration with the racist regime of South Africa, in­
cluding the provision to it of such materials as computers,
electronic equipment and related technology;
6. Demands that South Africa respect international con­
cern for peace and stability in Africa by terminating forth­
with its development of the capability to produce nuclear
weapons and that it submit all its nuclear installations and
facilities to inspection by the International Atomic Energy
Agency;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to follow closely South
Africa's evolution in the nuclear field and to report thereon
to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session the item entitled "Implementation of
the Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa".
98th plenary meeting
9 December 1982

37/75. Establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in
the region of the Middle East
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3263 (XXIX) of 9 December
1974, 3474 (XXX) of 11 December 1975, 31/71 of 10

December 1976, 32/82 of 12 December 1977, 33/64 of 14
December 1978, 34/77 of 11 December 1979, 35/147 of 12
December I 980 and 36/87 of 9 December I 981 on the
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region
of the Middle East,
Recalling also the recommendations for the establishment
of such a zone in the Middle East consistent with paragraphs
60 to 63, in particular paragraph 63 (d), of the Final Doc­
ument of the Tenth Special Session of the General
Assembly, 2 1
Emphasizing the basic provisions of the above-mentioned
resolutions, which call upon all parties directly concerned
to consider taking the practical and urgent steps required
for the implementation of the proposal to establish a nuclear­
weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East and,
pending and during the establishment of such a zone, to
" Resolution S- I0/2
