A /73/PV.103

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-third session

103rd plenary meeting

Friday, 30 August 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Garcés . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ecuador)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 6 (continued)
Election of the Vice-Presidents of the
General Assembly
Election of the Vice-Presidents of the General
Assembly for the seventy-fourth session
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
will now resume its consideration of agenda item 6 to
proceed to the election of one remaining Vice-President
of the General Assembly for the seventy-fourth session,
in accordance with rule 30 of its rules of procedure.
Members will recall that, at its 87th plenary meeting,
on 4 June, the Assembly elected 20 Vice-Presidents of
the General Assembly for the seventy-fourth session.
The Assembly was informed that one remaining seat
for Latin American and Caribbean States would be
filled at a later date to be announced.
In a note verbale dated 7 August, the Permanent
Mission of Belize to the United Nations reaffirmed its
candidature for one of the vacancies of Vice-President
allocated to the Latin American and Caribbean States.
In accordance with paragraph 16 of decision 34/401,
the election of the Vice-Presidents of the Assembly by
secret ballot will be dispensed with when the number
of candidates corresponds to the number of seats to be
filled. We shall proceed accordingly.
Since there is only one candidate for one seat to be
filled from among the Latin American and Caribbean

States, I declare Belize elected Vice-President of the
General Assembly at its seventy-fourth session. I
congratulate Belize on its deserved election.
I wish to remind members that following the
election of the Chair of the Fifth Committee, at a later
date, the General Committee of the General Assembly
at its seventy-fourth session will be fully constituted, in
accordance with rule 38 of the rules of procedure.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
conclude its consideration of agenda item 6?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 14 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolution (A/73/L.108)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Finland to introduce draft
resolution A/73/L.108.
Mr. Tanner (Finland): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the European Union
(EU). The EU and its member States are very pleased
that today the General Assembly will adopt a draft
resolution that endorses the agreed recommendations
of the work of the ad hoc open-ended working group
established under resolution 72/277, entitled “Towards
a Global Pact for the Environment”. We would like to

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-26667 (E)

*1926667*

A/73/PV.103

thank all delegations for their constructive engagement
in this process, both in Nairobi and here in New York.
Strengthening environmental protection and
governance remains an indispensable element of the
pathway towards global sustainable development.
Those issues are of the utmost urgency, as demonstrated
throughout the world by the impacts of climate change
and environmental degradation, biodiversity loss and
pollution. Solving such problems requires the global
cooperation and commitment of all.
The outcome of the ad hoc open-ended working
group includes a number of important substantive
recommendations on how to strengthen the
implementation of international environmental law
and governance, which we, as the General Assembly,
endorse today. We call upon all relevant stakeholders,
Governments,
international
organizations
and
conventions, scientists and civil society to implement
those recommendations with urgency.
Based on the work of the next United Nations
Environment Assembly, a United Nations high-level
meeting will agree on a political declaration in the near
future. That will be an important occasion to demonstrate
at highest political level our joint commitment to
strengthening international environmental protection.
We look forward to continuing the constructive
work with all other delegations to prepare for the highlevel meeting in the most effective and efficient way
and to ensure an ambitious political declaration.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolution A/73/L.108,
entitled “Follow up to the report of the ad hoc openended working group established pursuant to General
Assembly resolution 72/277”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors of
draft resolution A/73/L.108: Andorra, Colombia, Fiji,
Georgia, Kenya, Lesotho, Monaco, Morocco, San
Marino, Senegal and Ukraine.
The President: Before we formally adopt the
draft resolution, I would like to thank Member States,
2/4

30/08/2019

the co-sponsors and, in particular, the delegation of
Finland for its leadership and timely follow-up on the
recommendations of the ad hoc open-ended working
group established pursuant to resolution 72/277,
entitled “Towards a Global Pact for the Environment”.
This plenary meeting provides a formal opportunity to
recognize the hard work of the co-Chairs of the working
group, Her Excellency Ms. Amal Mudallali, Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations, and
His Excellency Mr. Francisco Duarte Lopes, Permanent
Representative of Portugal to the United Nations. I am
delighted to take this opportunity to thank the co-Chairs
and all delegations for the important role they played
in reaching consensual recommendations on this very
important topic.
As mentioned in the briefing on this topic
on 9 July, the General Assembly now has a set
of actionable recommendations with regard to
multilateral
environmental
frameworks
and
international environmental law and on how to ensure
that we are on track to realize our shared ambitions.
I am counting on Member States to take action based
on those recommendations and to use them as a
stepladder to our collective drive for greater ambition
on all three dimensions all the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
(spoke in Spanish)
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/73/L.108?
Draft resolution A/73/L.108 was adopted (resolution
73/333).
The President (spoke in Spanish): Before giving
the floor to delegations in explanation of position, may
I remind delegations that explanations are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by the delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Lawrence (United States of America): First,
I would like to thank Finland for its facilitation of
resolution 73/333.
With this resolution and its annex, the United States
reaffirms its position on references to the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda, the Rio+20 outcome document, entitled “The
future we want”, and the 1992 Rio Declaration, among
other documents, as reflected in our general statement
delivered to the General Assembly on 8 November
19-26667

30/08/2019

2018. We also reiterate our statement delivered at the
conclusion of the session of the ad hoc open-ended
working group in Nairobi on 22 May 2019.
With respect to recommendations relating to
multilateral environmental agreements, including
recommendations referring to policy coherence, we
underscore that it is the governing bodies of such
instruments that determine the policies and priorities
to be addressed under those agreements and by
their secretariats.
With respect to the language on means of
implementation in paragraph (b) of the annex, the
United States notes that the language is not to be
understood as implying a call for increased financing
from any particular country, and we emphasize the
role of all sources in the mobilization of means of
implementation. We underscore in particular the need
for an expansion of the donor pool beyond traditional
donors and the increasingly important role of domestic
resource mobilization and private investment, while
noting in particular the need for good governance,
transparency and strong investment climates.
We want to reiterate that the United States supports
strong levels of environmental protection as part of a
balanced approach to promote economic growth and
foster access to affordable and reliable energy while
protecting the environment.
Mr. Kvalheim (Norway): The Norwegian delegation
would like to express its satisfaction at the adoption of
resolution 73/333. We once again thank the co-Chairs,
who guided our efforts to this successful conclusion.
Recent reports from the Intergovernmental
Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem
Services and the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change, as well as the United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP) report entitled Global Environment
Outlook 6, all share one overarching finding: in spite of
everything we are doing, our efforts are not yet sufficient
to curb the overall trajectory in terms of climate
change, biodiversity loss and plastic pollution in our
oceans, among other things. Effective environmental
governance includes implementation, monitoring and,
yes, enforcement at the appropriate levels as part of
the solution. Norway will work with Member States
to implement the resolution’s recommendations, in
particular as they pertain to the fifth session of the
United Nations Environment Assembly.

A/73/PV.103

Some aspects require further guidance, such as the
modalities around the commemoration of the fiftieth
anniversary of the establishment of UNEP at the
Conference on the Human Environment in Stockholm.
On the political declaration, we will work closely with
Member States in Nairobi and with our colleagues in
the United Nations Environment Assembly Bureau,
with the support of the United Nations Environment
secretariat, to take the next step.
As part of our consistent and long-standing tradition
of working for global action for sustainable action,
Norway is committed to working for a declaration that
galvanizes the political will required for us to step
up action needed to address the global environmental
challenges we all face.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the last speaker in explanation of position. The Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 14.
Agenda item 128 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(s) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
Draft resolution (A/73/L.106)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Russian Federation to
introduce draft resolution A/73/L.106.
Mr. Popov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): On behalf of the States members of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), I would
like to introduce draft resolution A/73/L.106, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization”. The work on this
year’s draft resolution — and such a draft resolution is
regularly put forward for consideration by the General
Assembly — was difficult, requiring substantial efforts
and a readiness to engage in constructive cooperation
towards compromise solutions by all parties.
In that connection, we would like to commend
in particular the decisive contributions of the Kyrgyz
delegation throughout all stages of the work on the
draft resolution. Our Kyrgyz colleagues coordinated
the process of consultations on the draft resolution
between November 2018 and June 2019, when the SCO

19-266673/4

A/73/PV.103

Summit of Heads of State was held in Bishkek. Russia
has since taken over the presidency of the SCO.
The customary broad-based support for this draft
resolution serves to underscore the importance attached
to the consistent development of cooperation between
the United Nations and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization. We firmly believe that it will allow for
productive collaboration between the two organizations
in the interests of security and stability around the world.
Fifteen years ago, through resolution 59/48, of
2 December 2004, the General Assembly granted
observer status to the SCO, marking the beginning of
dialogue between the United Nations and that young
regional organization. Today the SCO is rapidly
developing and playing a decisive role in regional
affairs, which is also bolstering its international
authority. Its eight member States — China, India,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Pakistan, Russia, Tajikistan
and Uzbekistan — account for almost half the
population of the planet and around a quarter of global
gross domestic product. In their capacity as observers
and dialogue partners, another 10 States — spread
widely, from South-East Asia to Europe — participate
in its work. A key priority of the SCO is the fight again
terrorism, illegal drug trafficking and cross-border
crime in the region. In that regard, it is underpinned
by a robust legal treaty and the necessary practical
mechanisms, including the SCO regional counterterrorism structure.
The SCO Convention on Countering Extremism
entered into force this year. It is open for accession by
any State. The counter-narcotic strategy is also being
systematically implemented. A key area of our work is
cooperation in the economic sphere, with a focus on
supporting national strategies and integration initiatives
with a view to creating a space of broad, open, mutually
beneficial and equal cooperation to ensure reliable
security and sustainable development in Eurasia.
A cornerstone of the SCO is promoting dialogue
among civilizations and strengthening mutual trust
between peoples. At this stage, we are preparing
to hold joint activities to honour the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the victory over fascism in the Second

4/4

30/08/2019

World War. As President of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization in 2019 and 2020, Russia intends to work
energetically to further consolidate the SCO, boost its
role in international and regional affairs and enhance
its cooperation in the political, security, economic and
humanitarian spheres.
SCO member States are, as always, firmly
committed to the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. In that connection, an important dimension of
our joint work is strengthening the multifaceted forms
of cooperation with the United Nations, based on the
2010 joint declaration of cooperation between the United
Nations and SCO secretariats, and the memorandum of
understanding with its specialized agencies.
We call on all Member States to support draft
resolution A/73/L.106 and join the list of co-sponsors.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolution A/73/L.106,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/73/L.106, and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have also
become sponsors: Azerbaijan, Pakistan, Qatar, Sri
Lanka and Uzbekistan.
The President (spoke in Spanish): May I take it that
it is the wish of the Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/73/L.106?
Draft resolution A/73/L.106 was adopted (resolution
73/334).
The President (spoke in Spanish): May I take it
that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude
its consideration of sub-item (s) of agenda item 128?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 10.35 a.m.

19-26667
