V.

32/3.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second {:ommittee

Assistance for the reconstruction of Viet
Nam

The General Assembly,
Having warmly welcomed the admission of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to the United Nations,
Expressing prof ound admiration to the courageous
Vietnamese people in their struggle far independencc
and national reunification and their constant cfforts
devoted to national reconstruction,
Deeply concerned ovcr the grave economic and social
consequences of the long years of war furthcr aggravated by recent severe natural calamities,
Recalling the Secrctary-General's statement in his
report on the work of the Organization far 1974/1975
expressing the hope that the United Nations system
would be able to assist countries in the Indo-China
península in their efforts far national rehabilitation
after the war, 2
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 1944 (LVIII) of 7 May 197 5 appealing to ali
States to come to the assistance of the people of IndoChina in their efforts to bring about the reconstruction
of their countries, in accordancc with the needs and
requests of those countries, by ways and means which
the latter deem most appropriate and with full respect
far their national sovereignty,
Recalling further rcsolution 33 adopted by the World
Conference of the Intcrnational Womcn's Year, held
at Mexico City from 19 June to 2 July 197 5, Ón aid
to the Vietnam ese people, 3
Noting with appreciation the prompt and pertinent
efforts made by the Secretary-General and by the
organs, agencies and programmes of the United Nations
to mobilize assistance to meet the most pressing humanitarian needs in Viet Nam and to help organize rclicf,
rehabilitation and reconstruction assistance to the Vietnamese people,
Further concerned that massive international assistance, notably in rcspcct of faod, equipment and project
aid, remains urgently needed to speed up the rehabilitation and reconstruction of the social and economic infrastructure of the country,
Noting with satisfaction that the non-aligned group
of countries has established, by rcsolution 28 adopted
by the Fifth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Colombo from
16 to 19 August 1976, 4 a solidarity fund for the reconstruction of the Lao People's Democratic Republic and
Viet Nam to help in the reconstruction effort,
1. Recommends that Viet Nam be included in the
list of the most seriously affected countries;:;
2. Appeals to thc peoplcs and Governments of all
Member States and to all international cconomic, financia! and social institutions to increasc and intcnsify
their efforts and contributions on a bilateral and/ or
multilateral basis to help the Victnamese peoplc in the
rcconstruction of their country;
2
See Ofjicial Records of the General Assemblv, Thirtieth
Session, Supplement No. JA (A/10001/Add.l), ·sect. XVII.
3
See Report of the World Conference of the International
Women's Year (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.76.IV.l ), chap. III.
4 See A/31/197, annex IV, sect. B.
6
See Ofjicial Records of the General Assembly, Thirtyfirst Session, Supplement No. 21 (A/31/21), annex IV.

75

3. Urges the Secretary-Gencral to continue to encourage further mobilization ?f re~ource_s and eff?rts
from thc intcrnational commumty w1th a v1ew to ach1eving the social and cconomic rchabilitation of Viet
Nam;
4. A uthorizes the Sccretary-General to utilize the
nccessary resources far irnplementing thc present resolution.
34th plenary meeting
14 Ortoher 1977
::\2/ 51.

United Nationi, lnstitute for Traininµ; and
Researeh

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-V]) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and
thc Programmc of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order,
Recalling also its rcsolution 3 281 (XXIX) of 12
December 1974 containing thc Charter of Economic
Rights and Dutics of States.
Recalling further its resolution 31 / 107 of 16 December 1976 on thc Unitcd Nations lnstitute for Training
and Rcsearch,
Considering its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16 Septcmbcr 1975, which set in motion measures that form
thc basis and framework for the work of the competent
bodies and organizations of thc United N ations system,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of
the Exccutive Director of the United Nations Institute
for Training and Research;"
2. W e/comes the emphasis and urges the continuation of the concentration of the work of the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research in the
sphcre of economic and social training and research
and thc inclusion of specific projects on the problcms in
the arcas identified by thc General Assembly at its sixth
and scvcnth special sessions and in the relevant decisions of thc Assembly at its twenty-ninth session;
3. Expresses the hope that the Unitcd Nations
Institutc far Training and Research will have greater
and wider financia! support from Mcmber Statcs and
organizations.
98th plenary meeting
8 December 1977
32/52.

Manila Communiqué of the World Food
Couneil: Programme of Aetion to Eradie ate Hunµ;er and Malnutrition

The General Asscmbly,
Recalling its resolution 3348 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974, by which it established the World Food
Council to serve, in line with resolution XXII adopted
by the World Food Conference, 7 hcld at Rome from
5 to 16 November 1974, as a co-ordinating mechanism
to provide over-all, intcgratcd and continuing attention
for thc successful co-ordination and follow-up of
6
/bid., Thirty-second Session, Supplcment No. 14 (A/32/14
and Corr. l).
7
See Report of the World Food Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.75.IJ.A.3), chap. II.

General Assembly-Thirty-sccond Session

76

policies concerning food production, nutrition, food
security, food trade and food aid, as well as other
related matters, by all organizations of the United
Nations system,
Further recalling its resolution 31/121 of 16 December 1976, in which it requested the World Food Council, at its third scssion, to takc immediate and concrete
steps to promote the early implementation of the resolutions adopted by the World Food Conference, including the Universal Declaration on the Eradication of
Hunger and Malnutrition, 8 and its resolution 3362
(S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development and
international economic co-operation,
Having considered the report of the World Food
Council on the work of its third session, held at Manila
from 20 to 24 June 1977, ~
Bearing in mind Economic and Social Council resolution 2114 (LXIII) of 4 August 1977,
I. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the
World Food Council on the work of its third session
and expresses its appreciation to the Government and
people of the Philippines for acting as host to the session
and ensuring its outstanding success;
2. Highly commends the World Food Council for
the important initiatives it has taken, as embodied in
the Programme of Action to Eradicate Hunger and
Malnutrition contained in the Manila Communiqué of
the World Food Council, 10 inter alía, to increase food
production in the developing countries, improve and
ensure world food security, expand and improve food
aid programmes, improve human nutrition and liberalize
and improve food trade;
3. Adopts the Programme of Action to Eradicate
Hunger and Malnutrition contained in the Manila Communiqué of the World Food Council;
4. Commends those Governments, organizations of
the United Nations system and other bodies that have
already taken steps or are taking steps to implement
the programme of Action;
5. Calls upon all Governments, specialized agencies,
organs and other bodies within and outside the United
Nations system dealing with food, agriculture and
human nutrition to implement thc Programme of Action fully and as a matter of urgency;
6. Requests the President of the World Food Council to work with the Governments and organizations
referred to in paragraph 5 above to promote full implcmentation of the Programme of Action and, to this
end, requests the Secretary-General to give the necessary assistanoe to the World Food Council;
7. Further calls upon all potential donors to announce before the end of 1977 their contributions to
the international emergency reserve of cereals;
8. Urges ali Governmcnts and Unitcd Nations organizations and bodies-particularly the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations as well as
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the United Nations Children's Fund. the United
Nations Development Programme, the World Food
Programme, the Consultative Group on Food Production a_nd Jnvestment in Dcveloping Countries, the Internat1onal Labour Organisation, the Unitcd Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the

World Health Organization, the World Bank, the International Fund for Agricultura! Development and the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade-to give ful!
support and encouragement to the World Food Council
in discharging the important responsibilities assigned
to it by the World Food Conference and the General
Assembly;

Jbid., chap. l.
Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supplement No. 19 (A/32/19).
·
10 !bid., part one, para. l.

; See also rcsolution 32/107 in the present section.
~_See_Report o/ the World Food Conference (United Nations
ruh_l1cat1on, Sales No. E.75.II.A.3), chap. II.
1.i Scc IFAD/1.

8

9 Official

9. Decides to review at its thirty-third session the
implementation of the Programme of Action.

98th plenary meeting
8 December 1977
:J2/.53.

lnternational Fund for Agricultural Developn1ent 11

The General Assembly,
Recalling resolution XIII of 16 November 1974 of
the World Food Conference, 12 General Assembly resolutions 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975, 3503
(XXX) of 15 December 1975 and 31/122 of 16 Deccmber 1976 relating to the establishment of the International Fund for Agricultura! Development,
Conc~rned by the se!ious constraints facing the food
and ~gnculture sector m the developing countries and
especrally the deteriorating situation of the least dev~lop~d and most seri~msly affected developing count~1es m the field of agncultural development and nutrit10n,
Bearing in mind the objectives of the Fund as expressed in the. Agreement establishing the International
Fund for Agncultural Developmentrn and emphasizing
that the Executive Board of the Fund should take into
consideration the advice and recommendations relevant
to these objectives formulated by the World Food
Council at its various sessions
1. W elcomes the pro gres~ made so far towards
enabling the International Fund for Agricultural Develop~ent to become operational and expresses its
a~pr~ciation to the Chairman of the Preparatory Comm1ss1on for the Fund for his efforts in this respect;
2 .. Calls upon ali States eligible for original membership of 0e Fund that have not yet taken action to
bcco~e part1es to the Agreement establishing the In~crnational Fun~ for ~gricultural Development to sign
1t and to depos1t an mstrument of ratification acceptance, approval or accession as a matter of 'urgency,
so as to enable thc Fund to become fully operational
bef?re the end of 1977, with the full resources plcdged
to 1t;
3: Invites all other States Members of the United
Nat1ons. or member~ of specialized agencies or of the
International Atom1c Energy Agency to take action
to become members of the Fund.
98th plenary meeting
8 Decemher 1977
:l2 / ~- 1,,

Uniterl Nations Univer!lity

The General Asscmbly,
Recalling its rcsolutions 2951 (XXVII) of 11 Dccember 1972. 3081 (XXVIII) of 6 December 1973
'
1

1
