S/2021/873

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
14 October 2021
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolution 1559 (2004)
Thirty-fourth semi-annual report of the Secretary-General

I. Background
1.
The present report is the thirty-fourth semi-annual report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of Security Council resolution 1559 (2004). It
provides a review and an assessment of the implementation of the resolution since the
issuance of the previous report on the subject (S/2021/396), on 22 April 2021, and
covers developments until 27 September 2021.

II. Implementation of resolution 1559 (2004)
2.
Since the adoption of resolution 1559 (2004) by the Security Council on
2 September 2004, limited progress has been made in its implementation. A number
of provisions, including with respect to the existence and activities of Lebanese a nd
non-Lebanese militias, remain pending.

A.

Sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and political independence
of Lebanon
3.
Through the adoption of resolution 1559 (2004), the Security Council sought to
help to strengthen the sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and political
independence of Lebanon under the sole and exclusive authority of the Government
of Lebanon throughout the country, in accordance with the Taif Accords of 1989, to
which all the political parties in Lebanon had committed themselves. That objective
has remained the priority of my efforts.
4.
During the reporting period, Lebanon continued to be affected by the protracted
delay in the formation of a government, the sever e socioeconomic crisis, the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and the aftermath of the explosion in the
port of Beirut on 4 August 2020.
5.
On 10 September 2021, the Prime Minister-designate, Mohammad Najib Azmi
Mikati, formed a government of 24 ministers, more than a year after the resignation
of the previous Government. The new Government comprises one woman and
23 men, which represents a decrease from 30 to 4 per cent in the proportion of women
compared with the previous Cabinet. The Government an d its ministerial statement

21-14817 (E)

191021

*2114817*

S/2021/873

obtained a vote of confidence in Parliament on 20 September, with 85 votes in favour
of the 100 Members of Parliament present. The Government focused its statement on
economic and financial matters and affirmed “its commitment t o holding legislative
elections on time, as well as elections at the municipal and neighbourhood levels” and
its “keenness to continue all investigations to identify the reasons behind the
explosion in the port of Beirut and to uncover the full truth and p unish all the
perpetrators”. As in previous ministerial statements, the Government reiterated the
determination of Lebanon to put an end to violations of its sovereignty by Israel,
noting in that connection “the right of Lebanese citizens to resist the Isr aeli
occupation, thwart its aggressions, and recover the occupied territories”. In a press
statement issued on 27 September, the members of the Security Council welcomed
the formation of a new government and reaffirmed their strong support for the
stability, security, territorial integrity, sovereignty and political independence of
Lebanon, consistent with Council resolutions 1701 (2006), 1680 (2006), 1559 (2004),
and 2591 (2021).
6.
In this context, one year after the explosion in the port of Beirut, France and the
United Nations co-convened a conference in support of the Lebanese people on
4 August. Speaking at the conference, the Deputy Secretary-General, Amina
Mohammed, emphasized the emergency needs of the Lebanese population and of
Syrian and Palestine refugees for humanitarian assistanc e and longer-term recovery
support, including a comprehensive social protection system. Participants pledged
financial support totalling $370 million, to meet the most urgent needs in the areas of
food security, water and sanitation, health and education, in addition to substantial
in-kind assistance.
7.
Efforts by Investigating Judge Tareq Bitar to pursue the investigation into the
explosion in the port of Beirut continued. His request to question the former Prime
Minister Hassan Diab, the State Security Chief, Tony Saliba, the General Security
Chief, Major General Abbas Ibrahim, and parliamentarians and former ministers have
been unsuccessful to date. On 4 August, several protests, gatherings and marches were
held in the country in commemoration of the explosion, while on 12 August, activists
stormed the Justice Palace in Beirut to demand a transparent investigation into the
incident. The international community has emphasized on several occasions the need
for an impartial, thorough and transparent investigation into the explosion. On
27 September, the probe was reportedly put on hold after the request by a former
Minister of the Interior, Nohad al-Machnouq, for the removal of Judge Bitar, pending
the decision of the Beirut court of appeal. There was also n o progress in the
investigation into the killing of Lokman Slim.
8.
Fuel shortages combined with the electricity crisis had a severe impact on
essential services, including electricity provision, public health services, public water
supply, businesses and livelihoods. This had a significant impact on women, as a
considerable number of protection service providers were unable to maintain
adequate levels of service delivery and women continued to bear the disproportionate
burden of childcare and domestic responsibilities, struggling to ensure continued
access to education, health care and clean food for their families. While the spread of
COVID-19 generally slowed during the reporting period, the ability of hospitals to
respond to the needs of patients was considerably affected by fuel shortages, power
cuts and medicine shortages.
9.
On 16 September, diesel oil from the Islamic Republic of Iran was reportedly
imported into Lebanon. This came after the Secretary-General of Hizbullah, Hassan
Nasrallah, declared in three speeches in August that his party would procure diesel
oil from the Islamic Republic of Iran for Lebanon. On 13 September, he announced
that the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic had agreed to receive the ships and
that “the fuel would be transferred from that country to Lebanon through land
2/9

21-14817

S/2021/873

borders”. In an interview given to the media on 17 September, the Prime Minister,
Mr. Mikati, stated in response to a question on the arrival of trucks carrying Iranian
fuel into Lebanon facilitated by Hizbullah that he was “sad because that
[demonstrated] a lack of sovereignty of Lebanon”.
10. On August 19, the Lebanese presidency publicly announced discussions with
the World Bank, the United States of America and other countries on a regional energy
framework that would allow Lebanon to import natural gas from Egypt through the
Arab Gas Pipeline, through Jordan and the Syrian Arab Republic, and electricity from
Jordan. A senior Lebanese ministerial delegation, led by the caretaker Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Defence and Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Emigrants, Zeina Akkar, visited Damascus on 4 September to discuss the matter. The
visit to the Syrian Arab Republic was the first carried out in an official capacity by
Lebanese officials at that level since 2011. At a meeting held in Amman on
8 September, the Minister of Energy and Mineral Resources of Jordan, the Ministers
of Petroleum and Mineral Resources of Egypt and of the Syrian Arab Republic and
the Minister of Energy and Water of Lebanon agreed on the delivery of Egyptian
natural gas to Lebanon through Jordan and the Syrian Arab Republic and on an action
plan and a timetable for the project implementation.
11. In its resolution 1680 (2006), the Security Council strongly encouraged the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to respond positively to the request made
by the Government of Lebanon to delineate their common border, noting that such
measures would constitute a significant step towards asserting the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of Lebanon and improving the
relations between the two countries.
12. The delineation and demarcation of the boundaries of Lebanon remain critical
to enable proper border control and management and to prevent smuggling, including
with regard to the movement of people, goods and, potentially, arms. They also
remain essential to guarantee national sovereignty and territorial integrity. While
border delineation is a bilateral matter, progress on the issue remains an obligation
for Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic, in accordance with resolution 1680 (2006).
13. There were reports of intimidation attempts made against Syrians in Lebanon
on 20 May, during the out-of-country voting for the Syrian presidential election,
including attacks on vehicles heading to the Syrian embassy in Beirut. Video footage
showed attackers pelting cars with rocks and smashing windows with sticks in several
areas in and outside of the capital, resulting in several people getting injured. Threats
of violence against those not wishing to vote and calls upon the Government by some
Lebanese politicians to return Syrian refugees to their coun try were also reported.
14. Israel continued to occupy the northern part of the village of Ghajar and an
adjacent area north of the Blue Line, in violation of the sovereignty of Lebanon and
resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006).
15. There was no progress in relation to the issue of the Shab‘a Farms area.
Furthermore, neither the Syrian Arab Republic nor Israel has responded to the
provisional definition of the area contained in the report of the Secretary -General on
the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) of 30 October 2007 (S/2007/641).
16. During the reporting period, unmanned aerial vehicles and fixed -wing aircraft,
including fighter jets, of the Israel Defense Forces continued to fly almost daily over
Lebanon, in violation of Lebanese territorial sovereignty and resolutions 1559 (2004)
and 1701 (2006). In identical letters dated 1 June addressed to the Secretary -General
and the President of the Security Council (A/75/913-S/2021/537), the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon, on behalf of her Government, stated that, on the night of
7 to 8 April, Israeli army warplanes had violated Lebanese airspace and fired several
21-14817

3/9

S/2021/873

missile salvos at the area surrounding Damascus. In a letter dated 22 July addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/2021/712), she stated that, upon
instructions from the President of Lebanon, the then Deputy Pri me Minister and
Minister for Defence and Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs and Emigrants
“condemned the recent attacks and violations against Lebanon committed by Israel,
as Syrian military sites were targeted from Lebanese territory and airspace”. In
identical letters dated 19 August addressed to the Secretary-General and the President
of the Security Council (A/75/1001-S/2021/743), upon instructions from her
Government, she stated that, on the same day, Israeli warplanes had begun to carry
out low-altitude flights over Lebanon, in the course of which they had “blatantly fired
missiles from within Lebanese airspace at positions in Syria”, and that the violation
had “caused panic among Lebanese civilians” and “posed a direct and serious threat
to Lebanese civil traffic and the safety of civil aviation”.
17. The financial situation of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon remained dire.
Owing to funding constraints, in 2021, the Tribunal will only be able to continu e the
prosecution’s appeal proceedings against the acquittal of Hassan Habib Merhi and
Hussein Hassan Oneissi in the main Ayyash et al. case concerning the bombing on
14 February 2005 that killed 22 people, including the Prime Minister, Rafic Hariri,
and injured 226 others. Proceedings in the “connected cases” concerning the attacks
against Marwan Hamade, George Hawi and Elias el-Murr remain stayed by order of
Trial Chamber II. For 2022, the budget of $8.3 million approved by the Management
Committee of the Tribunal will include funding for the completion of the appeal,
drawdown activities and the commencement of the residual phase of the Tribunal once
the appeal is completed.

B.

Extension of control of the Government of Lebanon over all
Lebanese territory
18. The Government of Lebanon continued its efforts to extend the authority of
the State over all Lebanese territory, as called for in the Taif Accords and resolution
1559 (2004).
19. Following an official visit to France of the Head of the Lebanese Armed Forces,
General Joseph Aoun, on 25 May, France hosted on 17 June a virtual ministerial
conference, co-chaired with Italy and supported by the Office of the United Nations
Special Coordinator for Lebanon, to mobilize emergency support for the security
forces of Lebanon. Two meetings were held in follow-up to that conference, on
25 August and 21 September, respectively. The Lebanese Armed Forces presented
their immediate needs to the participants, including a request for troop transportation,
food delivery, medical items and spare parts. The urgent need for cash assistance to
pay the soldiers’ wages was highlighted at both meetings.
20. From 13 to 15 August, the crisis triggered by the lifting of fuel subsidies led to
a sharp deterioration of the security situation throughout the country. Following a
meeting of the heads of the Lebanese Armed Forces, the Internal Security Forces, the
General Directorate of General Security and the State Security held o n 13 August,
security agencies stepped up their efforts to crack down on illegal storages of fuel and
began confiscating and re-distributing fuel to Lebanese citizens. In that context, on
15 August, in Tulayl, Akkar Governorate, a reservoir containing 60,0 00 litres of fuel
exploded, reportedly killing 36 people, including two military personnel, and injuring
more than 80. The President, General Michel Aoun, chaired a meeting of the Higher
Defence Council that tasked security forces with monitoring the fuel distribution
process until 15 September. The Council also instructed security forces to “control
the security situation in Akkar in order to prevent lawlessness and to protect the

4/9

21-14817

S/2021/873

interests and security of citizens”. Fuel shortages also led to multiple inc idents
between individuals at fuel stations, some of which involved the use of small arms,
hand grenades and rocket-propelled grenades and resulted in casualties, at times
igniting sectarian tensions.
21. Separately, on 31 July, in Jiyah, Mount Lebanon Go vernorate, a Hizbullah
member, Ali Chibli, was killed in a shooting at a wedding by a member of a Sunni
Arab population group of Bedouin origin living in the area. The incident followed the
killing on 27 August 2020 of a member of that group ( S/2020/1032, para. 27),
allegedly by Mr. Chibli. The Sunni Arab residents of Khaldah claimed that the killing
was an act of revenge. On 1 August, in Khaldah, Mount Lebanon Governorate, at least
five people were killed and several injured in an attack on Hizbullah supporters
attending Mr. Chibli’s funeral. The attack was attributed to members of the same
group. The ensuing clashes lasted intermittently for several days. A Hizbullah
Member of Parliament, Hassan Fadlallah, called the events “a major aggression that
would have big repercussions unless these gangs [were] stopped”. In a speech given
on 23 August, the Secretary-General of Hizbullah similarly called the event “not an
incident but a massacre”, asked for the arrest of all concerned and urged for “a radical
solution to the situation along the coastal highway [that connects Beirut and the
south]”. On 3 August, in Alayh, Mount Lebanon Governorate, the Lebanese Armed
Forces arrested an individual involved in the Khaldah clashes.

C.

Disbanding and disarmament of Lebanese and
non-Lebanese militias
22. In its resolution 1559 (2004), the Security Council called for the disbanding and
disarmament of all Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias, a key provision of the
resolution that has yet to be implemented. The provision reflects and reaffirms a
decision which all Lebanese committed themselves to in the Taif Accords.
23. Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias within the country continued to operate
outside the control of the Government, in violation of resolution 1559 (2004). While
several groups across the political spectrum in Lebanon possess weapons outside
government control, Hizbullah is the most heavily armed militia in the country.
24. There has been no tangible progress towards the disbanding and disarming of
Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias, as called for in the Taif Accords and resolution
1559 (2004). Since the adoption of that resolution, no specific steps have been taken
to tackle that crucial issue, which lies at the heart of the question of sovereignty and
political independence of Lebanon. The maintenance by Hizbullah of a military
arsenal outside of a legal framework and its involvement in the Syrian Arab Republic
continued to be denounced by a number of voices in Lebanon, which consider that
those issues are destabilizing factors in the country and undermine democracy. Many
Lebanese see the continued presence of such arms as an implicit threat that the
weapons could be used within Lebanon for political reasons.
25. The self-acknowledged maintenance of arms by Hizbullah and other groups and
the alleged increase by Hizbullah of its arsenal pose a serious challenge to the ability
by the State to exercise full sovereignty and authority over its territory.
26. In the context of the developments in Israel and the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, rockets were fired from southern Lebanon towards Israel on 13, 17 and
19 May, twice impacting in Israel and prompting response fire on two occasions
(S/2021/650, paras. 2–4).
27. From 11 to 19 May, Palestinian and Lebanese protestors also held sit-ins and
organized marches in several locations across the country, particularly in Palestine

21-14817

5/9

S/2021/873

refugee camps, in solidarity with the Palestinian people. On 14 May, demonstrators
in vehicle convoys displayed Palestinian, Lebanese and Hizbullah flags at several
locations along the Blue Line. In one of those instances, at least 10 protesters crossed
the Blue Line across from the Israeli village of Metulla, where they planted
Palestinian and Hizbullah flags, threw stones and lit a bush fire. Israel Defense Forces
soldiers opened fire, prompting the demonstrators to return north of the Blue Line. In
identical letters dated 17 May addressed to the Secretary-General and the President
of the Security Council (A/75/890-S/2021/482), the Permanent Representative of
Lebanon stated that “on 14 May 2021, during a rally of civilians in solidarity with the
Palestinian people near the technical fence in the Ibil al-Qamh area in the town of
Sarda, Israeli enemy soldiers opened fire in their direction into Lebanese territory.
That led to injuries to Husayn Sulub … and Muhammad Tahhan … Mr. Tahhan died
from his injuries shortly thereafter”.
28. In identical letters dated 27 May addressed to the Secretary-General and the
President of the Security (S/2021/507), the Permanent Representative of Israel stated
that the firing of rockets from southern Lebanon was “clear evidence of the existence
of unauthorized weapons in southern Lebanon and confirmation of Israel’s repeated
claims concerning this matter”. He also stated that the Deputy Secretary -General of
Hizbullah, Sheikh Na‘im Qasim, had publicly announced on Al-Manar, on 22 May
2021, that many of the recent events in the vicinity of the Blue Line were sponsored
by Hizbullah. According to the Permanent Representative, this clearly showed the
direct connection between the activity of Hizbullah in southern Lebanon and the
security situation in the region. In identical letters dated 21 July addressed to the
Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council ( S/2021/672), the
Permanent Representative of Israel stated that during Operation “Guardian of the
Walls” in Gaza, between 10 and 21 May, there had been a significant increase in
attacks and other hostile activities by Hizbullah and other armed groups in Lebanon.
29. On 20 July, two rockets were launched from Lebanon towards Israel, triggering
artillery fire from the Israel Defense Forces into Lebanon.
30. On 4 August, two rockets were launched from Lebanon towards Israel,
triggering Israeli artillery fire. On 5 August, the Israel Defense Forces reported that
they had conducted air strikes targeting three areas in South Lebanon. On 6 August,
rockets were fired from Lebanon towards Israel, triggering artillery fire from the
Israel Defense Forces into Lebanon. The Israel Defense Forces reported that 19
rockets had been fired from Lebanon towards Israel. Hizbu llah issued a statement the
same day claiming responsibility for the rocket fire, stating that, “in response to the
Israeli air raids [in Lebanon on 5 August], … the Islamic Resistance [had] bombed
open lands in the vicinity of the Israeli occupation sites in Shabʻa Farms with dozens
of 122 mm rockets”. In a speech given on 7 August, the Secretary -General of
Hizbullah added: “our response yesterday was linked to the direct Israeli air raids on
South Lebanon that took place for the first time in 15 years.”
31. In identical letters dated 6 August addressed to the Secretary -General and the
President of the Security Council (A/75/988-S/2021/711), the Permanent Representative
of Lebanon, on behalf of the Ministry of National Defence, denounced what the
Ministry said was the shelling of Lebanon by Israel on 4 and 6 August and two raids
carried out by Israeli warplanes on Lebanese territory on 5 August, adding that
Lebanon condemned the Israeli attacks, which it considered to be hostile acts and
clear violations of Lebanese sovereignty.
32. In identical letters also dated 6 August addressed to the Secretary -General and
the President of the Security Council (S/2021/710), the Permanent Representative of
Israel stated that, on the same day, Hizbullah had fired a barrage of 19 rockets at
Israel, and that the attack had come only two days after three additional rockets had
6/9

21-14817

S/2021/873

been fired towards Israel from Lebanon. In a statement issued on 8 August, I
expressed deep concern about the recent escalation between Lebanon and Israel
across the Blue Line, including rocket fire into Israel and return air strikes and
artillery fire into Lebanon.
33. In a speech given on 7 August, the Secretary-General of Hizbullah stated that,
“while the resistance group was returning from carrying out its operation through
Shuwayya, [it had been] intercepted by some people” and that “four [of the resistance
members had been] handed to the Lebanese Army”. The Lebanese Armed Forces said
in a statement that it had “detained four people who [had] launched the rockets and
seized the launcher used in the operation”. On 7 August, the four individuals were
released by the General Prosecutor of Lebanon, pending trial. In a speech given on
7 August, the Secretary-General of Hizbullah denounced the interception as an
attempt to incite sectarian tensions and stated that the perpetrators of violence against
the Hizbullah fighters concerned “should be investigated by the security agencies and
held accountable by the judiciary”. In identical letters dated 12 August addressed to
the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council (S/2021/725), the
Permanent Representative of Israel stated that “[t]he release of the four terrorists
clearly smack[ed] of politics, and underline[d] the extent of Iran’s and its proxy,
Hezbollah’s, domination of local government and power in Leban on. Moreover, such
an act of impunity serve[d] only to encourage further attacks on Israel.” In identical
letters dated 27 August addressed to the Secretary -General and the President of the
Security Council (S/2021/758), the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission
of the Islamic Republic of Iran categorically rejected “all unfounded allegations of
the Israeli regime against the Islamic Republic of Iran contained in documents
S/2021/710 and S/2021/725”.
34. On 8 August, Patriarch al-Rai stated during a sermon that “we cannot accept
[…] that one party take the decisions for peace and war outside the decision of the
State and the national decision-making that is entrusted to two thirds of the Cabinet
members”. He added: “we call upon the army, which is responsible with the
international forces for the security of the south, to control the entire territory of t he
south, to strictly implement resolution 1701 [(2006)] and to prevent the launching of
missiles from Lebanese territory […], not out of concern for Israel’s safety, but rather
for the safety of Lebanon”.
35. The Palestine refugee community continued to be affected by the deteriorating
socioeconomic situation in the country, with severe shortages of fuel and electricity
in refugee camps. Tensions between refugees and the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) increased, with
many protests leading to the forcible closure of UNRWA offices. UNRWA worked to
secure the water supply in the camps and provide additional cash assistance to the
refugees. However, as needs outstripped the capacity of the Agency to meet them,
with an expected funding shortfall of its programme budget of approximately
$100 million in 2021, protests against the Agency continued.
36. There has also been an increase in violent incidents in general in refugee camps,
including drug-related, domestic and other instances of violence. Clashes erupted on
6 June inside Rashidieh camp, reportedly resulting in the deaths of two persons and
in six people being injured. On 3 and 17 July, in Beddawi camp, personal disputes
escalated into shooting, reportedly resulting in the deaths of a Syrian woman and a
13-year-old Palestinian girl. On 27 August, in Ein El Hilweh camp, an attempted
assassination and subsequent armed clashes resulted in one fatality.
37. The presence of Palestinian armed groups outside the camps also continued.
Notwithstanding the decision taken in 2006 in the context of the national dialogue,
and confirmed at subsequent sessions, to disarm Palestinian militias outside the camps
21-14817

7/9

S/2021/873

within a six-month period, no progress was made during the reporting period with
regard to dismantling the military bases of the Popular Front for the Liberation of
Palestine-General Command and Fatah al-Intifada in the country.

III. Observations
38. I welcome the formation of a new government of Lebanon. The people of
Lebanon are struggling with a deepening crisis and hardship. I urge the new
Government to implement a tangible reform agenda that address es the needs and
aspirations of the Lebanese people and that includes the timely holding of legislative
elections. The United Nations will work with the Government in that regard. I
encourage Lebanon to ensure the full participation of women across all sec tors of
government, as well as in the forthcoming elections.
39. An impartial, thorough and transparent investigation into the explosion in the
port of Beirut, in line with the Lebanese people’s demand for accountability, remains
of the utmost importance. I also reiterate the need for a thorough and transparent
investigation into the killing of Lokman Slim.
40. Tackling the grave socioeconomic situation is essential not only for the sake of
the citizens of Lebanon and for its stability, but also because th e crisis leads to an
erosion of State institutions, which opens up space for non-State actors to fill the void.
I am also concerned about the security impact of the overlapping crises. The security
services are faced with ever more numerous demands to which they are not always
able to respond, and they are under increasing logistical and financial pressure. In that
context, the material support provided by the international community to the
Lebanese Armed Forces is critical to preserve their role as guarant or of the stability
of the country. I appreciate the support already provided by several Member States to
security services and encourage others to do the same.
41. Security incidents that have taken place between Lebanon and Israel offer a
vivid reminder of the risks posed by the maintenance of weapons outside of State
authority and the continued presence of armed militias in Lebanon. I strongly
condemn the firing of rockets from southern Lebanon into Israel. I also condemn the
fire from Israel, in particular the air strikes into Lebanon on 5 August. Those incidents
could have easily jeopardized stability across the Blue Line and led to renewed
conflict.
42. The widespread presence of weapons outside the control of the State, the
existence of armed militias and rocket launches such as those mentioned above
continue to undermine security and stability in Lebanon and are in violation of
resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006). The self-acknowledged maintenance by
Hizbullah of sizeable and sophisticated military capabilities outside the control of the
Government of Lebanon remains a matter of grave concern.
43. I call again upon all parties not to engage in military activity in or outside
Lebanon, consistent with the requirements of the Taif Accords and resolution 1559
(2004). It is critical that the Accords be preserved and implemented by all to av oid
the spectre of renewed confrontation among Lebanese citizens and to strengthen the
institutions of the State. All parties concerned must contribute to efforts to reinforce
the institutions of the Lebanese State.
44. The Lebanese State should increase its efforts to achieve a monopoly over the
possession of weapons and the use of force throughout its territory. I continue to urge
the Government and the armed forces of Lebanon to take all measures necessary to
prohibit Hizbullah and other armed groups from acquiring weapons and building

8/9

21-14817

S/2021/873

paramilitary capacity outside the authority of the State and in violation of resolutions
1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006).
45. Calls from sectors of the Lebanese population for the full implementation of
resolution 1559 (2004) and for rejecting the possession of arms outside State
institutions indicate that the maintenance of weapons by Hizbullah remains a divisive
issue within Lebanese society.
46. The continued, self-acknowledged involvement of Hizbullah in the conflict in
the Syrian Arab Republic is not only in breach of the disassociation policy and the
principles of the Baabda Declaration of 2012, but also carries a risk of entangling
Lebanon in the regional conflict and poses risks to the stability of Lebanon and of the
region. Furthermore, it demonstrates the failure of Hizbullah to disarm and its refusal
to be accountable to the very State institutions that the implementation of resolution
1559 (2004) was intended to strengthen. The reported involvement of Hizbullah and
of other Lebanese elements in fighting elsewhere in the region remains of concern.
47. Countries in the region that maintain close ties with Hizbullah should encourage
the disarmament of the group and its transformation into a solely civilian political
party, in accordance with the requirements of the Taif Accords and resolution 1559
(2004) and in the best interests of Lebanon and of regional peace and security.
48. I strongly condemn all violations of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Lebanon, as they undermine the credibility of Lebanese security and State institutions
and give rise to anxiety among the civilian population. The repeated alleged use of
Lebanese airspace by the Israel Defense Forces to strike targets in the Syrian Arab
Republic is deeply concerning, owing to the risk that it poses for regional stability. I
renew my calls for Israel to adhere to its obligations under relevant Security Council
resolutions and to withdraw its forces from the northern part of the village of Ghajar
and an adjacent area north of the Blue Line, as well as to cease immediately its flights
over Lebanese airspace.
49. It is essential that donors continue to provide fu nding to UNRWA, including in
support of its request for cash assistance to address the deteriorating economic
situation, exacerbated by the COVID-19 crisis, in Palestine refugee camps, so that it
may continue to perform its essential role and deliver services. The role of the Agency
in maintaining stability in Palestine refugee camps is more critical now than ever and
vital to the dignity and security of Palestine refugees. Such efforts are without
prejudice to the need for a just resolution of the Palestine refugee question in the
context of a comprehensive settlement in the region.
50. As the Special Tribunal for Lebanon concludes its proceedings, I trust that
Lebanon will ensure that those who are behind terrorist acts are held accountable in
its domestic courts, in line with its obligations under international law.
51. I count on the continued commitment of the Government of Lebanon to its
international obligations, and I call upon all parties and actors to fully abide by
resolutions 1559 (2004), 1680 (2006) and 1701 (2006). The United Nations will
continue its efforts towards the full implementation of those and all other resolutions
pertaining to Lebanon.

21-14817

9/9
