II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

of America of military and other activities in and against
Nicaragua,
Emphasizing the obligation of States, under customary
international law, not to intervene in the interna! affairs of
other States,
l. Urgently calls for full and immediate compliance
with the J udgment of the International Court of J ustice of
27 June 1986 in the case of "Military and Paramilitary
Activities in and against Nicaragua" in conformity with
the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the General
Assembly informed on the implementation of the present
resolution;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-fourth session the item entitled "Judgment ofthe lnternational Court of Justice of 27 June 1986 concerning
military and paramilitary activities in and against Nicaragua: need for immediate compliance".
36th plenary meeting
25 October 1988

43/12.

Co-operation between the United Nations and
the Organization of African Unity

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on co-operation between the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity,2 1
Recalling its previous resolutions on the enhancement of
co-operation between the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity and the practica! measures taken
for their implementation,
Recalling also its resolutions S-13/2 of 1 June 1986, the
annex to which contains the United Nations Programme
of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990, and 42/163 of 8 December 1987 on the
Programme,
Taking note of the relevant resolutions, decisions and
declarations adopted by the Council of Ministers of the
Organization of African Unity at its forty-eighth ordinary
session, held at Addis Ababa from 19 to 23 May 1988,22
and by the Assembly ofHeads ofState and Government of
that organization at its twenty-fourth ordinary session,
held at Addis Ababa from 25 to 28 May 1988, 23
Considering the important statement made by the current Chairman of the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity befare
the General Assembly on 4 October 1988, 24
Mindful of the need for continued and closer cooperation between the United Nations and the specialized
agencies and the Organization of African Unity,
Grave/y concerned at the deteriorating situation in
southern Africa arising from the continued domination
and oppression of the peoples of South Africa and Namibia by the minority racist régime of South Africa and
conscious of the need to provide increased assistance to
the peoples of the region and to their liberation movements in their struggle against colonialism, racial discrimination and the policies of apartheid,
2 1 A/43/497 and Add. l.
22 A/ 43/398, annex l.
23 /bid., annex II.
24 See Official Records of the General Assemhly,

Plenary Meetings, 16th meeting.

Fom•-third Session.

19

Conscious of its responsibilities to provide economic,
material and humanitarian assistance to independent
States in southern Africa to help them cope with the situation resulting from the acts of aggression and destabilization committed by the apartheid régime of South Africa,
Deeply concerned at the gravity of the situation of the
refugees in Africa and the urgent need for increased international assistance to help African countries of asylum,
Recognizing the important role that the United Nations
information system could play in disseminating information to bring about a greater awareness of the grave situation prevailing in southern Africa as well as the social and
economic problems and the needs of African States and
their regional and subregional institutions,
l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
co-operation between the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity and of his efforts to strengthen
such co-operation;
2. Notes with appreciation the increasing and continued participation of the Organization of African Unity
in the work of the United Nations and the specialized
agencies and its constructive contribution to that work;
3. Commends the continued efforts of the Organization of African Unity to promote multilateral cooperation among African States and to find solutions to
African problems of vital importance to the international
community;
4. Reaffirms that the implementation of the United
Nations Programme of Action for African Economic
Recovery and Development 1986-1990 is the responsibility of the international community as a whole and commends the efforts undertaken by African countries in spite
of the effects of the ad verse international economic environment;
5. Calls upon the Secretary-General of the United Nations to continue to ensure closer co-operation and coordination with the Secretary-General ofthe Organization
of African Unity in the implementation and monitoring of
the United Nations Programme of Action for African
Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990, as well
as in the search for solutions to Africa's debt and debtservicing burden, taking into account Africa's common
position on its externa! debt, adopted by the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of the Organization of
African Unity at its third extraordinary session, held at
Addis Ababa on 30 November and 1 December 1987, 25
and within the terms of the Medium-term Review of the
Programme of Action, to consult the Organization of
African Unity with a view to establishing a group of experts to undertake an in-depth assessment of the question
of commodities of interest to Africa and the scope for export diversification;
6. Reaffirms that ali Member States and regional and
international organizations, in particular those of the
United Nations system, should continue to give their maximum support to Africa's Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990; 26

7. Requests ali Member States, United Nations bodies,
the specialized agencies and ali other relevant organs of
the United Nations, as well as non-governmental organizations, to actívate and increase their programme of assistance to African subregional organizations for drought
and desertification control such as the Permanent InterState Committee on Drought Control in the Sahel and the
2 ' A/42/874, annex 11
2" A/40/666, annex l. declarat1on AHG/Decl. 1 (XXI), annex.

20

General Assembly-Forty-third Session

Intergovernmental Authority for Drought and Development;
8. Reiterates its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for bis efforts, on behalf of the international community,
to organize and mobilize special programmes of economic
assistance for those African States facing grave economic
difficulties, the front-line States and other independent
Sta tes of southern Africa to help them to withstand the effects of the acts of aggression and destabilization committed by the apartheid régime of South Africa;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to keep
the Organization of African Unity informed periodically
of the response of the international community to those
special programmes of economic assistance and to continue to co-ordinate efforts with ali similar programmes
initiated by that organization;
10. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Development Programme, the Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator, the World Food Programme, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, the World Health Organization, the
United Nations Children's Fund, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research for the assistance so far rendered to the African States in dealing with
the emergency situation as well as with the critica! economic problems that exist on the African continent;
11. Reiterates the determination of the United Nations, in co-operation with the Organization of African
Unity, to intensify its efforts to eliminate colonialism, racial discrimination and apartheid in southern Africa;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary measures to strengthen co-operation at the political,
economic, cultural and administrative levels between the
United Nations and the Organization of African Unity in
accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly, particularly with regard to the provision of assistance to the victims of colonialism and apartheid in
southern Africa;
13. Urges the international community to contribute
generously to the Assistance Fund for the Struggle against
Colonialism and Apartheid established by the Organization of African Unity and to the Action for Resisting lnvasion, Colonialism and Apartheid Fund, established by the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries;27
14. Calls upon the competent organs ofthe United Nations and the specialized agencies to continue to ensure the
just and equitable representation of Africa at ali levels at
their respective headquarters and in their regional and
field operations;
15. Urges ali Member States and regional and international organizations, in particular those ofthe United Nations system, as well as non-governmental organizations
to provide material and economic assistance to African
countries of asylum to enable them to withstand the heavy
burden imposed on their limited resources and weak infrastructure by the presence in their countries of large numbers of refugees;
16. Calls upan the United Nations organs-in particular the Security Council, the Economic and Social Council, t'.:e Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation ofthe Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, the Special Committee against Apartheid and the United Nations
Council for Namibia-to continue to associate closely the
27 A/42/422, annex 111.

Organization of African Unity with ali their activities concerning Africa;
17. Congratula tes the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and the Secretary-General ofthe Organization of
African Unity for reactivating the machinery for cooperation of the two organizations and encourages them
to further strengthen the said machinery;
18. Requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations to invite the representative of the Secretary-General
of the Organization of African Unity to participate in the
meetings of the United Nations Steering Committee and
its Inter-Agency Task Force and working groups on the
implementation ofthe United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development
1986-1990; 28
19. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that
adequate facilities continue to be made available to facilitate continued liaison and consultations on matters of
common interest as well as the provision oftechnical assistance to the General Secretariat of the Organization of
African Unity, as required;
20. Further requests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly at its forty-fourth session on the implementation ofthe present resolution and on the development of co-operation between the Organization of African
Unity and the organizations within the United Nations
system.
36th plenary meeting
25 October 1988
43/13.

Pretoria's racial "municipal elections"

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 38/11 of 15 November 1983, in
which it stated its conviction that the "constitutional
proposals" were aimed at depriving the indigenous African majority of ali fundamental rights and further entrenching apartheid and accordingly rejected them,
Reaffirming that apartheid is a crime against humanity
and a threat to international peace and security,
Gravely concerned that the so-called nation-wide
municipal elections of26 October 1988 are an extension of
the "constitutional proposals" of 1983,
Welcoming the united resistan ce of the oppressed people
of South Africa against these "municipal elections",
Alarmed that the Pretoria racist régime has declared
illegal ali advocacy against these "municipal elections"
and further intensified repressive State violence, including
the bombing of buildings that house the offices of
anti-apartheid organizations as well as the mass arrest and
detention of its opponents, in a bid to crush ali resistance
to these "municipal elections",
Reaffirming the lcgitimacy of the struggle of the oppressed people of South Africa for the elimination of
apartheid and for the establishment of a society in which
ali the people of South Africa as a whole, irrespective of
race, colour or creed, will enjoy equal and full political
and other rights and participate freely in the determination of their destiny,
Firmly convinced that the holding of these "municipal
elections" will further aggravate the already explosive
situation inside apartheid South Africa,
28 See A/42/560. paras. 121 and 122, and A/43/664 and Corr. l,
para. 4].
