A/66/PV.121

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-sixth session

121st plenary meeting

Tuesday, 3 July 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Al-Nasser. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

In the absence of the President, Mr. Sajdik (Austria),
Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 35
Protracted conflicts in the GUAM area and their
implications for international peace, security
and development
Report of the Secretary-General (A/66/813)
Draft resolution (A/66/L.50)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia to introduce draft resolution
A/66/L.50.
Mr. Lomaia (Georgia): Sometimes no news is
good news. But that is definitely not so when it comes
to the right of return. Another year has passed since the
General Assembly adopted its most recent resolution
upholding that fundamental right (resolution 65/287).
Yet, what we hear from Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
is that “No major developments took place during the
reporting period with regard to refugees and internally
displaced persons exercising their right of return”
(A/66/813, para. 12).
Regrettably, as in years past, the right of return has
fallen victim to politically motivated obstructionism.
A letter recently circulated among Member States
that purportedly focused on this issue revealed an
astonishing disregard of the plight of the forcefully
displaced. Members of the Assembly have undoubtedly

(Qatar)

read that letter. To our common amazement, it failed
to include a single word about the displaced — not a
single word. It was merely a rehash of the same old
political arguments. In fact, the author did not even
bother to change the date on the letter, which still reads
“19 June 2011”. Given that disregard for accuracy and
the truth, it was no surprise that the letter claimed to
include a quotation from the Secretary-General’s 2012
report.
Yet, the sentence it cited does not even exist in the
report. Instead, it seeks to legitimize the so-called new
reality and, referring to the citizens of my country, who
come from various ethnic and religious backgrounds,
the letter brazenly declares that they “will never be
able to exist within a single country”. In this new
reality, there is no place for the half a million men,
women and children — Catholics, Orthodox, Jews and
Muslims; and Georgian, Abkhaz, Ossetian, Armenian,
Greek, ethnic German and others. They represented a
staggering 75 per cent of the pre-war and pre-conflict
population, before they were expelled from their homes
in Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia.
The mantra of a new reality suggests that the
international community should simply accept a
paradigm in which three quarters of the population is
ethnically cleansed — an action that is then accounted
for as a fait accompli. We believe that an overwhelming
majority of the Assembly would beg to differ. Instead,
they would agree with what the Secretary-General
reiterates in his 2012 report, namely,

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

12-40377 (E)

*1240377*

A/66/PV.121

“It is essential to recognize return as both a
human right and a humanitarian issue that must
be addressed irrespective of any solution to an
underlying conflict.” (A/66/813, para. 34)
The Secretary-General could hardly have been
any clearer. In fact, by introducing draft resolution
A/66/L.50, we leave politics aside and focus exclusively
on the humanitarian dimension of the problem.
The displaced are consumed by all that they were
forced to leave behind. Their once-vibrant communities
are now ghost towns or, worse, foreign military
garrisons. But those dark visions are leavened by
hopeful thoughts, too. They dream of the day they will
return to heal their wounds and restore their broken
neighbourhoods. They take solace in the Assembly’s
continued, humane attention to their condition, and
they earnestly believe that the unwavering calls of the
international community will bear fruit and that those
who prevent those men, women and children from
returning to their homes will one day be compelled to
change their minds. That is why this draft resolution
is so important. It encourages the participants in the
Geneva talks to redouble their efforts to ensure respect
for human rights and create favourable conditions for
the safe, voluntary and dignified return of all displaced
persons to their places of origin.
We have said it before, and we will continue to
say it until justice is delivered: each and every one of
those hundreds of thousands of souls carries a dream
in their hearts, the dream of returning to the soil that
nurtured generations of their ancestors and of sharing
it with their children. We continue to believe that
maintaining the issue of Georgia’s internally displaced
persons on the agenda of the General Assembly makes
a significant contribution to an eventual return of
the displaced. We also believe that the annual report
of the Secretary-General to the General Assembly
is an important tool yielded by the draft resolution.
Most important, however, the draft resolution sends
a powerful signal to all those forcibly displaced in
my country, as well as others in similar conditions
all around the world, that is, that the international
community stands by them.
Despite the lack of progress in recent years,
hundreds of thousands of displaced persons have again
vested their expectations in the Assembly, hoping for
a helpful decision from it. I urge members to vote in
favour of the right of return.

2

The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/66/L.50, entitled “Status
of internally displaced persons and refugees from
Abkhazia, Georgia, and the Tskhinvali region/South
Ossetia, Georgia”.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of vote before the voting, may I remind delegations
that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
The Georgian draft resolution before us (A/66/L.50), as
was the case with previous resolutions, is extremely
politicized and not in line with reality. Furthermore, it
has nothing to do with its authors’ apparent concerns
about the situation of internally displaced persons
(IDPs) and refugees and so-called high humanitarian
goals. It is yet another attempt by those who bear the
full responsibility for the region’s serious humanitarian
situation to push that responsibility off onto others and
to draw the attention of the international community to
themselves.
The draft resolution has been prepared without
taking into account the current political realities in
the region. In the title of the draft resolution itself and
in its confirmation of the right of return for IDPs and
refugees to their homes throughout the entire territory
of Georgia, including in Abkhazia and South Ossetia,
they appear to be saying that Abkhazia and South
Ossetia belong to Georgia. It is time to come to terms
with the objective fact that there are two new States
in the region, Abkhazia and South Ossetia. Georgia’s
leadership and its supporters need sooner or later to
understand that. The geopolitical reality cannot be
changed by means of this distorted draft resolution.
The draft resolution appears to seek the return of
IDPs and refugees from Abkhazia and South Ossetia.
In reality, it complicates the already fragile negotiation
process that is part of the Geneva discussions.
Furthermore, those discussions remain the only
effective negotiation forum for representatives from
Abkhazia, South Ossetia and Georgia, including on
humanitarian issues and the situation of refugees
and IDPs. No one is surprised by Georgia’s stubborn
unwillingness to conclude a legally binding agreement
on the non-use of force with the South Ossetian and
Abkhazian sides.
Against that backdrop, the text’s call for “all
participants in the Geneva discussions to intensify

12-40377

A/66/PV.121

their efforts to establish a durable peace, to commit to
enhanced confidence-building measures” (A/66/L.50,
para. 5) is open demagoguery.

We draw the Assembly’s attention to the conclusions
contained in the report of the Secretary-General, which
says that

If the Georgian side proposes to discuss the subject
here in New York, as stipulated in the draft resolution,
it is essential that the representatives of Abkhazia
and South Ossetia be invited. Such a discussion is
meaningless without their participation. This is just
another attempt by Georgia to impose a timetable for
the return of IDPs. We can only speculate on the motives
of the authors of the draft resolution and the reasons
that they ignore the position of the Secretary-General,
who clearly stated his opinion in his report (A/66/813),
to the effect that such a step is not possible at this
stage. It is therefore clear to all that Tbilisi is acting
from purely political motives and attempting to ignore
the humanitarian situation with no care for the fate of
thousands of Georgians, Abkhazians, Ossetians and
citizens of other nationalities who have suffered as a
result of short-sighted and aggressive policies.

“Over the past three and a half years, the
Geneva international discussions, co-chaired by
the European Union, [the] OSCE and the United
Nations, have remained the single forum for the
key stakeholders to discuss security and stability
and humanitarian issues, in particular related to
the return of refugees and internally displaced
persons.” (A/66/813, para. 49)

The Russian Federation is convinced that the draft
resolution that has been introduced by the representative
of Georgia will not help to normalize the situation in the
region and will not create trust between the Abhazian,
South Ossetian and Georgian parties, which is an
essential precondition for the return of IDPs. These
problems have arisen not through some mythical foreign
plot, but as a result of a purposeful policy imposed by
the Georgian authorities themselves, which culminated,
as we know, in Georgia’s attack on peaceful Tskhinvali
on the night of 7 August 2008.
Given what I have said, the Russian Federation
would ask that we proceed to the vote on the draft
resolution, which we will vote against. We trust that
Member States will follow our example and will not
support this clearly politicized initiative from Tbilisi.
In voting against it, they will contribute more to solving
the humanitarian problems in that region.
Mrs. Kolontai (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): Belarus
has carefully studied the draft resolution introduced
by the representative of Georgia (A/66/L.50). Our
delegation’s position remains unchanged: on such
an important issue as that of providing assistance to
refugees and internally displaced persons (IDPs), a
decision must be arrived at by consensus and as the
result of an open and transparent negotiation process
that includes the participation of all interested parties.

In the light of that, we note the importance of
maintaining the Geneva consultations format and the
quest to find a solution to the issues here together through
negotiations. We are concerned about the possibility
that a non-consensus adoption of the draft resolution
could harm the discussions in Geneva. We know that
the adoption of similar resolutions in previous years
almost led parties concerned to refuse to be involved
in the Geneva negotiation processes. We would propose
that we take advantage of those discussions to continue
efforts to find mutually acceptable approaches in
order to solve the issues raised in the draft resolution
through negotiations. In our view, the Geneva format
is the most appropriate forum for solving problems
relating to security and stability in the region as well
as to humanitarian issues, including those involving
refugees and internally displaced persons.
Given the situation, the Belarusian delegation
maintains the position it expressed during the sixty-fifth
session of the General Assembly and will not participate
in the voting on the draft resolution.
Mrs. Furman (Israel): Israel welcomes the steps
the Government of Georgia has taken to implement
the strategy on internally displaced persons (IDPs)
highlighted in the Secretary-General’s report
(A/66/813). The strategy has brought about a marked
improvement in the humanitarian situation of IDPs.
Israel is encouraged by the action plan for implementing
the strategy for 2012-2014. Israel also takes a positive
view of Georgia’s programme of engagement through
cooperation, which aims to build trust and confidence
among divided communities.
Israel would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
once again our support for and recognition of Georgia’s
territorial integrity. We do not support or recognize any
unilateral declarations of independence by Abkhazia
or South Ossetia. We reiterate our well-established

12-403773

A/66/PV.121

position that the way to resolve long-standing conflicts
is through a negotiated, mutually agreed approach, and
not through unilateral actions.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/66/L.50, entitled “Status of internally
displaced persons and refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia,
and the Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia, Georgia”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, Comoros, Croatia, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominica, Estonia, Finland, France,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Grenada, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi,
Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, New
Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic
of Moldova, Romania, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, San Marino, Sierra Leone,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South Sudan, Spain,
Sweden, Tuvalu, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Vanuatu
Against:
Armenia, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Myanmar, Nauru, Nicaragua, Russian Federation,
Serbia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cyprus,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Israel, Jamaica,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Libya,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Mexico, Mongolia,

4

Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Suriname, Switzerland,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Zambia
Draft resolution A/66/L.50 was adopted by 60 votes
to 15, with 82 abstentions (resolution 66/283).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Greece and the
Netherlands advised the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour; and the delegation of
Kuwait that it had intended to abstain.]
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of vote following the voting,
may I remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
Mr. Rey (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland abstained from the voting on resolution
66/283, which was introduced by the representative
of Georgia and entitled “Status of internally displaced
persons and refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia, and the
Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia, Georgia”.
As a constant in our policies, Switzerland recalls
the obligation that exists to pay particular attention to
the situation of internally displaced persons (IDPs) and
refugees in post-conflict situations, as well as their right
to return to their places of origin. We intend to provide
the most favourable conditions for the discussions
that began in Geneva following the 2008 conflict. We
believe those talks to be the appropriate forum for
dealing with the issue of internally displaced persons
and refugees. Consequently, Switzerland supports all
efforts of the international community aimed at making
a consensus solution possible among the parties on the
question of IDPs and refugees.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): I take the floor to briefly
explain our position. We are concerned about the fact
that the conflicts in the Abkhazia and South Ossetia
regions of Georgia remain unresolved. The situation
has serious economic, social and humanitarian
consequences, primarily for the people of Georgia but
also for the peoples of the Caucasus region as a whole.

12-40377

A/66/PV.121

Turkey supports all efforts aimed at the peaceful
resolution of those conflicts. We invite all parties to
work towards a comprehensive and sustainable peace
that also provides for the return of internally displaced
persons (IDPs) and refugees. As a country of the region
and a neighbour of Georgia, we stand ready to contribute
all efforts towards that end.
I wish to reiterate Turkey’s firm commitment to the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Georgia with its internationally recognized borders.
We continue to believe that the Geneva talks
provide a valuable forum to also address the issue of
the voluntary, safe, dignified and unhindered return
of IDPs and refugees. We hope that the discussions at
Geneva can be made to bear their full potential in order
to have a positive and concrete outcome. To achieve
that, we call on all sides to seriously engage with
others in a cooperative manner and take action to build
confidence.
Ms. Ivanović (Serbia): I take the floor to briefly
explain our position following the voting on resolution
66/283, which we have just adopted.
As a country that has faced a long-standing problem
with internally displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees
on its territory, Serbia is fully committed to finding
just, comprehensive and sustainable solutions for
displacement situations all over the world that include
full respect for the rights of displaced populations,
in particular, the right of all refugees and internally
displaced persons to return safely to their homes without
preconditions and with adequate security guarantees.
To that end, we believe that the General Assembly
should continue to deal with displacement issues in the
comprehensive framework of the draft resolutions on
the protection of and assistance to IDPs and refugees
adopted annually or biannually in the Third Committee
by consensus. Serbia is a sponsor of those draft
resolutions because they address human rights issues
in addition to having a very important humanitarian
dimension.
We support the long-standing practice in the
General Assembly of finding a common understanding
in addressing sensitive humanitarian issues by adopting
thematic humanitarian draft resolutions by consensus.
Given that today there are many different situations
involving displacement all around the world, singling
out specific situations of displacement through

specific resolutions could lead to the proliferation of
such resolutions in the General Assembly while their
adoption by vote provides fewer prospects for the real
improvement and solution of the situation of refugees
and IDPs on the ground.
Serbia respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of all States Members of the United Nations,
including Georgia, and understands Georgia’s concern
about the status of internally displaced persons and
refugees. We support every effort to find a consensual
solution for the specific situations of internally
displaced persons and refugees. Therefore, draft
resolutions aiming for such solutions should, in our
view, be adopted by consensus. That is why, as in
previous years, while recognizing the importance of
elements contained in the resolution that has just been
adopted which apply to the problem of displacement in
general, Serbia could not support it.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia.
Mr. Lomaia (Georgia): Together we have just
adopted resolution 66/283, which lifts the spirits of
hundreds of thousands of internally displaced persons
and refugees who were forced by violence and fear to
flee their homes and communities. It is on behalf of
those men, women and children, citizens of Georgia of
various ethnic and religious backgrounds, that I would
like to express my most sincere gratitude to the General
Assembly.
Today’s vote marks the fifth straight year that the
Assembly has invoked the norms and principles of
international law to defend the right of every displaced
person to return to his or her home. With each passing
year, the circle of understanding and support is widening.
I know that, in some cases, the Assembly’s support of
the resolution might not have come easily — a fact that
had little to do with the merits of the resolution itself.
That makes the Assembly’s affirmative vote even more
noteworthy. Unfortunately, the moral clarity that guides
us all on the issue today has been challenged once again
by blatant attempts to politicize the resolution. But truth
and dignity prevailed and the resolution was adopted by
an even greater margin than in previous years.
Back in 2008, we started the battle with just 14
votes cast in favour; we now stand at 60. I have no doubt
that soon, through our common efforts, a majority of
the general membership will stand in support of the
resolution. Rest assured that we remain as determined

12-403775

A/66/PV.121

as ever to bring dignity and relief to our compatriots
who have suffered for so long. We will engage with
all stakeholders to ensure that the right of return is
respected and exercised.
Finally, on behalf of all those who have suffered
from violence and discrimination, we would like once
again to express our heartfelt gratitude to each and every
Member State that voted in favour of the resolution.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 35?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 14 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation of
and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolution (A/66/L.51)
The Acting President: Members will recall that,
at its 72nd plenary meeting, held on 2 December 2011,
the General Assembly held a debate on agenda item 14
jointly with agenda item 117, agenda item 123 and its
sub-item (a), and agenda item 124. Members will also
recall that, under agenda item 14, the Assembly adopted
resolution 66/28 at its 118th plenary meeting, held on
28 June.
I now give the floor to the representative of Morocco
to introduce draft resolution A/66/L.51.
Mr. Iziraren (Morocco) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to introduce draft resolution A/66/L.51, on
the International Year of Crystallography, on behalf of
the following sponsors: Australia, Belgium, Chile, the
People’s Republic of China, the Dominican Republic,
Equatorial Guinea, India, Luxembourg, Madagascar,
Mexico, Poland, and my own country, Morocco.
Today, the influence of science on the lives of
people and its role in the development process is well
recognized. Since its inception, 100 years ago, modern
crystallography has developed in close cooperation with
other scientific disciplines and has had a considerable
impact in various years, such as the development of
modern medicines, nanotechnology, biotechnology and
the manufacture of aircraft components, which clearly
shows the close links between crystallography and
various sectors of industry.

6

Moreover, crystallography is an excellent example
of the universality of science because it permeates
several other sciences at the most basic levels, including
physics, biology, medicine, chemistry, mineralogy,
geosciences and cultural heritage. The importance of
the scientific achievements in crystallography has been
demonstrated in the more than 20 Nobel Prizes awarded
in this discipline. The awarding of those prizes has also
shown broad gender balance worldwide.
At the international level, crystallographers
are represented by the International Union of
Crystallography, which was founded in 1948 and whose
mission is to serve the crystallographic community
and promote international cooperation. Three regional
associations further that cooperation in various parts
of the world, including North-South cooperation,
namely, the American Crystallographic Association for
North and South America, the Asian Crystallographic
Association for the South Pacific and Asia and the
European Crystallographic Association for Europe and
Africa. Regional associations play an important role in
promoting crystallography in the North-South dialogue,
all the more so since education and the exchange of
scientific knowledge are an essential component of
North-South cooperation in the area of crystallography.
The purpose of the draft resolution is to mark
the one hundredth anniversary of the birth of modern
crystallography by declaring 2014 as the International
Year of Crystallography. The crystallographic
community throughout the world enthusiastically
welcomes the idea of commemorating the anniversary
of the birth of modern crystallography.
The purposes of the International Year of
Crystallography are to provide a framework for
celebrating the one hundredth anniversary of modern
crystallography, to promote international cooperation
among scientists worldwide, to raise awareness of the
role of crystallography in the development of modern
technology, to illustrate the universality of science,
to promote education in crystallography and its ties
with other sciences, and to intensify crystallography
programmes in all regions of the world where there is
not sufficient education in crystallography, in particular
in developing countries. All of the those goals are
closely linked, and it is expected that the International
Year of Crystallography will have a strong educational
component, primarily for developing countries and for
countries where the disciple is less developed.

12-40377

A/66/PV.121

The draft resolution invites UNESCO to facilitate
the commemoration of the International Year of
Crystallography in close cooperation with Governments,
the International Union of Crystallography, regional
crystallographic associations and United Nations bodies.
The draft resolution also encourages all Member States,
United Nations bodies and other interested parties to
take advantage of the Year to promote initiatives at
all levels aimed at raising public awareness on the
importance of crystallography and ensuring broader
access to new knowledge and activities in that sphere.
Before concluding, I would like to express my
country’s appreciation to all sponsors of the draft
resolution for their support and commitment. I would
also like to thank all delegations that participated
actively and constructively in the consultations process.
Finally, I urge all delegations to join the sponsors of the
draft resolution.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/66/L.51 entitled
“International Year of Crystallography”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/66/L.51?
Draft resolution A/66/L.51 was adopted (resolution
66/284).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to the speaker in explanation of vote, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia.
Mr. Archondo (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): The delegation of the Plurinational
State of Bolivia would like to congratulate the sponsors
of resolution 66/284, which proclaims the year 2014
as the International Year of Crystallography. We
recognize the understanding that humankind has of the
material nature of the world on the basis, in particular,
of knowledge of crystallography.
With regard to nanotechnology and biotechnology,
which are referred to in the resolution just adopted, the
Government of the Plurinational State of Bolivia would
like to underscore the fact that while those technologies
have brought about scientific advances in the modern
world in such fields as public health, medicine and

other areas, when it comes to developing new materials
through those new technologies, an adequate use of
those technologies should be ensured when developing
products for daily use so that they do not have a negative
impact on the environment, public health and food.
I would like to recall that, in various international
forums, civil society organizations and sine researchers
have expressed their concern about the development
of certain applications in both biotechnology and
nanotechnology that are being carried out without
adequate regulation or clear and precise information on
the consequences thereof. For that reason, they have set
out the need, for example, to apply an immediate global
moratorium on some applications of those technologies
until we better understand their effects. Furthermore,
they have also warned that particles artificially
constructed at the nano scale could present new risks
for health and the environment.
The technology of crystallography is used in Bolivia
in the area of structural research, particularly in the area
of research into the resources from extraction in the
Salar de Uyuni. In geological research and the study of
mineral raw materials, crystallographic analysis is not
only helpful, it provides data for identifying materials
and the further development of new applications in the
following areas: new types of clean energy, particularly
the use of semiconductors; the area of the photocatalytic
processes; electrodes for energy systems; and catalysts
for transforming hydrocarbons in petroleum and gas
chemical products used in the field of gas synthesis,
the transformation of liquid gas and the production of
oxygen and alcohol, among others.
Moreover, in the area of mineral processing in
general, particularly of extracted resources, we in
Bolivia have been working since 1986 on testing
lithium and treating the salt layers of the Salar de
Uyuni. Bolivia, which is a country relatively new to the
development of science and technology, has been using
crystallography in developing its natural resources,
daily developing technological processes to transform
its raw materials, particularly in lithium production and
the lithium and potassium salts of Bolivia’s Salar de
Uyuni.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of vote after the voting.
I now give the floor to the observer of the European
Union to make a statement following the adoption of
the resolution.

12-403777

A/66/PV.121

Mr. Bulanek (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union and its
member States.
We are pleased to join the consensus today
on resolution 66/284, which proclaims 2014 as the
International Year of Crystallography. We recognize
the broad impact that crystallography has on many
scientific fields, and the benefits it offers society as a
whole. Discoveries in this field have formed the basis for
developments in the medical and public health sectors,
as well as solutions to plant and soil contamination,
among other issues. There is no doubt that the results of
crystallographic research can have a positive impact on
development and can help in achieving the Millennium
Development Goals. We therefore support the promotion
of crystallography in order to improve knowledge of the
science, and we call for its continued support.
However, we would like to take this opportunity
to express our concern about the recent proliferation
of resolutions that proclaim international observances,
particularly international years. More than 30 years
ago, the Economic and Social Council established, by
consensus, guidelines on international years, which
were subsequently affirmed by the General Assembly in
1998. They were designed to support the implementation
of international observances and to promote their best
possible impact by setting clear guidelines for Member
States’ consideration of such proposals. In recent
years, unfortunately, those guidelines have rarely been
met. Since 2001, seven years have been designated as
international years for more than three topics at the
same time, a direct contradiction of the Economic
and Social Council guidelines. The year 2009 saw the
celebration of five different international years.
We are concerned that continuing the practice of
declaring overlapping international observances for the
same time frame could lead to less attention being paid
to the important topics they are intended to highlight,
on the part of both Member States and the wider
international community. We are trying to inspire with
such declarations, and not to have an adverse impact
on the achievements they proclaim. We therefore call
on all Member States to work together to ensure proper
observance of the guidelines we have set for ourselves,
in order to ensure than international years continue
to receive the attention they deserve and to have a
continued positive impact on international development
and solidarity.

8

The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 14.
Agenda item 32 (continued)
Support by the United Nations system of the efforts
of Governments to promote and consolidate new or
restored democracies
Draft resolution (A/66/L.52)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly considered agenda item 32 at its 60th
plenary meeting, on 18 November 2011.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to introduce draft
resolution A/66/L.52.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, in its capacity as
of Chair of the International Movement of New or
Restored Democracies, to introduce to the General
Assembly the draft resolution contained in document
A/66/L.52, entitled “Support by the United Nations
system of the efforts of Governments to promote and
consolidate new or restored democracies”. It has been
an arduous but enriching experience for my country to
facilitate the drafting of this draft resolution. In our
view, the long hours of negotiations have resulted in a
balanced, substantive text that duly reflects the spirit of
this noble cause. In that connection, we would like to
offer our thanks to the large number of countries that
have sponsored the draft resolution.
The high-level international conferences for
new and restored democracies have set in motion a
movement for promoting democratic development and
encouraging a new style of international cooperation
on democratization within the frameworks of social
justice and religious and cultural diversity. It is
important to recognize, as this draft resolution does,
that while democracies share common characteristics,
there is not one single model of democracy alone, and
that every State has the sovereign right to elect and
freely determine its own political, social, economic
and cultural system, in accordance with the will of
its people and without interference from other States,
in strict conformity with the Charter of the United
Nations.

12-40377

A/66/PV.121

We therefore urge the Governments, parliaments,
civil society and social movements of the world to
create mechanisms and spaces aimed at consolidating
new and restored democracies, and to participate
actively in the process of international conferences for
those democracies.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/66/L.52, entitled
“Support by the United Nations system of the efforts
of Governments to promote and consolidate new or
restored democracies”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I would like to announce
that, since the submission of draft resolution A/66/L.52,
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors
of the draft resolution: Algeria, Argentina, Armenia,

Australia, Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Croatia, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Germany,
Guatemala, Guyana, Iceland, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania,
Montenegro, Norway, Portugal, the Republic of Korea,
the Republic of Moldova, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Slovakia, Sweden, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia, Turkey and
Uruguay.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/66/L.52?
Draft resolution A/66/L.52 was adopted (resolution
66/285).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 32?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 11.10 a.m.

12-403779
