UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1996/26
22 May 1996
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH AND RUSSIAN

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3666th meeting of the Security Council, held on 22 May 1996 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Croatia", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the letter of the SecretaryGeneral to its President of 20 May 1996 (S/1996/363) in which he informed
the Council of the assessment of the Transitional Administrator that the
military component of the United Nations Transitional Administration for
Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium (UNTAES) had been deployed
and was ready to undertake its mission of demilitarization of the Region.
That mission of demilitarization began on 21 May 1996.
"The Security Council calls upon the parties to comply strictly with
their obligations under the Basic Agreement of 12 November 1995 on the
Region of Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium (S/1995/951, annex)
and to cooperate fully with UNTAES. It stresses that they must refrain
from any unilateral action which could hinder the implementation of the
Basic Agreement including the process of demilitarization.
"The Security Council reminds the parties that the successful
implementation of the Basic Agreement requires the respect by them of the
highest level of internationally recognized human rights and fundamental
freedoms. It calls upon the parties to continue to cooperate with UNTAES
in adopting confidence-building measures to promote an environment of
mutual trust.
"The Security Council calls upon the Government of the Republic of
Croatia to grant amnesty to all persons who, either voluntarily or by
coercion, served in the civil administration, military or police forces of
the local Serb authorities in the former United Nations Protected Areas
with the exception of those who committed war crimes as defined in
international law. It notes that the law on amnesty recently passed in the
Republic of Croatia is a step in this direction. The Council calls upon
the Government of the Republic of Croatia to make this amnesty

96-12809 (E)

220596

/...

S/PRST/1996/26
English
Page 2

comprehensive as soon as possible and stresses the importance such a
measure would have for maintaining public confidence and stability during
the demilitarization and demobilization process.
"The Security Council underlines the key importance of attention to
the need for economic reconstruction and rehabilitation of the region of
Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium and encourages Member States
to contribute to this end.
"The Security Council will remain seized of the matter and requests
the Secretary-General to keep it regularly informed of developments in the
situation."

-----
