TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

th
MEETING:

NEW

22 DECEMBER

1969

YORK

CONTENTS
Page
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l

Adoption

of the agenda

526)

., .. .. ., . .. . . .. . . .,. .. .. ... .. .

. . . . . . . , ., . .. . .. . . ., . .. , . ,.. . ,., . ... ..

Complaint by Guinea:
Letter dated 4 December 1969 from the ChargC d’affaires ad interim of Guinea
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/9528) . . . . . . . . . . . .

SIPV.1526

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference, to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

UNDPtEDANlDTWENTY-SIXTMMEETING
eld in New York
President: Mr. V. J. MWAANGA

on Monday,

(Zambia).

~ew~t:
The represeptatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, IJnited States of America and Zambia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 526)
1. Adoption of the agenda,
2. Complaint by Guinea:
Letter dated 4 December 1969 from the Charge
d’affaires ad interim of Guinea addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/9528).
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted,
Complaint by Guinea
Letter dated 4 December 1969 from the Cbargi! d’affaires ad
interim of Guinea addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/9528)
1. The PRESIDENT: III accordance with previous decisions, I propose now, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the representatjves of Guinea and Portugal to take
places tit the Council table, and the representatives of Mali,
Syria, Congo (Brazzaville), Liberia, Madagascar, Sierra
Leone, Tunisia, Lesotho, Saudi Arabia, Libya, Yemen,
India, Mauritius and Bulgaria to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber, in order to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, on
the usual understanding that those with places at the side of
the chamber will be invited to take a seat at the Council
table when it is their turn to address the Council.
At the invitation of the I+esident, Mr. A. Tour& (Guinea)
and Mr. F. B. de Miranda (Portugal) took places at the
Council table, arid Mr. S. !I?aore (Mali), Mr. G. J. Tomeh
(Syria), Mr. J. Mombouli (Congo {Bruzzaville)), Mr. L. II.
Digss (Liberia), Mr. U. Rabstafika (Madagascar), Mr. I;. B.
Savage (Sierra Leone), Mr. A. M’Sr2dek (Tunish), Mr. M. T.
Mashologu (Lesotho), Mr* J. M. Baroody (Saudi Arabia),
Mr. W. W Bow-i (Libya), Mr. M. S. Al&tar (Yemen), Mr. SO
Sen (India), Mr, R. K. Ramphul (Mauritius) and Mr. M.
Tmabanov (Bulgaria) took the places reserved for them.
2. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council concluded last
Friday [15,25th meeting] its general debate on the item

22 December

1969, at 10.30 a.m.

before it. Before we proceed to the vote, a number of
delegations have expressed a wish to speak in explanation
of their votes before the vote, I shall now call on them.
3. Mr. PINIES (Spain) (translated from Spanish): My
delegation regrets once again that between two countries
with which we maintain the most cordial relations incidents
of this kind should have occurred leaving so many victims
and definitely creating tension which seriously threatens
the tranquillity of the region.
4. My delegation feels that at present the task of the
COUnCil is not to examine other attacks against independent
African States. Today we have before us the complaint of
Guinea, to be found in documents S/9525, S/9528 and
S/9554, together with the explanations given by the
representative of that country. We also have in mind the
statements made here by the representative of Portugal,
5. Thus we believe that the events which have occurred
require investigation by this Council so that light could be
shed on them, and so that we representatives could have
objective information enabling us to judge this situation. It
is not that we are casting doubt here on any of the
assertions made by the one or the other party, but my
delegation believes that to overlook the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations, and more particularly
Articles 33 and 34, would keep us in a constant state of
uncertainty and prevent us from making an accurate
evaluation of the events. On the other hand, my delegation
deplores the loss of human life, the toll of wounded, and
the material damage which resulted from these events
which we are examining.
I
6. We consider, too, that an ena must be put to this
situation, and we appeal to the parties concerned to find
some just and satisfactory solution by means of negotiation .
7. My delegation, respectful of the Charter of the United
Nations, cannot make any judgement in the absence of an
investigation of the matter. My delegation will therefore
abstain from voting on the draft resolution now before Us
[S/9574].
8. Mr. PHILLIPS (United States of America): My delegation wa abstain on the resolution contained in document
S/9574 because we believe it fails to take into account the
conflicting claims which have been presented to us by the
representatives of Portugal and Guinea. Moreover, the
considerable gap between the time the incidents reportedIy
took place and the meeting of the Security council, as well

as the lack of any impartially confirmed evidence;make it
difficult for my delegation to make an informed decision as
to the facts of the case.

him a remarkable Chairman of the First Committee. The
authority which he demonstrated in the Council will not be
forgotten.

9. It is the belief of my Government that issues such as
these could better be resolved through recourse to Article
33 of the Charter; and we regret that the procedures under
that provision of the Charter have not been sufficiently
explored or utilized.

18. We shall also not forget the qualities of discernment
and common sense-the rarest quality in the world,
whatever Descartes may have said-and the sincerity and
loyalty which have earned our colleague from Paraguay
such an important place in our affections,

10. In view of those considerations my delegation has no
alternative but to abstain.

19. The two other colleagues who are leaving the Council
represeIQ countries which have special relations with my
own country. To our colleague from Senegal, Ambassador
Boye, it will be sufficient for me to say-and this is the
highest tribute that could be paid to him-that on every
occasion here he has been the worthy representative of that
great international statesman, his President.

11. Mr. JAKOBSON (Finland): The Finnish delegation
will vote in favour of the draft resolution submitted to the
Council in the name of the delegations of Algeria, Nepal,
Pakistan, Senegal and Zambia [S/9574]. I should like here
to say to the sponsors that we are grateful to them for
taking into account a number of suggestions which my
delegation made to them last week,

20. To our colleague, Mr. Azzout, I shall express very
special regret because he has told me he is leaving not only
the Security Council but the United Nations. He has been
much liked for his intelligence, his quick grasp of problems,
his political sense, the sincerity of his convictions and his
loyalty in his relations with us, all of which have made him
the friend of us all.

12. In voting for the draft resolution we wish to express
our concern over the continued tension along the borders
of the African Territories under Portuguese administration
and adjoining independent African States. The three complaints brought before the Council by the Governments of
Zambia, Senegal and Guinea within the last six months
serve to underline the gravity of the situation.

21. My delegation has already had the opportunity on
many occasions, and again a few days ago, to make known
to the Council its views on the incidents which take place
on the frontier of the Portuguese Territories in Africa.
Moreover, is there any need for me to recall the obvious
and deep divergencies which distinguish t!le policy of
France from that of Portugal on the African continent? We
have always considered that the recognition of the right of
peoples to self-determination and the free exercise of
self-determination constitute both a moral obligation and a
pre-condition for political stability.

13. I should like to stress once again the two major
elements that have determined our attitude to these
complaints, First, it is our view that in these cases the
necessary prerequisites for adopting the normal procedures
provided for in Article 33 of the Charter are lacking, and
that therefore it is up to the Security Council, acting within
Chapter VI of the Charter, to recommend ways and means
by which the recurrence of these incidents could be
prevented <andthe deterioration of the situation halted.

22. My country has shown that complete decolonization,
without reservations, can open up the road mofe widely to
friendship and to fruitful co-operation. I would add my
voice to the voices of those speakers who have stressed here
that Portugal, during its long African past, has accumulated
sufficient trust not to hesitate now to enter on that same
road. That is our most sincere wish.

14. Second, it is the view of the Finnish delegation that
incidents of the kind the Security Council is dealing with at
this moment cannot be viewed in isolation: they are
symptoms of a tension that could be regarded as structural,
tension arising from the suppression of the legitimate
aspjrations of the peoples living in the African Territories
under Portuguese administration, peoples that have the
right to self-determination and independence.

16. Having my colleague from Hungary as my immediate
neighbour, has shown me how easy and pleasant coexistence with him is and has persuaded me that the same
relationship should exist among peoples and political
systems. Whenever our votes differed, I concluded that I
must certainly be right; but whenever our opinions coincided, I was convinced that we could not both be wrong.

23. The draft resolution that has been presented to US
nevertheless raises certain hesitations on our part. It relates
to incidents that are for the most part old, and in the case
of some of them the facts seem to be neither ciearly nor
adequately established. Can we really pass a legally valid
judgement on this matter? We wonder, moreover, whether
the measures that are proposed are really such as to restore
calm in that region. A severe warning was already addressed
to Portugal on 9 December [resolution 273 (1969)]. My
delegation has often, in sirnilar cases, cited the provisions of
Article 2 of the Charter, which makes it an obligation Of
Member States to settle their disputes by peaceful means. It
still considers that, more particularly in that part of the
world, everything should be done to bring about the
replacement of military action by bilateral negotiations.

17. Our colleague from Pakistan brought to the Council
the same exceptional qualities of intelligence which made

24. After hearing the parties, it seems to US that the
Council should be in a position to facilitate such talks, since

15. Mr. BERARD (France) (translated from .l”rench):
Mr. President, since you have expressed the wish that this
should be the Security Council’s last meeting of the year I
should like, at the beginning of this explanation of vote, to
express my sincere regrets to those who will be leaving the
Council.

2

each of the two parties has expressed the wish to obtain the
return of personsand property being held on the territory
of the other.

delegation with regard to the draft resolution in document
S/9574, and a second time, at the end of the debate,in
order to make a brief statement. The example of the
representative of France, which I shouldlike to follow, will
enable me, I think, to combine my two statementsinto
one, and if you will allow me I shallnow proceed,

25. Suchare the reasonswhy my delegation,while wishing
to pay tribute to the moderationshownby the sponsorsof
the draft resolution, will not be in a position to vote.

33, I shall begin with what was to be my second
statement. It is probable that this meeting will be the last
one that we will hold in 1969 and, consequently, the last
when my country and I will participate in the work of the
Security Council. In conformity with the presentsystem,it
is possible that much time will pass before another
representative of Paraguay will be sitting in the Security
Council. Whether or not this is the last meeting, this is an
exceptional occasion for my delegationwhich justifiesmy
requestto be alIowed to make this statement.

26. Mr. MORALES SUAREZ (Colombia)(translated from
Spanish): A new statement of the principles to which my
deleg,ationadheresis obviously not necessaryin this case,
sincethe Council knows with what conviction and determination my country supports anti-colonialism, the selfdetermination of peoples,and the non-intervention in the
internal affairs of other nations.There can be no discussion
of those principles and their application can be neither
evadednor postponed.

34. For two consecutiveyears, 1968 and 1969, Paraguay
has served the cause of the United Nations and the
permanent ideal of international peace and security as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council, the
General Assembly having entrustedit with that post. At the
end of this period for which it waselected, I shouldlike to
say that, while fulfilling the responsibilitiesentrustedto us,
the Republic of Paraguay has in the Council defendedits
concept of justice with the greatest impartiality, and has
made every effort to ensure that it made a useful
contribution in the examination and evaluation of matters
brought to the Council’s attention, so that, in fulfilling the
functions the Charter hasbestowedon it, the Councilcould
work successfully within the obvious limitations which its
structure imposes.

27. Furthermore, we have welcomedwith satisfaction and
sympathy the arrival on the world sceneof the African
countrieswhich have accededto independence.They share
many of the problems and difficulties which we are
endeavouringto overcome,andvery often our purposesand
objectivesare similar.
28. Of coursewhat is being debatedhere is the specific
casebrought before the Council. In this case,my delegation
wishesin the first place to expressits concern about a
situation which hasbeen goingon for a very long time, and
the fiial solution of which must necessarilybe compatible
with the instrumentsto which the Membersof the United
Nationsmust subjecttheir conduct.
29. Onthe other hand, my delegationdoesnot believe that
we should overlook the statementof the representative of
Portugal as to his Government’s willingness that these
events should be satisfactorily investigated. These facts
seemto my delegation to be very complicated. We are
united with Portugal by nothing more than an old and
long-standingfriendship, and there are’no other motives,
either political or fmancial, which would cause US to
expressour concernhere, We are in complete disagreement
with Portugal’s approach to questionsof principle, but it
seemsto us that to disregardPortugal’sstatement would be
neither just nor in conformity with the detachment and
objectivity which should characterize the action of the
Council.
30. My delegation wonders whether such a possible
investigation is compatible with the functions of the
Council. We think ,that to investigateis not a function that
can be deniedto the political organwhich has in its hands
the power to sanction and to restrain. The Charter itself
corroboratesthis opinion of ours, This doesnot, of course,
convert the Council into a tribunal, but it doesprovide an
instrumentof which it shouldnot be deprived.
31. It is this considerationwhich will causeus to abstain
in the vote on the draft resolution that the Council has
beforeit.
32. Mr. SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay) (translated from
Spa,sish):Before this meetingbegan,Mr. President,I asked
you to let me speaktwice: once to explain the vote of my

35. At this time when thesedutiesand responsibilitiesare
being transferred to other memberswho will in nine days’
time take up their postsin the Security Council, I believe,
castinga retrospective eye on the work of thesetwo years,
that I can say categorically that we have not betrayed
anybody’s confidence and that we can return to the
General Assembly confident that we have made a no doubt
small but useful contribution in helping to make the
Security Council what the Charter and the Membersof the
United Nations want it to be, namely an organ whichbears
the main responsibility in maintaining international peace
and security.
36. I should like to add a personalnote. During thesetwo
years I have had the honour of representingthe Republicof
Paraguay in the Security Council. It was a unique experience and I shall always rememberthat period of 24
months. I have learned furthemlore to recognize and
respect the high intellectual and moral qualities of the
membersof the Council. From all of them I havelearneda
great deal and I shall never forget it. Allow me, Mr. President, to expressto each and every member of the Council
my gratitude for the co-operation which they have always
given me and for the very many fine lessonsthey have
taught me. My gratitude can be summedup in two simple
words: thank you, I should like to expressmy gratitudeto
AmbassadorBdrard for his kind words, in which I seethe
reflection of the friendship with which he hashonoured
me.
37. I now come to the draft resolution before us.This is
the third time in the latter part of this year that the

3

,

Security Council has on its agenda a complaint against
Portugal for the violation of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of a free and indepedent African State, and for the
loss of lives and material damages suffered by that State as
a result of those violations which are the subject of the
complaint. Following on the complaints brought successively by the Republic of Zambia and by Senegal, which led
to the adoption by the Council of resolutions 268 (1969)
and 273 (1969), we now have a complaint before us
submitted by the Republic of Guinea.

sufficiently discussed and consequently they might cast a
shadow on the impartiality of the Council. Therefore, 1
would make an appeal to the representative of Guinea, in
case these allegations need further examination, so that he
can make an effort to dispel all doubts about them, or, if
necessary, to have the persons in question liberated.
45. Mr. LIU Chieh (China): My delegation will abstain on
the draft resolution before us because, in our view, the
specifics contained in the complaint appear insufficient to
warrant a decisive judgement on the part of the Council,
Some of the incidents mentioned seem to lend themselves
to the possibility of settlement by direct negotiation
between the parties. I must make it clear, however, that our
abstention does not in any way affect our firm and
longstanding opposition to colonialism. It is a well-knows
fact that my delegation has throughout the years faithfully
adhered to the anti-colonial policies laid down a half.
century ago by the founder of the Republic of China,
Mr. Sun Yat-sen. We fully support the aspirations of the
colonial peoples for self-detemrination and independence.

38. Any violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of a State is a dangerous breach of the universally
accepted norms of international co-operation, on which
relations between States must be based if they are to be
peaceful and harmonious. Furthermore, these norms, incorporated in the United Nations Charter, must be respected and implemented by all the Members of our Organization.
39. In judging each case submitted to the Council, that
consideration must inevitably take first place. A second
essential requirement is that the facts which are at the basis
of the complaint must be verified or, in any case, that it
must be determined whether they actually occurred; this
determination of facts must be beyond question. From a
study of this debate, it seems to my delegation that the
facts mentioned in the complaint have actually occurred as
related in this Council and that Portugal, through its armed
forces in Guinea (B&au), has violated the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Republic of Guinea and has
caused not only material damage, for which compensation
can be paid, but..has also caused losses in human lives, for
which there can be no compensation.

46. It is our belief that unless the Portuguese authorities
march with the spirit of the times and provide the
inhabitants of Angola, Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau)
with an opportunity to express their wishes freely, there
will always be conflict between the Portuguese authorities
and the independent African States. It is hoped that the
Government of Portugal will see the wisdom of avoiding
costly colonial warfare, which seems to be in the offing in
the prevailing circumstances.
47. In the present case, however, the Council is dealing
with a specific complaint rather than with colonialism a~
such. Hence our abstention.

40. It is in this light that we examine the draft resolution
submitted to the Council by the representatives of Algeria,
Nepal, Pakistan, Senegal and Zambia [S/9574/.

48. The PRESIDENT: There are no further names on my
list of speakers in explanation of vote before the vote. The
Council will now proceed to a vote on the draft resolution
contained in document S/9574, submitted by Algeria,
Nepal, Pakistan, Senegal and Zambia.

’ 41. My delegation has certain reservations with regard to
certain paragraphs in the draft resolution, for example the
fourth paragraph of the preamble. We would have preferred
that that had not appeared in the text, in view of the fact
that the present debate is based on specific complaints
made by the Republic of Guinea and not on the policy of
Portugal in gene’ral against independent and sovereign
African States. Certainly it is possible and even probable
that the Security Council will be called upon to discuss that
general situation at some time in the future, But this is not
the case at the moment.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
1n favour: Algeria, Finland, Hungary, Nepal, Pakistan,
Paraguay, Senegal, Union of Soviet SociaIist Republics,
Zambia.
Against: None.
Abstaining: China, Colombia, France, Spain, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America.

42. It would have been possible to adopt an alternative
wording and to mention specifically similar cases which the
Council had to examine previously and which gave rise to
the resohrtions already adopted.

The draft resolution was adopted by 9 votes to none,
6 abstentions. ’

43. However, despite these reservations, we intend to vote
in favour of the draft resolution submitted by Algeria,
Nepal, Pakistan, Senegal and Zambia.

Wit/t

4.9. The PRESIDENT: A number of delegations has asked
to speak after the vote. The first speaker is the representas
tive of Portugal on whom I now call.

44. Finally, I should like to refer to the allegations made
during the course of the debate by the representative of
Portugal with regard to certain Portuguese citizens detained
in the Republic of Guinea. Those allegations were not

50. Mr. MIRANDA (Portugal): Once again a resOfUtion
against my country has been adopted, a resolution that is
1 Seeresolution 275 (1969).
4

patently one-sided and unwarranted by the facts available
for the consideration of the Council. My delegation wishes
tlo place on record its most formal and emphatic reservations in regard to that resolution contained in document
s/9574.

delegation. Looking around the table I see that the only
other representative present on that occasion was the
representative
of France, His Excellency Mr, Armand
BBrard. I shall never forget the noble speech he made on
that occasion and I take this opportunity to pay tribute to
him most sincerely for the courage with which he defended
the principles of international good conduct and of the
Charter of the United Nations. We are on the eve of
Christmas, Mr. President, and in keeping with the spirit of
the season I may be pardoned these reminiscences.

51. Nevertheless, we should be amiss if we failed to
express our sense of appreciation for the attitude of those
members of the Security Council whose abstentions left no
doubt that they will not be parties to such an act of
injustice. On behalf of my delegation and on my own
behalf, I should like to thank the representatives of Spain,
the United Kingdom, the United States, China, Colombia
and France for their abstentions.

57. Among the other representatives then sitting at the
table there was one who had been present at the signing of
the Charter in San Francisco. I refer to the late Ambassador
Adlai Stevenson, who represented the United States of
America. I think the words he spoke on that occasion could
well be the subject of meditation by all the Members of the
United Nations during this Christmas season:

52. Strictures have been gratuitously permitted against
Portugal, strictures based on flagrantly false conclusions
arrived at in the course of a debate which, besides being
prolific in more than one aspect, has been allowed to stray
far beyond the context of the complaint brought by the
Republic of Guinea. Questions that were entirely extraneous to the complaint were brought before the Council.
My delegation will not comment on any of them; it will
only reject and repudiate all of them as unacceptable.

“I believe that I am the only representative at this table
who was present at the birth of the United Nations,
Tonight we are witnessing the first act in a drama which
couId end with the death of the Organization.” [988th
meeting, para. 130.1

53. We consider as altogether deplorable the resolution
that has just been voted upon. We wish to emphasize that it
does not reflect the situation created by the international
conspiracy to provide aid and encouragement for the armed
attacks launched from the Republic of Guinea, with the
official blessings of its Government, against Portuguese
Gluinea, with sophisticated armaments, technicians and
professional officers drawn from the regular armies of
States entirely alien to the continent of Africa; States
which are bent on the expansion of their ideology by all
available means.

Those words were spoken by Ambassador Adlai Stevenson
on 18 December 196 1, Eight years have gone by, almost to
a day. When one finds that it has since become possible to
come to the Security Council and openly advocate violence
as a political instrument, when rank outsiders find it
possible to come here and arrogate to themselves the right
to speak even for me and for other Goans, as was witnessed
during the debate that is about to end, then one begins to
entertain justifiable apprehensions regarding the future
application through the United Nations of the very concepts of justice and equity in international relations, which
alone can ensure the peace and the progress of mankind.

54. Nothing could, moreover, illustrate more fully the
partial nature of the resolution than the fact that the 24
Portuguese nationals illegally detained in the Republic of
Gluinea under a regime of duress have been entirely ignored
by its sponsors and supporters, in whose opinion, likewise,
the innocent civilian dead and injured of Portuguese
Guinea-deaths and injuries caused by the repeated and
almost daily attacks launched from the Republic of
Gluinea-do not seem to count as human beings.

58. As recently as last Wednesday, 17 December, this state :
of affairs was the subject of a radio and television broadcast
in Lisbon by the Prime Minister of Portugal, Mr. Marcello
Caetano. The following is an extract from his address to the
Portuguese nations:
“Every pretext is good enough to accuse and condemn
us. A clamour is raised in support of the terrorist
movements which some new African States welcome in
their territories and which provide them with food and
material. And when from those territories attacks are
directed against us, killing and causing injuries to our
people and destroying property on our side, and if,
notwithstanding
repeated instructions from the Government, the Portuguese forces, tired and indignant, reply
and a stray bullet should fall on the other side of the
frontier, a hue and cry is raised saying that we violate the
integrity of neighbouring countries. If we denounce the
aggressions of which we are the victims, the United
Nations turns a deaf ear. If we complain that Portuguese
nationals who happen to enter peacefully in the territories bordering on our provinces are treacherously
detained, harassed and clapped in gaol, even after their
acquittal in court, the United Nations remains indifferent.
If we invoke legitimate self-defence, the United Nations
closes its eyes in order not to see the evidence. But if a

55. We cannot but note with righteous indignation that
such one-sided resolutions are adopted every time a
complaint is brought to the Council against Portugal, while
on the sole occasion on which Portugal complained of a
premeditated and clear-cut act of armed aggression against
its national territory, the draft resolution aimed at putting a
stop to that aggression, even though supported by the
majority of Council members, was rendered ineffective by
the veto of one of the permanent members.
56. Mr. President, speaking as the representative of your
country at the 1525th meeting, you said, with your usual
sense of humour, that Portugal had become almost a
permanent member of the Security Council. Since I have
personally been representing Portugal for many years now,
your words reminded me of the first occasion on which I
came to the Council as a member of the Portuguese
5

complaint is made against Portugal by an African
country, it is known beforehand that there will be a
condemnation, whether the complaint is substantiated or
not. In vain do we express surprise that allegations of
incidents unknown to us are made in the United Nations
before they are brought to our notice by the countries
concerned with a view to finding solutions bilaterally, as
is usually done among civilized nations, In vain do we ask
that before a decision is taken, an inquiry be held on the
spot ln order to find out whether the alleged incidents did
take place and, if so, under what circumstances. In vain
do we present our allegations with facts and documents
which in any tribunal would be carefully examined before
a decision is taken. For the United Nations nothing of
this is of any use. Censures succeed one another in an
attempt to wear out our nerves and to break our moral
resistance. I ask myself, I ask the nation, if it is worth
while to continue taking part in such meetings, in which
decisions are taken before the debates take place and
where the fact that we participate and present our
defence imparts a semblance of formal regularity to what
is no more than violence pure and simple, devoid alike of
a basis and of ajuridical significance.”

63. We maintain that, apart from those condemnations,
Portugal must be made to listen to reason. We would like to
compare Portugal to a very sick man attended Ly two
physicians: the first physician has tried to inject the serum
of reason into him, but the patient has proved allergic to
that treatment. The second physician feels surgery Is
needed. This physician represents the freedom fighters who,
after trying the serum of reason-that
dialogue which
Portugal requests yet will not hear about-have resolutely
taken the path of national liberation against which no
armada, no force can prevail. This is the occasion to affirm
that more emphatically than ever, so that Portugal may
take note of it.
64. We wish once again to appeal to Portugal, through its
allies, to enter into a dialogue with the freedom fighters. We
state again that the African peoples are without hate and
that the African peoples aspire only to their independence,
We ask Portugal to heed this voice of Africa, which wants
only its independence and its freedom. When that voice has
been heeded, Portugal will no longer sit in the dock,
65. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council has now
concluded its consideration of the complaint submitted to
it by Guinea on 4 December in document S/9528.

59. Mr. TOURE (Guinea) (translated from French):
Mr. President, may I be allowed, through you, to thank the
Security Council for having heard the cause of the Republic
of Guinea, a young African State, which is the victim of
acts of aggression committed by Portugal. We sincerely
thank and warmly congratulate all the States which have
here demonstrated their active solidarity with the Republic
of Guinea in the course of this debate and which have
shown by their evident sohdarity how much they condemn
colonization and all its consequences, how attached they
are to justice, and what a scourge for Africa Portuguese
colonization is in itself.

66. It is my optimistic expectation that, given the desire
of the people of the world for peace, this will be the last
meeting of.,theSecurity Council in 1969. Let me take this
oppofl?iy
to express my thanks to all of you for the
maximum co-operation you have given me. During this
month we have discussed some most thorny problems and,
despite an absence of unanimity of views on a number of
these problems, I am most grateful for all the useful
suggestions and advice I received throughout from all the
members of the Council, Let me pay a very special tribute
to our colleagues Ambassador Shahi, Ambassador Csatorday, Ambassador Solano Lopez, Ambassador Boye and
Mr. Azzout for the loyal and indispensable services they
rendered to the Council. They have truly been worthy
representatives of their countries. I enjoyed working with
all of them and I shall miss them very greatly.

60. The vote just taken by the Security Council is
completely satisfactory to the delegation of the Republic of
Guinea because it results from a debate during which the
files of Portuguese colonization were opened wide and
presented under various aspects, all of which bear witness
to the desire of Portugal to maintain, well on in the
twentieth century, its colonization, its arbitrary rule, and
its domination over States which aspire to their freedom
and sovereignty.

67. In conclusion I wish you all a very happy Christmas
and a prosperous New Year. Let us truly strive to make
1970 a more peaceful year, a year when the world will see
more peace, justice and progress. I can only say, with
.
justified optimism, that all is well that ends well.

61. The Security Council has carefully noted the fact that
the Republic of Guinea was attacked by Portugal. That
attack against my country was not the first of its kind, so
there is no need here to refer to other condemnations
which have been pronounced by the Security Council, by
the General Assembly, by other international organs and by
world public opinion against Portugal.

68. Mr, SHAH1 (Pakistan): Together with our colleagues
from Algeria, Hungary, Paraguay and Senegal, the members
of the Pakistan delegation and I were looking forward to a
silent exit from the Security Council on the termination of
our term of membership. However, the representative of
France, Ambassador Berard, has been so generous in his
praise of our work in the Council that the vow of silence
must perforce be broken by a few words.

62. Besides those condemnations of Portugal by the
Security Council and all other condemnations, there is the
reaffirmation of resolution 1514 (XV) on the granting of
independence to colonial countries and peoples. Because of
the permanent conflict created by the non-acceptance of
that resolution and its provisions, the Security Council will
have to sit continuously in order to deal with the clear cases
of aggression of which Portugal is and always will be guilty.

69. During the period of our membership the Security
Council was called upon to act on several matters brought
before it. On all occasions my delegation, while stating the
views of its Government, has also endeavoured to work
together with all members of the Security Council to bridge
differences in order that all of us could move together and
6

move forward. It is a matter of no small satisfaction that
more often than not the Council was able to act in unity on
the basis of consensus. It is the most fitting tribute to all
the members of the Council that my colleagues were not
content to state the views of their respective Governments,
but were impelled by their responsibility under the Charter
to act also 011 behalf of all Members of the United Nations
and to discharge the onerous responsibility of the Security
Council for the maintenance of international peace and
security.

Assembly. When we and the representative of France voted
in the same way, he took the correct position-and in this I
fully share his opinion.
74. The Hungarian delegation has endeavoured to make a
contribution to the best of its ability, faithful to the foreign
policy of the Hungarian People’s Republic, a policy of
peace, progress and co-operation with other countries for
the maintenance of peace. It has been a privilege to serve on
this mOSt important organ of the United Nations in the
cause of maintaining international peace and security as laid
down in the United Nations Charter. We wish at the same
time to express our deep appreciation for the friendly
co-operation and generous help we received from other
Security Council members in carrying out our high duties.
We wish all members of the Council-and first of all you,
Mr. President-a happy holiday and a prosperous and
peaceful New Year.

70. It would be presumptuous for me to attempt to
evaluate the contributions of any of my colleagues during
the two years of our membership. All I would wish to say is
that it has been a rare opportunity and privilege for me and
my delegation to work with colleagues of such great
personal calibre and stature. At this moment I cannot but
express the hope that, together with the new members of
the Security Council, all my colleagues who will continue
their membership will be able to find solutions to the grave
solutions or adjustments of the grievous situations of which
the Council is seized. In particular we look to the four
permanent members of the Security Council that have
resumed their consultations on the Middle East to bring
about a just and lasting peace to that tomtented region, We
are heartened to note that what appeared to be a hardened
deadlock shows signs of movement. We believe that the
collective efforts of the permanent members and their
authority will give a powerful impetus to the implementation of Security Council resolution 242 (1967) of 22
November 1967.

75. Mr. BOYE (Senegal) (translated from French): Since
these last days of the year are days of love and hope, we
must hope, with the optimists, that today’s meeting will be
the last meeting of the Council in which Senegal will
participate in its two-year term of office.
76. In any case I should like to thank all my colleagues
present here for the co-operation which they have always
accorded me in my task. They have taught me a great deal
during the two years that I have had the honour of
representing my country.
77. I have already had the opportunity of expressing my
gratitude to each representative here. Senegal, during these
two years, has attempted to make its modest contribution
to the fulfillment of the ideals of peace and justice. I am
happy to have been able to represent my country among SO
many eminent representatives of countries which maintain
relations of friendship and co-operation with Senegal. I
again thank all of you.

71. In concluding may I express my gratitude to Ambassador Berard for his most friendly gesture and to all my
distinguished colleagues for their goodwill and encouragement and their assistance to my delegation and me. It is
most fitting, Sir, that our membership should come to an
end under your Presidency, you who are an outstanding
representative of Africa and of a great African country.
72. Mr. CSATORDAY (Hungary): As we near the end of
the year, some delegations are filled with so much optimism
that they can express the hope that international tensions
will not lead to any more meetings of the Security Council
before New Year’s Day. Though we share that hope we
cannot be entirely certain that it will be fulfilled. But no
matter what the next few days hold for us, my delegation
wishes especially to thank the Ambassador of France for
the warm tribute he paid to my delegation and to the other
outgoing members of the Security Council.

78. Mr. AZZOUT (Algeria) (translated from French): 1
should like first to thank Mr, Berard for the very kind
words he addressed to me. Through my humble self, those
words were meant for the entire Algerian delegation, whose
humble spokesman I am.
79. Now that our term of office in the Security Council iS
coming to an end, I should like, on behalf of the Algerian
delegation, to express our thanks to all the delegations
members of the Council for their sincere and loyal
co-operation. In the course of these last two years we have
all, beyond our divergencies of views, appreciated the
efforts of those who have at heart the safeguarding of peace
and security in justice and the realization that despite its
omissions and wmknesses the Security COUnCil remainS a
useful instrument in the search for peace in the world. I am
sure that all those who have shared our views during this
period, as well as all those who have held different
opinions, will leave with the feeling that they have done
everything in their power to promote peace and understanding among peoples. Certainly, world peace will be

73. In his eloquent and elegant statement, Ambassador
Berard expressed some qualified praise with regard to mY
delegation. We are certain we do not entirely deserve a good
part of it. We have only fulfilled the task entrusted to us by
our Government and by the international cOmmUnitY.
On
the other hand, I wish to tell him that when we voted
differently from him we too were convinced that our
position was a constructive and just one-and that applies
to today’s vote too. All our votes and all our actions were
based upon the principles of the Charter
with respect to
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
7

-

strengthened only when the last vestiges of colonialism and
of injustice have been entirely eliminated.

know that those tributes were meant, abpve all, for the
country which I have the honour to represent.

80. In conclusion, may I offer my special thanks to all my
colleagues who have had kind words to say about me. I

l%hemeeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

8

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED NATIONS

United
Nations
publications
the world,
Consult
your
or Geneva.

SE PROCURER

COMMENT

PUBLICATION5

may be obtained
bookstore
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Notions,
Soles Section,

LES PUBLICA710NS

DES NATIONS

throughout
New York

UNIES

Ler publications
der Notions
Unier
rent en vente dons ler libroiries
et ler ogences
d6poritoirer
du monde entier.
Informez.vous
ouprbs de votre librairie
ou adrerrez-vouy
L:
Notions
Unier, Section der venter, New York ou Geni?ve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

Las publicociones
de las Naciones
Unidos estdn
en tadas p&es
del mundo. Consulte
o IV librero
Ventor,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

UNIDAS

en vento en libreriar
y cosos dirtribuidoror
o dirijose
o: Nocioner
Unidos,
Seccibn

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

de

82315-January

1973-2,050
