S/PV.6470 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6470th meeting
Wednesday, 19 January 2011, 2.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Čolaković . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bosnia and Herzegovina)

Members:

Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Rizzo
Mr. Huang Hongjiang
Mr. Osorio
Ms. Legendre
Mrs. Ntyam-Ehya
Mr. Eick
Mr. Gupta
Mr. Ramadan
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Vaz Patto
Mr. Listov
Mr. Crowley
Mr. Afshar
Ms. Masilko

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-21096 (E)

*1121096*

S/PV.6470 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 2.40 p.m.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes in
order to enable the Security Council to carry out its
work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The United Nations
Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in
the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967, Richard
Falk, recently voiced his concern over the murder of
four Palestinian citizens by the Israeli Defense Forces
in the West Bank and the demolition of the historic
Hotel Shepherd in the centre of Jerusalem to make way
for an Israeli settlement. The West Bank Director of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, Barbara Shenstone,
indicated that the demolitions of dwellings of
Palestinian citizens occupied since prior to 1948 are
reprehensible acts of devastating effect and violate
Israeli obligations pursuant to international law and the
United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child.
These facts continue to occur without this body
adopting efficient measures to avoid such excesses.
Therefore, it is imperative to reiterate that all activities
connected with the establishment of Israeli settlements
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, are illegal and constitute a major obstacle to
the achievement of peace in the region.
These and other reprehensible actions repeatedly
carried out by Israel, the occupying Power, which are
aimed at changing the demographic composition,
character and status of Palestinian territories, in clear
violation of international humanitarian law and the
relevant resolutions of this body and of the United
Nations, require the international community to
demand the immediate cessation of such illegal
activities.
Against this backdrop, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela co-sponsors and therefore firmly supports
the draft resolution urging Israel to cease the
construction of settlements. The United Nations must
condemn in the firmest possible manner these repeated
violations of international law carried out by the State
of Israel and adopt practical and effective measures to
prevent them, at the risk of its historic relevance.

2

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela welcomes
the increasing number of countries, in particular those
of Latin America and the Caribbean, that have joined
the dozens of countries throughout the world
recognizing Palestine as a free and independent State.
The delegation of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
wishes to recall the importance of ensuring the
implementation of all Security Council and other
United Nations resolutions promoting a peaceful
solution that will lead to the establishment of two
States. The Madrid terms of reference, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the Road Map are equally relevant
proposals that urge direct negotiations between the
parties so that the State of Israel and the State of
Palestine can live side by side within secure and
recognized borders.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reaffirms
the need to implement the Geneva Convention relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Times of War in
the Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem and
the other Arab territories occupied since 1967.
Our country emphasizes the importance of the
annual international United Nations International
Meeting on the Question of Palestine, to be held on
7 and 8 February in Cairo on the theme “The urgency
of addressing the plight of Palestinian political
prisoners in Israeli prisons and detention facilities”.
This praiseworthy initiative, supported by the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People, will offer the opportunity to
address the repeated violations of human rights
suffered by hundreds of men and women who
heroically and with dignity have fought for the just,
legal and heroic cause of their people.
We cannot fail to mention the delicate
humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip. The daily
suffering of Palestinians in this territory requires us to
demand once again the immediate lifting of the
merciless blockade imposed by the Government of the
State of Israel.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela once again
calls on the State of Israel to respect the sovereignty of
Lebanon so that situations such those of July 2006 may
avoid recurrence. In that respect, efforts to promote
direct negotiations between the parties must be
encouraged, pursuant to resolution 1701 (2006).
All illegal actions aimed at violating the
territorial area of the occupied Syrian Golan are also an
11-21096

S/PV.6470 (Resumption 1)

impediment to comprehensive peace in the region.
Hence, Member States must address the need for Israel
to withdraw pursuant to the demands of resolution 498
(1981). Moreover, resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) must be implemented in order to preserve the
territorial integrity of Syria and thereby contribute to
the peace that is so sorely needed throughout the
region.
I would conclude by stating that cruelty, injustice
and unfairness throughout the world can constitute
major obstacles to the implementation of the provisions
of international law. That is why we once again call on
the State of Israel to comply with the resolutions
adopted by the United Nations on the Middle East and
the question of Palestine. We very much hope that
today’s debate of the Security Council will contribute
to achieving the longed-for peace in that region of the
world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Madame President, on Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month, and by extending the
appreciation of my delegation to you and the members
of the Council for convening this open debate on such
an important issue.
Mу delegation joins others in congratulating the
five new members of the Council — Colombia,
Germany, India, Portugal and South Africa — and in
wishing them a very productive and successful tenure
in the Council. We would also like to thank UnderSecretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his briefing.
Mу delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and with the
statement of the Organization of Islamic Conference to
be delivered by the representative of Tajikistan.
In the past few weeks, the news emanating from
the region has been of grave concern. The acceleration
of settlement construction and expansion in the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem, epitomizes this
harrowing trend. The situation was made even worse
by the latest military incursion conducted by Israel a
few days ago. The international community is very
aware of the ultimate objective of these settlement
policies and measures. They are clearly aimed at

11-21096

altering the demographic composition, physical
character and status of the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. Israel is violating
international law and the United Nations Charter.
The illegal Israeli settlements undermine all
efforts to restart peace talks between Palestine and
Israel, jeopardizing the vision of a two-State solution
and complicating the conflict in the region. We
therefore attach primary importance to the role of the
Security Council in responding to the settlement issue
as it did back in 1980, when it adopted resolution 465
(1980). The Council must regain its role in solving this
very important issue, as mandated by the United
Nations Charter.
It is in this context that Indonesia is
co-sponsoring the draft resolution before the Council
on the illegal Israeli settlement activities in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem. We hope that this new resolution will
reverse the inactivity of the Security Council when it
comes to matters relating to the suffering of the
Palestinian people. The Council must and indeed can
exert a positive influence on the Middle East peace
process.
At this stage, however, it is hard to imagine that
peace can be victorious in the Middle East through a
one-time lofty solution. We can always hope for the
kind of effort made at Oslo or Madrid or Annapolis,
but for the time being we must appreciate positive
developments on any scale that keep the peace process
in motion. Indonesia therefore supports the current
surge in diplomacy aimed at relaunching negotiations
and jump-starting a comprehensive peace process,
including the ongoing efforts of the United States. We
also recognize the role of the Quartet in promoting
solutions to the conflict in the Middle East. And, not
least, we have been persistent in recognizing the
contribution of countries in the region and of the
League of Arab States to the Middle East peace
process, including through the Arab Peace Initiative.
It is our view that the peace process and the peace
settlement must be aligned. One cannot envisage a
peace settlement forced under the threat of the barrel of
a gun. That would produce only a short-lived
settlement, if not a hazardous one. Nor can one
imagine a peace process that lacks the legitimacy
conferred by the main parties and the international
community.

3

S/PV.6470 (Resumption 1)

For far too long the Middle East conflict has
tarnished the efforts of our era to create a peaceful and
liveable region. The need to find a peaceful, just,
lasting and comprehensive settlement to the conflict is
absolutely critical. The Government of Indonesia is
committed to helping to achieve an end to the
protracted and bitter conflict that has been wearing on
the parties of the region for far too long. Our
commitment to and support for the Palestinian cause is
total and unwavering. Our commitment to an
independent, viable and democratic Palestine, living
side by side in peace and security with its neighbours,
is absolute.
Let me conclude by expressing our fervent hope,
which, I believe, is also shared by many here and
outside this Chamber. The Palestinian comprehensive
plan was launched in August 2009 in preparation for
independence within a 24-month period. We hope that
2011 will be the year that history will record as seeing
the victory of reason over fear, the victory of humanity
over cruelty; the year enabling us to liberate the people
of Palestine and to bestow peace and prosperity on
them, the year to see two countries living side by side,
charting a new phase in their bilateral relationship. The
Security Council owes the international community
and those two peoples such a desirable and dignified
outcome.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): It is
my honour to address the Security Council today in the
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. I thank the presidency for
convening an open debate on this matter, which has
been the focus of attention and concern on the part of
the international community for decades. I also thank
the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Lynn Pascoe, for his briefing.
Chile associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Egypt on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
My country has consistently supported the right of
the Palestinian people to form an independent State
coexisting in peace with the State of Israel. Similarly,
we have fully supported the right of the State of Israel to
exist within secure and internationally recognized
borders. In order to achieve those aims, the Government
of Chile considers imperative and resolutely supports

4

the relaunching of the negotiation process between the
two parties, with the support of the international
community, in order to achieve a comprehensive,
definitive and satisfactory peace agreement in
accordance with the resolutions of the United Nations.
The continuation of the Israeli Government’s
policy of settlement construction is a serious obstacle
to this process, and we call for its immediate
suspension, as stated in the draft resolution submitted
to the Council, of which my delegation is a sponsor.
The Government of Chile, on the seventh of this
month, recognized the existence of Palestine as a free,
independent and sovereign State. In that recognition,
the Government of Chile made particular mention of
the Jewish and Palestinian communities in Chile
because of their valuable support for the country’s
social, cultural, political and economic development
over many decades, and for their full integration into
our society. Their fraternal coexistence has been a clear
example of good relations, which we hope will serve as
an inspiration to the States of Israel and Palestine, a
point that I reiterate that today in this Chamber.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mr. Núñez Mosquera (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba supports the statement made by the
representative of Egypt on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
It is regrettable that the situation in the region,
particularly the occupied Palestinian territory,
including Jerusalem, is continuing without progress
being made. The region is still marked by instability
and insecurity. The situation in the Gaza Strip is
unsustainable. The blockade of the Strip — the
imposition by Israel of impediments and restrictions on
the freedom of movement and access to both persons
and goods, including humanitarian and medical
supplies — has made the recovery and reconstruction
of the area practically impossible, a situation that has
further affected the already precarious living standards
of the population.
The international community cannot remain
indifferent. All possible practical measures must be
taken to ensure that Israel ends those policies, which
are carried out deliberately and in violation of
international laws. Such policies only increase the
suffering and tensions of the Palestinian people. Cuba

11-21096

S/PV.6470 (Resumption 1)

reiterates its demand that Israel immediately,
unconditionally and fully lift the cruel and illegal
blockade in Gaza and allow the free movement of
supplies to and from the Gaza Strip, as well as
permanent humanitarian access to it.
Cuba condemns the settlement activities in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem, which are continuing despite the calls by
the international community for an immediate halt to
them. Recently, the Government of Israel, in flagrant
violation of the norms of international law, destroyed
the historic Shepherd Hotel, located in the occupied
territory of East Jerusalem, to establish a new Israeli
settlement. Israel also announced that in 2012 it will
allocate $500 million for subsidies for settlement
activities.
At the end of 2009, more than 3,700 dwellings
were being built and more than 200 Palestinian
dwellings were demolished to make way for those
illegal activities. Cuba demands an immediate halt to
the demolition of Palestinian dwellings, the
construction of the wall and the eviction of Palestinian
families in East Jerusalem, as well as other acts of
provocation and illegal aggression perpetrated by the
extremist settlers against the Palestinian population and
the holy sites. These measures and policies perpetuated
by Israel are serious and flagrant violations of
international law, the United Nations Charter, many
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council, and the Advisory Opinion of the International
Court of Justice of 9 July 2004.
The Security Council cannot remain indifferent to
these facts. Its silence over the past two years on this
matter has been used by Israel to pursue its demolitions
and construction of settlements. Direct conversations
between Israel and Palestine, upon which the
international community pinned certain hopes, lasted
for less than a month, due to Israel’s decision to
continue its settlement activities and to end the brief
moratorium thereon.
The widespread physical, economic and social
devastation caused by the illegal and destructive
practice of settlements has been the main obstacle to
achieving a peace agreement. In practical terms, the
settlement policy prevents the creation of a Palestinian
State on the basis of the existing 1967 borders, and
thus the possibility of resolving the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict in a just manner.

11-21096

Cuba reaffirms that any measure or action that
Israel has taken or will take to change the legal,
physical and demographic situation and institutional
structure of the occupied Syrian Golan, or to exercise
jurisdiction and administration in that territory is null
and void and has no legal effect. We also reaffirm that
all such measures and actions, including the illegal
construction and expansion of Israeli settlements in the
Syrian Golan since 1967, are violations of international
law and agreements, the Charter and resolutions of the
United Nations, including Security Council resolution
497 (1981), and the Fourth Geneva Convention, and
represent a defiance of the international community.
Cuba demands Israel’s full withdraw from the occupied
Syrian Golan to the borders of 4 June 1967.
Israel cannot be allowed to continue to commit
serious and flagrant violations of international law with
impunity. The Security Council must shoulder its
responsibility for the maintenance of peace and
security in the region and, in particular, for the IsraeliPalestinian conflict.
The Palestinian people and its leaders have
agreed to and are working assiduously for a two-State
solution. However, Israel thus far has not proved to be
a serious interlocutor in the peace process. The
international community must assume its responsibility
for the Palestinian question and find a solution that
allows the Palestinian people to exercise its right to
self-determination. In this connection, it is imperative
that a peace agreement be achieved this year, pursuant
to relevant resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference
and the Arab Peace Initiative. The growing
international recognition of the Palestinian State that
we have seen in recent weeks in Latin America and the
Caribbean should give momentum towards achieving
this objective.
Cuba once again reiterates its position in favour
of a fair and lasting peace for all the peoples of the
Middle East that will put an end to the occupation of
all the Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967
and guarantee the exercise of self-determination of the
Palestinian people by means of the establishment of an
independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as
its capital.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uganda.
Mr. Mugoya (Uganda): I thank you, Madame
President, for organizing today’s open debate on the

5

S/PV.6470 (Resumption 1)

situation in the Middle East. We thank UnderSecretary-General Pascoe for his briefing, and the
Permanent Observer of Palestine for his statement.
We welcomed the holding of direct IsraeliPalestinian talks between Prime Minister Netanyahu and
President Abbas in Washington, D.C., Sharm el-Sheikh
and Jerusalem, with a renewed sense of optimism. Both
parties committed themselves to negotiating in good
faith a framework agreement that would lay the
foundation for a final peace treaty. The expectation of
the international community was that this momentum
would be sustained towards the long-awaited creation of
an independent and viable Palestinian State living in
peace and security alongside Israel. Uganda is
convinced that there is no viable alternative to a
negotiated solution and that comprehensive and durable
peace lies in a two-State solution.
We urge Israelis and Palestinians alike to
summon the necessary courage to engage without delay
in substantive negotiations on all core issues, including
security, borders, settlements, refugees and Jerusalem.
In this regard, we commend the efforts undertaken by
the international community and regional partners in
facilitating negotiations. There is no doubt that the
negotiation process will require courageous decisions
and concessions by both parties.
My delegation is deeply concerned about the
recent developments that led to the stalling of direct
talks. The continued settlement activity of Israel is a
recipe for conflict. In this regard, the recent demolition
of the Shepherd Hotel and the planned construction of
a new settlement are not conducive to negotiations. In
our view, such actions constitute an obstacle to peace.
We reiterate our call upon Israel to freeze all settlement
activity, including natural growth.
Uganda salutes the Palestinian Authority, under
the leadership of President Abbas and Prime Minister
Fayyad, for the significant accomplishments towards
fulfilling its obligations under the Road Map,
particularly in the security sector, institution-building
and economic development.
We are also concerned over the situation in Gaza.
While we welcome the easing of the blockade, it is
evident that it continues to hamper humanitarian relief
and reconstruction efforts in that area. We therefore
call for Israel’s complete lifting of the blockade. It is
essential that both parties exercise maximum restraint

6

and adhere to the ceasefire, in accordance with
resolution 1860 (2009) and other relevant resolutions.
On the subject of Lebanon, we are concerned
about the continued violations of resolution 1701
(2006), and reiterate our call on all parties to fully
implement that resolution.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Kodama (Japan): I thank you very much,
Madame President, for giving us the opportunity to
address the situation in the Middle East. I would like to
thank Mr. Pascoe for his comprehensive briefing. I
would also like to thank the Permanent Observer of
Palestine, Ambassador Mansour, for his statement this
morning.
Japan hopes that a just, comprehensive and
lasting peace will be realized at the earliest date
possible. In this context, Japan strongly supports a twoState solution and remains convinced that the only way
to achieve durable peace is to achieve the two-State
solution through sincere negotiations.
Gravely concerned by the current impasse in the
peace process, we strongly encourage both parties to
restart direct negotiations. We also believe that there is
lack of mutual trust that is preventing this. We call on
both sides to engage the United States and the
international community and to take steps that will
create an environment conducive to renewing direct
negotiations.
The two parties must abide by their obligations
under previous agreements, most importantly the Road
Map. We call on Israel, as we have on so many
occasions, to freeze its settlement activities in the West
Bank, which includes East Jerusalem. In that
connection, Japan condemns the demolishing of a part
of Shepherd Hotel in East Jerusalem with a view to
constructing new housing units for Jewish people.
Japan does not recognize any unilateral measures that
prejudge the outcome of the final status negotiations.
At the same time, we call upon the Palestinian
Authority to continue its efforts to improve security
and fulfill its commitment to cease violence and work
against incitement. We strongly condemn the rocket
attacks launched into Israel and call on those
responsible to immediately stop.

11-21096

S/PV.6470 (Resumption 1)

Japan strongly supports and will continue to
provide assistance to the State-building efforts of the
Palestinian Authority.

why it is crucial to actively and aggressively engage
with all actors with a view to putting the relevant
process back on track.

On the Gaza strip, the measures taken by Israel to
ease the blockade are a positive step, but Japan remains
concerned about the humanitarian situation. Japan
stresses the importance of further easing the blockade
while preventing the inflow of weapons into the Gaza
Strip. Japan welcomes Israel’s easing of restrictions on
movement and access in the West Bank, which has
contributed to the development of the Palestinian
economy, and hopes that Israel will further ease such
restrictions.

Turkey continues to believe that there is no
alternative to a negotiated two-State solution. The
parameters are well known and remain on the table. We
reject violence of any kind perpetrated by any party.
We also recognize that an impasse in which one side
continuously undermines any and all efforts at even
direct talks is not tenable.

We call on both parties to make the difficult
decisions to advance peace. Japan will continue its
efforts to realize a just and comprehensive peace in the
region.
Allow me to say a few words on Lebanon. We are
concerned about the situation in Lebanon, where a
number of Cabinet members under Prime Minister
Saad Hariri announced their resignation last week. We
reaffirm our support for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity, unity and political independence of Lebanon
and for the full implementation of all relevant Security
Council resolutions. We are closely following the
developments in Lebanon and support the efforts of
President Michel Sleiman for the early establishment
of a new Government and the maintenance of
democratic institutions.
We support the Special Tribunal for Lebanon —
an independent and international judicial organization
whose work will enhance the rule of law. The Tribunal
should continue to carry out its mandate without any
interference, which will contribute to ending impunity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Let me first congratulate
Bosnia and Herzegovina for assuming the presidency
of the Security Council.
The Council is once again deliberating on the
situation in the Middle East, and once again the
outlook is bleak. We are not even remotely close to a
negotiated comprehensive settlement, and recent
developments in various parts of the region are fuelling
uncertainty and instability. The continuing state of flux
is not at all conducive to addressing the many
intertwined issues facing us in the Middle East. That is

11-21096

At the moment, on the Israeli-Palestinian track
there are ongoing talks on whether there can be talks
towards addressing core issues. However, slowly but
surely, and in blatant disregard for international law or
morality, Israel is imposing its will on the Palestinians,
through accelerated and aggressive settlement activity,
tightening measures of occupation, demolitions and
evictions.
The latest developments in East Jerusalem are
deplorable. How can the Palestinian side be expected
to negotiate in good faith while Israel continues to
advocate and implement such unilateral policies? That
is the major dilemma at the moment, and that is why it
is high time for the Security Council to make a strong
statement on such unilateral Israeli practices. The
Council must not shy away from that responsibility.
Meanwhile, the Palestinian side cannot be
expected to remain a prisoner of Israel’s will forever.
Indeed, with the ongoing help of the international
community, the Palestinians are successfully building
their national institutions, and at the current pace and
performance they are well positioned for the
establishment of their State at any point in the near
future. That process cannot be reversed, as evidenced
by the recent increase in the number of States that
recognize Palestine. Based on the will of the
international community, that process will ultimately
culminate in the creation of the State of Palestine,
based on the 1967 borders.
On the other hand, it has been two years since
Security Council resolution 1860 (2009) was adopted.
The sad truth is that since then there has been no
significant change on the ground. Despite all the public
diplomacy to the contrary, the circumstances of the
1.5 million prisoners in Gaza remain appalling. An
unjust, inhumane and unlawful blockade continues to
be imposed from land and sea. Homes, schools and
basic infrastructure cannot be built. Markets are full of

7

S/PV.6470 (Resumption 1)

goods no one can afford. Indeed, resolution 1860
(2009), which called for the unimpeded provision of
humanitarian aid and the elevation of the humanitarian
and economic situation in Gaza, has become, for all
intents and purposes, meaningless. The plight of the
Palestinians of Gaza is an embarrassment for the
international community.
Meanwhile, an international humanitarian aid
convoy attempting to deliver much-needed material to
Gaza was attacked by Israel in international waters
more than six months ago. A panel of inquiry was
established to investigate that incident, with the
participation of Israel. However, it is January 2011, and
Israel has yet to submit its report.
Turkey is concerned about the recent turn of
events in Lebanon. We fully support Lebanon’s
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence. The democratic process, the rule of law
and constitutional order must not be undermined.
Achieving lasting national reconciliation is in the
interest of all Lebanese people and factions. Turkey
will continue to actively promote and support all
efforts to foster peaceful political dialogue in Lebanon
and the region.
The President: I call next on the representative
of Morocco.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I wish to express my delegation’s
appreciation to you, Madam President, for organizing
this open debate under the frustrating and precarious
circumstances that prevail in the occupied Palestinian
territories, which are felt in the whole region, especially
under the daily practices of the Israeli Government and
its evasion of negotiations. We also wish to express our
thanks and appreciation to Mr. Lynn Pascoe, UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs, for his
comprehensive briefing.
In addition to the statement delivered by the
representative of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement and those to be delivered by Tajikistan on
behalf of the Organization of the Islamic Conference
and by Tunisia on behalf of the Arab Group, my
delegation wishes to focus its statement on the serious
circumstances and the grave results of the increased
pace of Israeli actions in the occupied Palestinian
territories, particularly in East Jerusalem, and the
obstacles it continues to place in the road to peace

8

negotiations, as the entire international community has
agreed on.
We wish to stress that it is important to maintain
the momentum that resulted following the resumption of
direct talks in Washington, D. C. on 2 September 2010
under the auspices of the United States of America,
when the Palestinian side, backed by undivided Arab
support, stated its readiness to continue along the path
towards peace and stability, as reflected in the American
and other international parties’ efforts. We wish to
express our appreciation to President Obama for his
efforts to relaunch a genuine peace process, including
the commitments that he mentioned in his statement
before the General Assembly on 23 September 2010
with regard to the rights of the Palestinian people and
the establishment of an independent State within a set
timeframe (see A/65/PV.11). We also take this
opportunity to express our wish that the American
Administration continue its robust efforts, pursuant to
the established principles of the peace process,
resolutions of international legitimacy, the principle of
land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Road
Map.
Alongside those American and international
efforts, the Palestinian leadership has fulfilled all its
international commitments under the Road Map.
Moreover, it has also taken concrete steps towards
establishing the foundations of an independent
Palestinian State, for which the Palestinian people
yearn, with the support of the international community.
In contrast to that firm Palestinian determination,
Israel has continued its unilateral measures by
implementing an expedited settlement policy in order
to curtail all signs of Palestinian presence on their own
land and to undermine the two-State solution, which
Israel has repeatedly avowed and committed itself to.
Israel is thus fully responsible for stalling the peace
process. In the short period since the cessation of direct
negotiations, the Israeli Government has continued to
seize more land, to build more housing units and to
demolish more Palestinian homes and expel its
legitimate owners, all the while enacting new
legislation limiting the conditions for its withdrawal
from East Jerusalem and the occupied Syrian Golan.
With regard to the occupied city of Jerusalem and
its environs, Israel continues its illegal policy of
Judaizing the Holy City through the destruction of its
main original features and the recent demolition of a

11-21096

S/PV.6470 (Resumption 1)

historic hotel in the Sheikh Jarrah neighbourhood of
East Jerusalem in order to build 20 housing units in the
centre of the city. Israel also declared that it will build
1,400 additional housing units for settlers in the
southern part of Jerusalem. This will entail the
expulsion of Palestinian owners, the demolition of their
homes and the cancelling of their residency rights, in
clear violation of international humanitarian law and
Security Council resolutions. That is in addition to
provocative measures targeting religious sites and
aimed at inflaming religious sensitivities.
The Kingdom of Morocco and His Majesty King
Mohammed VI, who is the current Chairman of the
Al-Quds Committee, set up by the Organization of the
Islamic Conference (OIC), express their grave concern
and condemn all Israeli practices seeking to change the
legal status of Jerusalem. The international community
and the Security Council are requested to put an end to
such practices. The Palestinian side, supported by the
League of Arab States, the OIC, the Non-Aligned
Movement and other States, opted to come to the
Security Council on the matter of Israeli settlements to
affirm the illegality of settlement activities and to urge
the Council to shoulder its responsibility so as to
restore hope in those who chose peaceful negotiations
as a civil means to achieve peace. That initiative was
based on the belief that peace in the Middle East is not
only the concern of the opposing parties and the region
itself, but is also a legitimate and immediate
requirement of the international community, as the
stability of the Middle East has a strong and direct
impact on international peace and security.
We wish to send the message that the settlements
and the construction of new housing units are rejected
and that they impede direct negotiations and undermine
all substantive efforts for peace. Based on our resolute
choice for peace and our international legitimacy, we
wish to reiterate that the two-State solution, which
guarantees the establishment of an independent and
viable Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, living side by side with Israel in peace and
security, as well as Israel’s withdrawal from the Golan
Heights and the remaining Lebanese lands, remain the
only way to end decades of conflict in the Middle East.
In order to reach that ultimate strategic goal, all
efforts to continue direct negotiations and to put an end
to all unilateral measures by any side should be
strengthened in order to create an environment
conducive to relaunching negotiations and to avoid

11-21096

extremism and violence and their dire consequences
for all the peoples and States of the region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Ali (Malaysia): Let me first and foremost
congratulate you, Madam President, on your presidency
of the Council, and secondly, state that we align my
delegation’s statement with the statements of the
representatives of Egypt, on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement, and Tajikistan, on behalf of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference.
The continued occupation of Palestinian territory
and its ramifications are unacceptable. The build-up of
illegal Israeli settlements on Palestinian lands,
including in East Jerusalem, continues unabated. That
includes the recent demolition of the historic Shepherd
Hotel in order to make way for the construction of
more housing for settlers.
In continuing to do so, Israel has time and again
put itself on the wrong side of history, with impunity.
In that connection, we welcome the European Union’s
declaration on the Middle East peace process of
13 December
2010,
which
considers
Israeli
settlements, including in East Jerusalem, illegal under
international law and an obstacle to peace. In addition,
we also welcome the increasing number of countries
officially recognizing the State of Palestine. At the very
least, that development serves as an indication to all
Palestinians that the world at large has not forgotten or
forsaken them.
It is also a reminder to Israel that it must fulfil its
legal obligations by stopping all illegal settlement
activities, the construction of the separation wall and
the demolition of Palestinian-owned buildings and
infrastructure, particularly in East Jerusalem. Only by
doing so can the peace process timeline stipulated in
September 2010 be adhered to and the occupation end.
Only by doing so can we bring stability and peace to
the Middle East. Most important of all, we can restore
justice and all rights due to the Palestinian people.
On Gaza, we reiterate our call on Israel to lift the
blockade and end the imprisonment of more than
1.5 million people, to normalize the flow of
construction materials and to expedite further
approvals of United Nations projects, including the
building of more schools by the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near

9

S/PV.6470 (Resumption 1)

East. Provocative actions, such as the shooting of
Palestinian civilians, including children, by Israeli
military personnel, must stop, as such actions further
aggravate the already dire situation in the Strip.
Resolving these issues requires the international
community to focus all its energy and efforts on
achieving a comprehensive peace in the region and on
restoring the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people, including their right to an independent State of
Palestine. All parties must act truthfully and sincerely
towards achieving these objectives. We again urge the
Security Council to take the necessary action by
bringing into effect its very own resolutions on
Palestine and the Middle East.
The President: I give the floor to the Chair of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People.
Mr. Diallo (spoke in French): I should like to
begin, Madame, by congratulating you, on behalf of
the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, on the outstanding
manner in which the Bosnian presidency has led the
Council’s work this month. I also wish to commend
Ambassador Susan Rice, Permanent Representative of
the United States of America to the United Nations,
who presided so effectively over the Council’s work in
December 2010.
I also thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, for his exhaustive
briefing, in which he urged the parties and the
international community to pursue their efforts aimed
at the resumption of negotiations on all final status
issues concerning the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
In a statement issued earlier this week, the
Bureau of my Committee reaffirmed that the
continuation of Israeli settlement activities in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem, is the main obstacle to a resumption of
negotiations between the parties to the conflict. It again
urges the Government of Israel to heed the repeated
calls of the international community for a complete
cessation of settlement activities, which are illegal
under international law and run counter to the efforts to
launch successful final status negotiations.
Since the expiration of the partial moratorium in
September, Israel has built over 1,600 housing units in
the occupied Palestinian territories, including East

10

Jerusalem. The recent decision of the Government of
Israel to devote over $500 million in the form of
subsidies to expanding settlements through 2012 also
demonstrates Israel’s intention to pursue its illegal
settlement policies in the occupied Palestinian
territories.
It would be useful if the Security Council were to
reaffirm today its firm position on settlements and to
demand that an end be put to their expansion so that
the parties might understand that the United Nations
and the Security Council intend to ensure respect for
international legitimacy and to achieve a just, lasting
and comprehensive settlement of the Palestinian
question. The Council must urgently intervene to
prevent the situation from deteriorating. It is also
obligated to maintain regional peace and security.
In that respect, the Committee fervently hopes
that the draft resolution on Israeli settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territories will be adopted by the
Council. Furthermore, the Committee asks the
Government of Israel to extend the moratorium
indefinitely and to apply it to East Jerusalem, pursuant
to its obligations under Road Map. The Committee
believes that the implementation of a new moratorium
on settlements, including in East Jerusalem, would
enable the parties to relaunch serious and direct
negotiations. These important negotiations can succeed
only in an atmosphere of mutual trust and good faith.
While commending the efforts undertaken by the
Quartet and each of its members in recent years to
promote a freeze of settlement activities and a
resumption of negotiations, the Committee, through
me, urges the Council, the Quartet and the high
contracting parties to the Geneva Conventions to
clearly reaffirm their principled position on the issue of
settlements in order to compel Israel to meet its
obligations. The very future of the peace process is at
stake. The international community should send a clear
message that settlement activities are illegal and
incompatible with peace. They must therefore stop.
The President: I give
representative of Tajikistan.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Aslov (Tajikistan) (spoke in Russian): I have
the great honour to make this statement on behalf of
the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC)
group.

11-21096

S/PV.6470 (Resumption 1)

At the outset, I wish to thank you, Madame, for
having convened this meeting to consider the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question. I
should also like to convey my gratitude to the UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Lynn
Pascoe, for his very detailed briefing.

must comply with the will of the international
community, abide by the resolutions of international
legitimacy and respect the provisions of international
law. For all these reasons, Israel must stop building and
expanding illegal settlements in order to enhance the
prospects for a viable two-State solution.

Israel, the occupying Power, has methodically
stepped up its violations in the occupied Palestinian
territories by confiscating lands, demolishing houses,
building illegal settlements, constructing the separation
wall, erecting numerous checkpoints, detaining
thousands of Palestinians and imposing an unjust
blockade on the Gaza. All those illegal acts are being
undertaken
despite
unprecedented
international
unanimity in calling on Israel to stop such unlawful
and unilateral activities, which flagrantly violate The
Hague and Geneva Conventions, and the resolutions of
the Security Council and UNESCO on East Jerusalem,
and defy the united international opinion.

The OIC remains deeply concerned by Israel’s
ongoing air and land violations of Lebanon’s
sovereignty in breach of resolution 1701 (2006), and
calls on it to withdraw fully from the remaining
Lebanese occupied territories.

East Jerusalem remains an integral part of the
Palestinian territory occupied by Israel since 1967. Its
illegal annexation by Israel has been rejected and
remains unrecognized by the international community.
However, Israel, the occupying Power, pursues a
systematic process of altering the historical ArabIslamic identity of the holy city, Judaizing and
tampering with its history, and changing its
demographic composition. It continues to build the
separation wall, confiscate lands, demolish houses,
construct new settlement neighbourhoods, and
excavate beneath the blessed Al-Aqsa Mosque. All
these activities seek to completely change the facts on
the ground, and ultimately to isolate occupied East
Jerusalem from its Palestinian surroundings.
Settlement construction, if allowed to continue,
will make Jerusalem the capital of hatred, fanaticism
and violence instead of the capital of tolerance and
coexistence. The choice before Israel, the occupying
Power, is clear. If peace and international justice are to
prevail, the demolition and colonial settlement policies
must stop. In the meanwhile, we reaffirm through this
international platform that such illegal Israeli practices
will surely undermine diplomatic efforts to restore
constructive negotiations, and ultimately squander the
historic opportunity to make peace and coexistence a
reality. At this critical juncture, the international
community must shoulder its responsibilities and put a
decisive end to the Israeli policy of settlement-building
on Palestinian land, including East Jerusalem. Israel

11-21096

The OIC also associates itself with the position of
the international community to the effect that all
measures and actions taken or to be taken by Israel, the
occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical and
demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan and
its institutional structures, as well as Israel’s measures
to impose its jurisdiction and administration there, are
null and void and have no international legal effect. The
OIC demands that Israel abide fully and immediately by
resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw fully from the
occupied Syrian Golan to the lines of 4 June 1967, in
implementation of resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973).
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Pedro Serrano, Acting Head of the
delegation of the European Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Serrano: I thank you, Madame, for giving
the floor to the European Union (EU). The candidate
countries Croatia, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Iceland and Montenegro; the countries of
the Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Serbia; the European Free Trade Association country
Liechtenstein, member of the European Economic
Area; as well as Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova
align themselves with this declaration.
The European Union listened carefully to the
important statements by Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe and the Permanent Observer of Palestine.
The European Union notes with regret that since
our last discussion on the situation in the Middle East
in October 2010 (see S/PV.6404), the direct talks
between Israelis and Palestinians have come to a stop
for the moment. Our hopes for the resumption of direct
peace talks, expressed in this very place four months
ago, did not materialize.

11

S/PV.6470 (Resumption 1)

There is no alternative to a negotiated two-State
solution. Therefore, the European Union calls on all
parties to find a satisfactory way to engage without
delay in substantive negotiations on all final status
issues. The European Union affirms its readiness to
contribute to a negotiated solution on all final status
issues within the 12 months set by the Quartet. The
European Union is preparing to participate actively in
the envisaged Quartet meeting in the coming weeks.
Intensified coordination within the Quartet, as well as
close cooperation with Arab partners, building on the
Arab Peace Initiative, will be instrumental.
In this context, the European Union considers
that it is indispensable that both sides show restraint
and refrain from actions that could negatively affect
the continuation of this process. To that end, both sides
must uphold and implement previous commitments and
strive to create an environment conducive to a
successful outcome of these negotiations.
The European Union reiterates its call on Israel to
end all settlement activities, including in East
Jerusalem. As stated by EU ministers in December
2010, settlements are illegal under international law and
an obstacle to peace. If there is to be a genuine peace, a
way must be found through negotiations to resolve the
status of Jerusalem as the future capital of two States.
In this context, the EU strongly condemns the latest
developments in East Jerusalem, most recently the
demolition of the Shepherd Hotel on 9 January and the
planned construction of a new illegal settlement. These
construction plans should be abandoned.
The European Union High Representative,
Catherine Ashton, visited the region once more in the
first days of 2011. She has listened carefully to the
positions and concerns of both parties and underlined
the need for urgent progress towards a two-State
solution, with Israel and Palestine living side by side in
peace and security as part of a just and comprehensive
peace. She discussed with the Palestinian Authority the
implementation of its State-building plan. This work is
of crucial importance for the establishment of the
future State of Palestine, and the EU will continue to
actively support it. We welcome the World Bank’s
assessment that:
“If the Palestinian Authority maintains its
current performance in institution-building and
delivery of public services, it is well-positioned
for the establishment of a State at any point in the
near future.”

12

Political and financial support from the entire
international community is essential. The European
Union urges those who have made financial
commitments to deliver on their promises. All efforts
to achieve Palestinian reconciliation behind President
Mahmoud Abbas must also be accelerated.
The European Union remains extremely concerned
by the prevailing situation in Gaza and firmly reiterates
its calls for the full implementation of resolution 1860
(2009), as well as for the immediate, sustained and
unconditional opening of crossings for the flow of
humanitarian aid, commercial goods and persons to and
from Gaza, including goods and persons from the West
Bank. The EU recognizes the progress following the
decision of the Israeli Government of 20 June 2010, but
changes on the ground have been limited and
insufficient thus far. Further efforts and complementary
measures by the Government of Israel are needed to
achieve a fundamental change of policy that will allow
for the reconstruction and economic recovery of Gaza
and improve the daily lives of the population while
addressing Israel’s legitimate security concerns. The
European Union has always recognized these concerns,
deeply regrets the loss of life and calls for a complete
stop of all violence, including rocket attacks, and of
arms smuggling into Gaza. The European Union renews
its calls on those holding the abducted Israeli soldier
Gilad Shalit, in contradiction with all principles of
international humanitarian law, to release him without
delay.
The
European
Union
welcomes
the
announcement by the Government of Israel concerning
new measures to facilitate exports out of Gaza, an
essential component of its recovery. The European
Union encourages a swift implementation and is ready
to work with Israel and the Palestinian Authority
towards reaching pre-2007 levels of exports in 2011 to
achieve real change on the ground. Increased and
accelerated imports of construction materials are
another crucial component of Gaza’s recovery.
The European Union highly values the services
delivered by the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East to
provide health, education and social protection services.
It also recalls that peace in the Middle East
should be comprehensive and reiterates the importance
of negotiations on the Israeli-Syrian and IsraeliLebanese tracks. As regards Lebanon, the European

11-21096

S/PV.6470 (Resumption 1)

Union has appreciated the Syrian-Saudi efforts to help
Lebanon avoid tensions. The European Union reiterates
its support for the Lebanese authorities and calls on all
political actors to work constructively to seek a
negotiated solution to the current situation. Dialogue
and stability are essential to responding to recent
events in the interest of the Lebanese people.
At the same time, the EU renews its support to
the Secretary-General’s recent unequivocal statement
reaffirming the independence of the Special Tribunal
for Lebanon, as well as his appeal for calm. The
European Union urges all parties not to interfere in the
Tribunal’s work and not to prejudge its outcome. The
European Union takes note that the Prosecutor filed, on
Monday, 17 January, an indictment with the Registrar
for transmission to the Pre-Trial Judge.
The European Union reaffirms its full support to
the Lebanese authorities and commends the crucial role
of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) in southern Lebanon. It calls upon all parties
concerned to implement all provisions of resolution
1701 (2006), to respect the Blue Line in its entirety, to
cooperate fully with the United Nations and UNIFIL,
and to ensure the safety and security of United Nations
personnel.
Finally, the European Union would like to
underline the fundamental importance of respecting
and ensuring the promotion and defence of human
rights. Human rights are universal and indivisible.
They are a key prerequisite for peace and security.
Violations of human rights need to be effectively
remedied. Human rights, as laid down in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and core international
human rights treaties, include the responsibility of
Governments to protect minorities and the freedom of
thought, conscience and religion. Everyone has the
freedom to manifest his religion or belief in teaching,
practice, worship and observance. Therefore, in the
context of recent violent incidents in the region, the
European Union reaffirms its condemnation of all
forms of intolerance and violence against persons,
including on the basis of their religion or belief,
wherever they take place.
When it comes to peace between Israelis and
Palestinians, these vital elements of the future — Statebuilding, strong economic development, respect for
human rights and security — need to be nurtured, but
nurtured in the context of resumed serious negotiations

11-21096

on all final status issues, which should lead to a twoState solution. Regional security is at stake. By ending
the conflict, both parties, as well as the entire region
and beyond, have much to gain. The European Union
reiterates its readiness to contribute substantially to a
comprehensive and sustainable solution, with the State
of Israel and an independent, democratic, contiguous
and viable State of Palestine living side by side in
peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Cabactulan (Philippines): First of all, I
should like to congratulate you, Madam President, your
country and your delegation for assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
January. I also wish to express my appreciation to you
and the other members of the Security Council for this
opportunity to address this Chamber on a matter that is
of grave importance to us all — the peace, security and
stability of the Middle East, including the question of
Palestine. I also wish to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Lynn Pascoe for his useful briefing, which set
the tone for today’s open debate.
At the outset, the Philippines associates itself
with the statement delivered by the Permanent
Representative of the Arab Republic of Egypt on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement, but at the same time it
wishes to stress certain points.
The timing of the Security Council’s open debate
today is indeed apt and well chosen. As we enter the
new year, with renewed hope and resolve to work
harder to attain international peace and security, there
is no better choice than to start by discussing the
situation in the Middle East and the question of
Palestine, inasmuch as it is one of the most sensitive
and long-running issues on the agenda of the United
Nations. Since it has become a permanent fixture of the
United Nations agenda, however, there is a danger that
we sometimes deal with the issue in a ritualistic and
mechanical manner, thereby losing the urgency and
relevance that it truly deserves. Despite years of debate
and the substantial energy and resources spent, the
resolution of this problem still remains elusive. I think
it is time to change gear, and give peace and security in
that region a chance.
In our highly interdependent and networked
world, geographical distance and remoteness no longer
isolate countries and regions from developments in

13

S/PV.6470 (Resumption 1)

others. The Middle East is a major source of oil and a
big market for the exports and services of many
countries, including the Philippines, and its stability
and progress are essential for world peace and security.
More than 2 million of my countrymen and women live
and work in the Middle East. That is why the
Philippine Government has an additional reason for
attaching the utmost importance for peace and security
to prevail in that troubled land.
The Road Map to peace between Israel and
Palestine has so far been hampered by obstacles and
difficulties. Time and patience seem to be running out.
If this issue is not addressed, it could unfortunately
lead again to greater tension, hostility and, worse,
armed conflict. This impatience is reflected by the
growing view that if Israel and Palestine cannot come
to terms, then the outside world or other forces that
may come into play have no choice but to impose
peace on them. But we know all too well, and history
teaches us, that durable and long-lasting peace must
come from within and not from without.
The Philippines shares with the Palestinian
people their legitimate aspirations to achieve justice,
peace and freedom. For many years, the Philippines
has joined in the global clamour for the establishment
of a Palestinian homeland to help alleviate the dire
situation of the Palestinian people. In that regard,
similar to other like-minded States, the Philippines
considers the two-State solution to be an effective
answer to the peace problem. The Philippines has also
repeatedly expressed its support for the complete and
unconditional lifting of the blockade imposed by the
State of Israel on the occupied Palestinian territories,
especially Gaza. The embargo is counterproductive,
and it serves only to collectively punish the hapless
civilians, particularly women and children, in Gaza.
As the international community anxiously awaits
any breakthroughs in the peace talks between Israel
and Palestine, I wish to point out one important
building block, or a direction, of the foundation for
long-lasting peace and stability in the Middle East. I
am referring to the goal of making the region free of
nuclear weapons and weapons of mass destruction.
One of the tangible achievements of the
successful 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) regarded how to make progress on the
1995 Review Conference resolution on the Middle

14

East, which called for the establishment of a zone free
of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass
destruction. The Philippines views the road to the
establishment of this nuclear-free zone as a critically
important confidence-building measure. We are
convinced that the process can coexist with the
ongoing peace process or initiatives, including those
being undertaken by the Quartet for the region.
The Final Document of the 2010 NPT Review
Conference (NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol.I)) states:
“The Conference reaffirms its endorsement
of the aims and objectives of the Middle East
peace process, and recognizes that efforts in this
regard, as well as other efforts, contribute to, inter
alia, a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons
as well as other weapons of mass destruction.”
(Part I, Conclusions and recommendations for
follow-on actions, section IV, para. 2)
In that regard, I wish to highlight key points agreed to
at the 2010 NPT Review Conference with regard to the
1995 resolution on the Middle East.
First is the convening by the United Nations
Secretary-General and the sponsors of the 1995
resolution on the Middle East, in consultation with the
States of the region, of a conference in 2012, to be
attended by all States of the Middle East, on the
establishment of a Middle East zone free of nuclear
weapons and all other weapons of mass destruction.
Second is the appointment by the United Nations
Secretary-General and the sponsors of the 1995
resolution on the Middle East, in consultation with the
States of the region, of a facilitator with a mandate to
support the implementation of the 1995 resolution by
conducting consultations with the States of the region
in that regard and undertaking preparations for the
2012 conference.
Third is the designation by the United Nations
Secretary-General and the sponsors of the 1995
resolution on the Middle East, in consultation with the
States of the region, of a host Government for the 2012
Conference.
Time is ticking away and 2012 is just around the
corner. The Philippines therefore urges the SecretaryGeneral and the three depository States to carry out the
tasks that have been assigned to them by the 2010 NPT
Review Conference with haste, while at the same time
taking the utmost care to ensure that these tasks are

11-21096

S/PV.6470 (Resumption 1)

done well and, of course, in consultation the countries
of the region, as stated in the consensus Document.
The 2012 conference presents a rare chance to
show the seriousness and goodwill of stakeholders. In
essence, all concerned countries must be well prepared
to make peace or to give a chance for peace in that
region. The conference is a fresh start for all. Once
again, I urge all concerned Member States to seize this
rare opportunity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, I wish to congratulate the delegation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina on having assumed the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. As this is the first
time I have addressed the Council since the new year, I
would also like to congratulate the new non-permanent
members of the Security Council, namely, Colombia,
Germany, India, Portugal and South Africa, and wish
them great success.
The question of Palestine is undoubtedly the
greatest problem facing humankind since the Second
World War. The occupation of Palestine, in terms of
both its root causes and its consequences, is the
greatest and most painful tragedy that has afflicted
humankind in modern history.
More than six decades of massacre, home
demolitions, food and medicine embargos, abduction
and imprisonment; the threatening of its neighbours in
various ways, including with nuclear weapons; the
waging of numerous wars against Palestine and
Lebanon; the assassination of people, political and
religious figures and elites; overt and covert
interference in the political, economic and cultural
affairs of other States; violations of international law
and international humanitarian law and all-out
violations of human rights, including the killing of
children and women — all of this should be reason
enough for the international community to take
decisive measures to stop these brutalities and grant the
people of Palestine the legitimate rights of which they
have been deprived for decades.
Despite strong international condemnation, illegal
settlements are expanding much faster than ever and an
ever greater number of Palestinian homes, including
historical sites, are being demolished. The orchestrated
construction work is undoubtedly intended to alter the

11-21096

demographic composition and character of the
Palestinian territories, particularly in Jerusalem and
surrounding areas. It is exactly for this purpose that the
Israeli regime has expedited its construction work and
is preparing itself for yet another major settlement
expansion in occupied East Jerusalem. According to
this newly revealed plan, some 1,400 homes will be
added to the Gilo settlement near the West Bank town
of Bethlehem. This would be the occupying regime’s
largest known settlement expansion since the plan to
add 1,600 homes unveiled last March.
It is very urgent that the international community
take this issue more seriously than ever. We therefore
welcome the initiative of the League of Arab States,
supported by the Non-Aligned Movement and the
Organization of Islamic Conference, in preparing a
draft resolution on the necessity to cease all settlement
activities by the Zionist regime. Regarding this draft,
we would like to state that we wholeheartedly support
the spirit within which it has been presented, aiming at
securing the rights of the Palestinian people and
preventing the aggression and brutality of the
occupying force against the people of Palestine,
particularly at this crucial moment.
Of course, the support of the Islamic Republic of
Iran for the draft resolution is without prejudice to its
principled position of not recognizing, implicitly or
explicitly, the legitimacy of the Israeli regime. Our
position is clear: while the Islamic Republic of Iran
stands together with all other nations and States that
support the people of Palestine and calls on all others
to support a final solution to end this great historic
tragedy, it believes that the only solution for Palestine
is the holding of a general referendum with the
participation of all Palestinians regardless of religion
or where they live in order to determine the system of
Government they wish to have.
Today we need to act collectively to demonstrate
our unqualified support to the cause of the Palestinians,
and to rally to the aid of those who have been deprived
of their rights.
Allow me to take this opportunity to say a few
words on developments in Lebanon and the issue of the
indictment by the so-called Special International
Tribunal on the assassination of the former Lebanese
premier, the late Rafiq Hariri. We believe that using
political pressure to issue a totally politically motivated
verdict in the name of justice not only discredits the

15

S/PV.6470 (Resumption 1)

international judicial system, but would also create an
unhealthy situation with ramifications for peace and
stability in the region. We strongly believe that we
should let regional initiatives, along with internal
political mechanisms in Lebanon, seek and attain a
solution to this issue, without the intervention of any
other major Powers.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Mr. Wetland (Norway): The year 2011 will
clearly be a critical crossroads in the Middle East
peace process. By August, Prime Minister Fayyad’s
Government is set to complete its two-year plan for
Palestinian State-building. The agreed timeframe of the
currently stalled Israeli-Palestinian negotiations will
also come to an end. In other words, the time to seize
the opportunity is now. Failing to do so will not merely
result in yet another lost opportunity; the very prospect
of a negotiated two-State solution is at stake. That is
why we must all stand firm behind the stated goal of
negotiating a framework agreement on permanent
status and a subsequent comprehensive peace treaty,
within the agreed timeline.
This was a main message voiced by the Foreign
Minister of Norway during his visit to the region this
month. As Chair of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for
the Coordination of International Assistance to
Palestinians (AHLC), Minister Støre also expressed his
confidence that the international donor community will
do its share to make this happen. At the AHLC meeting
here in New York last September, we were greatly
encouraged by the World Bank conclusion that the
Palestinian Authority stands ready to establish a State
in the near future. We have no doubt that, at the
upcoming AHLC meeting in April, to be convened by
Norway and hosted by the European Union in Brussels,
major donors will recommit to help the Fayyad
Government bring the State-building project to
completion by the August deadline.
However, by September 2011, we will need to see
a substantial breakthrough on the political track. The
bottom-up approach to Palestinian State-building is in
itself not sufficient. Questions will arise in earnest
concerning its sustainability beyond 2011 if a decisive
top-down push is not brought to bear.
If the Palestinian State-to-be is to break out of
structural donor dependence, it will need political and
economic conditions to do so. Restricted access to

16

resources and markets in Area C and East Jerusalem, as
well as to foreign markets, is a major barrier to
economic growth in the private sector. This potential
must be tapped to fuel the drive towards independence.
The peace process is in a fragile state. Norway is
deeply concerned, and so we call on the parties to
urgently return to negotiations in good faith. Both sides
know perfectly well what they have to do and what
they must not do to create an environment conducive to
negotiations. For one, maintaining security for all is a
key factor for the parties to build confidence and trust
in each other as partners in peace. Moreover, it is
imperative to refrain from actions that are illegal under
international law and that are gradually eroding the
ground on which the two-State solution is to be built.
In that respect, we take note of the Security Council’s
draft resolution on Israeli settlements submitted
yesterday.
Current policies in the occupied Palestinian
territory are simply not sustainable, and time is running
out. If international donors lose sight of the two-State
solution, it will no longer be possible to take their
tireless support for granted. Two decades after the
Madrid peace conference, a real sense of urgency is
overdue, and decisive action should not be too much to
ask for. Not only should the parties return to the table;
they must act rapidly to rescue the two-State solution.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. AlNafisee (Saudi Arabia)(spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I would like to thank the Council and the
Secretary-General for their efforts to achieve
international peace and security in the face of changing
circumstances and threats throughout the world at this
critical stage. I would also like to thank Mr. B. Lynn
Pascoe for his detailed briefing on the situation in the
Middle East, including the question of Palestine.
The suffering of the Palestinian people began at
the same time as the idea of giving land to a landless
people. In that context, the first issue was land and the
refugees became the second. Later issues involved
settlements, the revision of history and the demolition
of religious sites. The Palestinian people paid the price
for each of these scourges due to the international
community’s complete failure to enforce resolutions of
international legitimacy against the occupier.

11-21096

S/PV.6470 (Resumption 1)

If the United Nations, represented by the Security
Council, had fulfilled its role, the Palestinian people
would not have had to endure this continued suffering.
For more than half a century, Israel has unleashed its
worst policies against the people of Palestine,
including
murder,
deportation,
imprisonment,
blockades, the annexation of land, the confiscation of
property, and the looting and plundering of the
resources of Palestine. These actions of the Israeli
occupation forces seek to perpetuate the destruction of
the Palestinian people and its infrastructure, subject it
to greater oppression and suffering, and systematically
drive the Palestinians to despair and frustration.
The Arabs have chosen peace, not surrender.
Their demand was and continues to be for the
enforcement of international legitimacy, starting with
the implementation of resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) and the principle of land in exchange for a just
and comprehensive peace. This necessarily requires
full Israeli withdrawal from the occupied Arab
territories to the 1967 borders and the return of
Palestinian refugees to their homes with full restoration
of their rights. That will enable the Palestinian people
to exercise their right to self-determination and to
establish their independent State on their national soil
with East Jerusalem as its capital. It will also require
Israel’s withdrawal from the Syrian Golan Heights and
the Lebanese Shaba’a farms.
To address Israeli violations of international
legitimacy is to address violations of international law
and the international community’s lack of will to
shoulder its responsibilities for maintaining peace and
security. The Israeli occupation forces have exceeded
the limits of international legitimacy in their
application of any number of policies, including
building the apartheid wall, building and expanding
settlements in the occupied territories, and increasing
illegal colonization measures.
In addition, the Israeli Government’s financing,
protecting and arming of settlers has enabled the
building of more settlements and resulted in rapid
growth over the past few months. Last year, the world
witnessed the Israeli project to build 900 housing units
in the Gilo settlement, south of occupied Jerusalem.
This action was criticized by the entire international
community, including the so-called friends of Israel.
Moreover, Israel recently decided through its socalled Israeli Building Management Committee to

11-21096

launch a larger project to build 1,400 housing units in
the same settlement under the name Gilo: Southern
Slopes. Reports indicate that an even larger project
includes a vast plan for 4,000 housing units to attract
families from other areas. Such continued expansion,
along with the indiscriminate demolition of houses in
the occupied Palestinian territories — most recently of
the historic Shepherd Hotel — would create obstacles
to any peace initiative, as the wall and settlements
surrounding most cities of the West Bank will make it
nearly impossible to establish a contiguous, viable
Palestinian State in the future.
Israel’s illegal measures and practices against the
Palestinian people not only constitute violations of the
United Nations Charter, humanitarian law and
resolutions of international legitimacy; they also
undermine any slim chance for peace. Furthermore,
such unilateral practices prevent any international
initiative or effort to achieve peace and undermine any
international drive to hold Israel, the occupying Power,
accountable for its actions. From this rostrum my
Government calls on the international community, the
United Nations and the Quartet in particular to adopt a
comprehensive, strategic approach to achieving the
immediate and complete cessation of all settlement
activities in the occupied territories.
For the past six decades, the Arab-Israeli conflict
has dominated all issues in the Middle East. This has
led in turn to extremism and the expansion of terrorism
and created a critical deterrent to development and
reform efforts in the region, which should play a
civilized role instead of being torn by conflicts that sap
its energy and squander its resources.
In conclusion, all the Arab countries have
stressed their continued commitment to a just and
comprehensive
peace
based
on
international
legitimacy. In return, these countries continue to await
a matching, serious Israeli commitment. In this
context, the Israeli side must immediately accept the
Arab Peace Initiative, which is the only way to achieve
a lasting and comprehensive peace between the two
sides and a definitive solution that is equitable for all
parties.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Jomaa (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): It is my
great honour and privilege to address the Security
Council on behalf of the Arab Group on the situation in

17

S/PV.6470 (Resumption 1)

the Middle East, including the Palestinian question. I
would like to begin by congratulating the delegation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina on its assumption of the
Council presidency this month and to wish it every
possible success. My gratitude goes also to Mr. B. Lynn
Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
for his briefing to the Council.
The situation in the Middle East is entering a new
and decisive phase that requires that each of us take a
firm position. A prompt and serious international
commitment is necessary to end Israel’s occupation
policies, which continue to exacerbate the suffering of
the Palestinian people and cause escalating tensions
and provocations. That, unfortunately, impedes the
resumption of the peace process. This is a very serious
phase, which the international community must address
with a great deal of responsibility and caution in order
to avoid any exacerbation of tension in the situation
and prevent any risk of explosion.
The situation on the ground is extremely
alarming. The Arab Group would like to reaffirm very
clearly that Israel’s obstinacy in implementing its
settlement policies and practices in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem,
constitute ongoing violations of international law and
relevant resolutions of international legitimacy. These
practices undermine the possibility of achieving peace
and the creation of a sovereign Palestinian State with
East Jerusalem as its capital.
The Arab Group also reaffirms Israel’s sole and
full responsibility for the failure of the negotiation
process launched in Washington, D.C., in September as
a result of its preference for colonial settlement
activities over peace. Israel’s behaviour is a brazen
challenge to international unanimity in asserting the
illegality of the settlements and the very serious impact
of the pursuit of these activities on the possibility of
reaching peace and a two-State solution. Everyone here
will remember that the Arab States have addressed the
peace process in a very positive and responsible way.
They afforded international efforts undertaken by many
parties every possible chance to ensure that this
process would advance in the hope of achieving a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace that would guarantee
a two-State solution within pre-1967 borders.
The Arab Peace Initiative commission has met
several times over the past few months and adopted
many decisions to stay the Initiative’s course while

18

absolutely rejecting Israel’s continued colonial
settlement activities and arbitrary practices. Israel’s
pursuit of its policy of provocation, its settlement
activity and practices, and collective punishment aimed
at the Palestinian people, as well as the inhumane
blockade imposed on nearly 1.5 million Palestinians in
Gaza, have led to an impasse and undermined all
prospects for the peace process. In the meantime,
unfortunately, these practices proliferate and get worse.
All of that is alarming, and leads us to ask
ourselves whether Israel, the occupying Power, is truly
serious about achieving peace in the region. It is very
important that we remind all the members of the
Council and all States Members of the United Nations
of the reality of some of these serious practices, which
must stop immediately if we want to see the peace
process relaunched and stability reign in the region.
Let us recall that these policies include the continued
practice of violence and terror against Palestinian
civilians by Israeli settlers seeking to annex more
Palestinian land and maintain the status quo; the
ongoing assassinations of Palestinian civilians by the
Israeli occupation forces in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem; the continuing
illegal inhuman blockade of the Gaza Strip; the
increase in military actions against civilians in the
Gaza Strip, which have claimed the lives of many
individuals; increased expulsions; the destruction of
homes; and the withdrawal of Palestinians’ rights of
residency. These actions are in flagrant violation of
international law, including the Fourth Geneva
Convention and relevant Security Council resolutions.
Additional illegal practices include changing the
demographic composition and legal status of Jerusalem
by expelling Palestinian inhabitants; the destruction of
the historic Shepherd Hotel in East Jerusalem under a
plan to construct a new settlement of 20 housing units,
which threatens the geographic contiguity of the
Palestinian territories and the viability of any future
Palestinian State; the recent adoption by the municipal
Government of Jerusalem of a plan to build 124 new
housing units around East Jerusalem; and the recent
announcement by the Jerusalem planning commission
of a new plan providing for the construction of a
further 1,400 housing units for Jewish settlers in
annexed land in the occupied West Bank.
The Arab Group, while welcoming the rejection
of such practices by the international community, calls
for the implementation of real measures on the ground

11-21096

S/PV.6470 (Resumption 1)

and calls on Israel, the occupying Power, to put an
immediate end to these practices and to fulfil its
commitments within the framework of international
law, international humanitarian law and its
commitments to the Road Map and the various
benchmarks of the peace process.
Unfortunately, the repeated calls of the SecretaryGeneral and his condemnation of the continued
occupation, as well as the appeals of the Quartet, the
international community and the European Union, have
not been met with any response from the Israeli
occupying forces, which have continued their
repressive practices in flagrant violation of the desire of
the international community to help the Palestinian
people, which has struggled under colonialist
occupation for decades, to enjoy its right to freedom
and independence. Accordingly, the Arab Group
condemns these practices and calls on all influential
parties, including the Quartet, to assume their
responsibilities, address these issues, face down Israel’s
obstinate refusal to accept international legitimacy, and
force it to accept efforts to build a just peace.
We also call on the Quartet to go beyond the mere
adoption of statements and reiteration of positions.
What is important now is to ensure that these positions
are implemented on the ground by exerting the
necessary pressure on the occupying forces. We cherish
the hope that this will indeed take place following the
Quartet meeting to be held in Munich on 5 February.
We also condemn the ongoing inhumane
blockade imposed on Gaza and ask the international
community to take every possible step to put an
immediate end to this unjust blockade, lift all
restrictions to freedom of movement, enable access of
humanitarian assistance, and cooperate in a more
serious and effective way with the efforts of the United
Nations agencies to rebuild the Gaza Strip and enable
its inhabitants to enjoy their basic rights to life,
housing, education and health.
The Arab Group reaffirms its absolute rejection
of any activity aimed at changing the demographic,
religious and social composition of the holy city of
Jerusalem, of any attack on holy sites, and of any
attempt at arbitrary destruction of homes or expulsion
of people. We condemn these continued practices and
ask the international community to take a firm position
to ensure that an end is put to them and prevent the
maintenance of the status quo.

11-21096

Regarding the situation in the Middle East with
specific reference to the Lebanese and Syrian tracks,
the Arab Group affirms the Arab position that a just
and lasting peace with Israel can be achieved only
through Israel’s full withdrawal from occupied Arab
territories to the lines of 4 June 1967, including East
Jerusalem, the occupied Syrian Golan and the
territories that are still occupied in the south of
Lebanon. It is necessary that an independent
Palestinian State be established, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, pursuant to the Arab Peace Initiative; to
ensure a just return of the Palestinian refugees; and to
implement all relevant United Nations resolutions.
Allow me to remind the Council that the ongoing
violations of Lebanese airspace by Israel’s forces and
the violations of its commitments under resolution
1701 (2006) are all fraught with the threat of the return
of tension to the region and the undermining of efforts
to maintain stability.
The Arab Group calls for an end to these
violations and to settlement in the occupied Syrian
Arab Golan and reaffirms that all activities undertaken
by Israel in the Golan aimed at changing its
demographic and legal status, as well as Israeli
measures aimed at exerting administrative authority
there, are null and void and have no legal basis. The
Arab Group calls for immediate withdrawal by Israel
from the Syrian Golan to the borders of 4 June 1967, as
well as for the implementation of resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973) and 497 (1981).
The international community cannot stand by
passively in the face of the occupying Power’s
continued violations of every one of its commitments
under international law, instruments and agreements.
The enormous suffering of the peoples of the region
has lasted far too long. There is no alternative to
ending the occupation of Arab territories in order to
ensure security and stability in a region to which, as
everyone knows, the security and stability of the entire
world are related.
The international community cannot permit any
increase in tensions and frustration or the resumption
of aggression against the lives of civilians. This is an
immediate danger, and urgent and firm measures must
be taken to address the underlying causes of the
tension. The Secretary-General has reaffirmed in his
recent statements and briefings on the Middle East that
the need is urgent and that the strategy for addressing

19

S/PV.6470 (Resumption 1)

this situation must be changed. We must therefore
overcome the shortcomings and answer the repeated
calls on the international community to preserve the
rights of Palestinian civilians and protect them from
such oppressive practices so as to ensure that the peace
process has the chance to resume.
The Arab Group supports the resumption of the
peace process, but its position is clear. Relaunching
Israeli-Palestinian negotiations requires an immediate
halt to all settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem. The
established benchmarks of the peace process must be
honoured. An end to settlement activity is not the only
condition required for the peace process to resume.
International and humanitarian law must also be
implemented.
Continued
settlement
activities
undermine the very nature of negotiations. Historic
Palestinian territories are, unfortunately, are shrinking
and being drained of their life.
In this context, a draft resolution on the occupied
Palestinian territories and East Jerusalem has been
introduced, calling for an immediate end to settlement
activity, which would enable resumed negotiations to
achieve a just and lasting peace in the region. The draft
resolution enjoys the support of the Arab ministerial
meeting in Sharm el-Sheikh and of the majority of
States Members of our Organization. It is sponsored by
more than 120 States, which shows clearly that the
international community is unanimous in confronting
the imminent threat presented by these ongoing
practices, which are condemned by all under
international law, instruments and agreements.
The draft resolution contains consensus wording
and is based on previous Security Council resolutions,
as well as on a number of resolutions and statements
made by relevant actors and parties. It recalls the basic
positions regarding settlement activity and articulates a
position aimed at preserving the peace process’s
chances of success and at fulfilling the aspirations of
the peoples of the region, and of the international will
as a whole, with respect to the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people to freedom and dignity and to build
an independent State on its territory.
The members of the Arab Group support the draft
resolution in a demonstration of their commitment to
international legitimacy and their desire to abide by
their obligations as members of the international
community responsible for the maintenance of

20

international peace and security. The draft resolution is
an opportunity to breathe new life into the peace
negotiations and, indeed, to save them in order to
ensure peace. All those who cherish peace are called on
to support the draft resolution and to ensure the
implementation of justice and righteousness throughout
the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation wishes to congratulate the new
members of the Security Council: Colombia, Germany,
India, Portugal and South Africa. I would also like to
express my thanks to you, Madame President, for
organizing this open debate to address the deteriorating
situation in the occupied Arab territories under the
agenda item, “The situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question”. This item is
concerned exclusively with the Israeli-Arab conflict
and the Palestinian question, and not with any other
urgent matter beyond that political or geographical area
and outside the item’s historic definition, regardless of
its possible importance.
In this Chamber and beyond its walls, the
unanimous view is that tension in the Middle East is
greater than anywhere else in the world. The situation
is extremely grave and could well have dramatic
consequences for international peace and security. The
achievement of a comprehensive and just peace is an
urgent matter of relevance to all concerned parties in
the region and throughout the world.
But talking of the need for peace is one thing; the
ability to act and achieve it is another. While everyone
reiterates the importance of achieving a peace to which
we all aspire, Israel continues to repudiate it and to
defy the entire international community, including
Powers that are considered to be its closest friends and
allies. This extremely serious situation jeopardizes
peace and security in the region, while the Security
Council is unable to honour its obligations and
commitments or to maintain international peace and
security in accordance with the principles and purposes
of the Charter.
The situation reveals Israel’s methodical attempt
to violate rights that runs counter to the basic tenets of
international and international humanitarian law.
Israel’s aggressive behaviour and unrestrained
settlement efforts in occupied Arab territories are

11-21096

S/PV.6470 (Resumption 1)

condemned by the international community and violate
such international principles and agreements as the
Charter of the United Nations and the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949. They also constitute a violation of
hundreds of Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions. In addition to this are the annexation of
territory, deportations, evictions and the transfer of
settlers to Arab lands. There is also the problem of the
racist wall on Palestinian territory and the Judaization
of Jerusalem. These racist practices are carried out
under the willing gaze of the occupying army and a
deafening international silence denoting more than
complicity.
As we talk of settlements in the Palestinian
territories, it is appropriate for us to remind Council
members that Israeli settlements have been an essential
element of plans by the leaders of the Zionist
movement ever since the partition of Palestine in 1947.
The first Israeli Prime Minister, David Ben-Gurion,
established this movement, told a Zionist meeting that
“after we become a strong force, as a result of the
creation of a state, we shall abolish partition and
expand into the whole of Palestine.”
Ben-Gurion said this in 1949. A year later, he wrote to
his son:
“We are going to create an extremely
sophisticated defense force, an elite corps. There
will be no gainsaying that our army will be one of
the best in the world and nobody, my son, will
then prevent us from colonizing the whole of
Palestine. There is no doubt about it.”
Moshe Dayan, the Israeli Defense Minister
during the aggression of 1967, who was a witness to
the beginning of settlement activity, stated on 4 April
1969 to Ha’aretz, the Israeli newspaper:
“We came to this country, which was
already populated by Arabs and we are
establishing a Hebrew, that is, a Jewish state here.
Jewish villages were built in the place of Arab
villages. You do not even know the names of
these Arab villages, and I do not blame you
because geography books no longer exist. Not
only do the books not exist, the Arab villages are
not there either. Nahlal arose in the place of
Mahlul; Kibbutz Gvat in the place of Jibta;
Kibbutz Sarid in the place of Hanifieh; and Kefar
Yehushua in the place of Tal al-Shuman. There is

11-21096

not a single place built in this country that did not
have a former Arab population.”
Today’s meeting coincides with the second
anniversary of the Israeli aggression against Gaza,
which cost the lives of over 1,000 people and left
thousands of innocent civilians wounded. This was
very clearly noted in the Goldstone report
(A/HRC/12/48), which unambiguously stated that
Israel deliberately targeted civilians. The report
described Israeli practices during this attack as war
crimes and serious violations of international
humanitarian law, which could be deemed crimes
against humanity.
The perpetrators of these crimes remain
unpunished. This encourages Israel to continue its
unfair and inhumane blockade against the population
of Gaza, defying the will of the international
community, which has called for the lifting of the
blockade. Israel did not stop there. Its response to
international appeals to lift the blockade was the attack
on the freedom flotilla, which was on its way to Gaza
on a purely humanitarian mission. Nine peace activists
were killed in international waters and dozens
wounded.
We recall that the General Assembly recently
adopted two resolutions supporting the calls of the
Human Rights Commission to the United Nations, the
entire United Nations system, including the Security
Council, to implement the proposals in the Goldstone
report.
The Security Council must therefore bear its
responsibilities. It must prosecute the Israeli
perpetrators and punish them for the crimes they have
committed in Gaza if it wishes to establish justice and
to prevent impunity, two objectives of the Organization
itself.
The Israeli occupation of the Syrian Golan is a
part of this bleak picture. Israel still refuses to return
the occupied Syrian Golan to its motherland, Syria. It
still refuses to accept international resolutions,
particularly resolution 497 (1981), which considers the
annexation of the Syrian Golan to be null and void.
Israel continues to terrorize citizens there.
In provocation, escalation and defiance of the
will of the international community, the Knesset
recently adopted a law to organize a general
referendum before any withdrawal from the occupied

21

S/PV.6470 (Resumption 1)

Syrian Golan and occupied East Jerusalem. This is the
way in which Israel deals with issues that are not in its
purview to address. It represents a flagrant disregard
for international law and the position and will of the
entire international community regarding the occupied
Syrian Golan and East Jerusalem. Israel must
implement resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), the
principle of land for peace and the Arab Peace
Initiative.
We assert here that this recent Israeli initiative
and all others stand totally rejected and do not alter the
fact that the Golan is an occupied Syrian territory. It
cannot be the subject of negotiations. The return of the
Golan in its entirety to the 4 June 1967 border
constitutes the basis for peace. Once again, we reiterate
that Israel should not consider Syria’s demands to be
painful concessions. These are lands and rights that
have been usurped and that must be returned and
restored.
We had hoped to see the Secretary-General and
the Council implement their minimum prerogatives
regarding resolution 497 (1981) by discussing this
provocative Israeli behaviour and taking measures
demonstrating their rejection of this serious Israeli
action regarding the occupied Syrian Golan. We have
made a very detailed presentation to the Security
Council regarding this serious violation of international
law and legitimacy. It is unacceptable and irrational for
us to be asked to bring forward new proof of our desire
for peace while Israel continues to occupy our land, to
attack our people and to threaten peace and security.
The important question here that demands
answers is: How long shall Israel remain above the
law? How long shall Israel enjoy impunity as it pursues
its policy of aggression? How long shall the Security
Council be incapable of taking concrete measures to
deal with the horrors perpetuated by Israel in the
occupied Arab territories? How long shall the silence
regarding Israeli policy, which is pushing the region to
an explosion, be maintained?
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Algeria.
Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria): At the outset, I would
like to extend the congratulations of the delegation of
Algeria to your friendly country, Bosnia-Herzegovina,
and to you personally, Madam President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of January. I would also like to thank

22

you for organizing this open debate on an important
question on the agenda of the international community
as a whole.
I would also like to thank the outgoing members
of the Security Council — Austria, Japan, Mexico,
Turkey and Uganda — which served with dedication in
pursuit of peace and security and respect for the rule of
law in every situation. I also want to congratulate the
incoming members — Colombia, Germany, India,
Portugal and South Africa — on beginning their
mandates. I wish them success in fulfilling their
responsibilities.
In spite of recent efforts to revitalize the peace
process, Israel continues to carry out its illegal
settlements and colonization activities in occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, which
are accompanied by escalating settler violence, home
demolitions, forced evictions and the ongoing
construction of the separation wall despite the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice.
The recent allocation by the Israeli Government
of significant additional financial resources to expand
settlements through 2012 demonstrates clearly that
Israel is not on the path to peace and that the only goal
pursued by Israeli policy seems to be to undermine any
future prospects for a peaceful settlement. It is obvious
that those measures are intended to annex Palestinian
territory by bringing about long-term demographic
changes, removing traces of Palestinian heritage and
fortifying the Israeli presence in the West Bank and
East Jerusalem.
Furthermore, the situation is Gaza remains
disturbing from the perspective of human rights and
international law. Palestinians continue to be punished
collectively through the isolation of the 1.5 million
residents of Gaza for several years, including the
interdiction of exports from the Strip and the
prevention of the flow of goods and people, even in
life-and-death situations. Algeria reiterates its demand
for Israel’s immediate lifting of its illegal blockade and
for the opening of all crossing points to Gaza, in
accordance with resolution 1860 (2009), General
Assembly resolution ES-10/18 and other relevant
resolutions of the United Nations.
Similarly, the imprisonment of about 10,000
Palestinians in Israeli jails, where ill-treatment and
torture are widely used, represents a matter of serious
concern for my country. The international seminar in

11-21096

S/PV.6470 (Resumption 1)

support of Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails
organized in Algiers on 5 December 2010, with the
participation of delegations from several countries,
called on the international community to address this
scandalous challenge to international humanitarian law
and to adopt a clear and urgent stand for the immediate
release of these illegally detained people, among whom
are children and women.
It is the responsibility of the Security Council to
exercise its prerogatives in order to halt the brutal
practices of the Israeli Government by taking the
required actions to ensure respect for, and compliance
with, the ruling of the International Court of Justice,
the Fourth Geneva Convention and the relevant United
Nations resolutions.
Negotiations remain imperative for achieving the
two-State solution based on resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973) and other relevant United Nations
resolutions, the Madrid principles and the Arab Peace
Initiative, including the principle of land for peace,
which means the withdrawal of Israel from all Arab
occupied territories.
Algeria reiterates that any negotiated outcome
between the parties must result in the emergence of an
independent, democratic and viable Palestinian State,
with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, based on
international law and the relevant United Nations
resolutions. A complete cessation of colonization and
settlement activities and human rights violations is
clearly a prerequisite to creating a more stable
environment conducive to resuming the peace process
and achieving the two-State solution for peace.
As a sponsor of the draft resolution contained in
document S/2011/24, Algeria urges the 15 members of
the Security Council to step up to the challenge at stake
and to ensure its timely adoption.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): It is indeed a great
privilege to participate in today’s meeting with you in
the Chair, Madam President. You have a very onerous
task, which you are carrying out magnificently.
I would like to congratulate our friends that have
just joined the Council, namely, India, Colombia,
Germany, Portugal and South Africa, but Portugal
specifically. We wish them success in their work in the
Council.

11-21096

I align myself with my Egyptian colleague’s
statement as head of the Non Aligned Movement.
A lot has not changed since we were last here, but
there is always hope. During the last open debate on
the Middle East in the Chamber (see S/PV.6404), many
of us urged the Security Council, the Quartet and the
international community to act in tandem and prevent
the collapse of Israel-Palestine dialogue and direct
negotiations. Three months later, we regret to note that
all efforts to ensure continuity have failed. The quest
for sustainable peace in the Middle East and a
permanent political settlement to the Israel-Palestinian
question based on the two-State solution appears as
elusive as ever. In that context, I share the assessment
of many Member States that this impasse is due to
Israeli expansionist thoughts, vision and policy, which
manifest themselves in the form of the ongoing
settlement activities.
This is a clear violation of international law, and
should be taken as a major provocation. This month,
the very old Shepherd Hotel in Jerusalem was
demolished to build 20 new housing units. Was that
really necessary? Elsewhere in the West Bank, the
altering of the status of centuries-old prayer places,
mosques, churches and cemeteries of the Palestinian
people goes on unabated in the name of history,
excavation and creating — truthfully — new housing
space. Each block of those settlements constitutes a
major roadblock towards what we can consider to be a
final peaceful settlement — if ever. It complicates the
peace process and vitiates the atmosphere for talks.
Israel must stop building new settlements or using
settlement activity as a political tool in the peace
process.
I am surprised that, despite the odds, the
Palestinians have done well. We hear the name of
Salam Fayyad, who has taken important strides
towards implementing the plan announced in August
2009 for the building of State institutions within two
years. He has done it; I extend my congratulations to
Ambassador Mansour.
Many independent studies, including the
Economic Monitoring Report of the World Bank, have
praised this performance and, in my mind, this delivery
of public services by the Palestinian Authority shows
that the corner has been turned. The Middle East
Quartet, despite its own banes, acknowledged these
developments in its statement of 21 September 2010.

23

S/PV.6470 (Resumption 1)

The policies of self-reliance and empowerment and the
creation of economic opportunities pursued by the
Palestinian Authority have established a solid edifice
for Palestinian statehood and removed all pretexts for
the occupation.

solution based on the 1967 borders that would allow
Israel and a future Palestinian State to live side by side
in peace and security. As our Foreign Minister said
during the general debate of the General Assembly at
its sixty-fifth session,

The goal of establishing a Palestinian State by
August 2011 is well within our grasp. We must not let
it slip away; we must not allow peace and stability to
fall by the wayside. Failure to meet the Oslo Accord
deadlines of 1999 triggered the second intifada.
Missing the 2005 deadline for Palestine statehood set
in the Quartet Road Map of 2003 precipitated violence
and bloodshed. Do we want such calamities to revisit
the region?

“All States members of the General Assembly
should welcome the prospect of both an Israeli
and a Palestinian State being represented at the
sixty-sixth session of the Assembly, to be held
next year” (A/65/PV.16, p. 41).

The Security Council must therefore fulfil its
Charter responsibility and the Quartet Road Map, and
ensure that the historic opportunity to create a viable
Palestinian State by August 2011 is not lost. The
Council can do so by calling upon Israel to
unconditionally cease all settlement activity and
resume direct negotiations at the earliest with the
Palestinian Authority on all outstanding issues.
Pakistan is supportive of lasting peace for all the
inhabitants of the Middle East, irrespective of their
religion, ethnicity or nationality. That is where we
stand. The framework for such a peace has been
elaborately laid down in resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973), 1397 (2002), 1515 (2003) and 1850 (2008); the
Madrid terms of reference; the Arab Peace Initiative;
and the several Quartet Road Maps. We share the
collective objective of the international community for
an independent, sovereign and viable State of
Palestine, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, living
side by side and in peace with its Israeli neighbours.
Our prayer is that today’s open debate in the Council
will serve to bring us nearer to that objective.
The President: I give
representative of Australia.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I congratulate you,
Madame, on the presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. I thank the outgoing members of the
Council and congratulate to the new members. We will
continue to work closely with all members of the
Council, of course.
Australia is genuinely committed to peace and
security in the Middle East. We support a just and
enduring peace based on a negotiated two-State

24

We should all support every serious effort to achieve
that.
Australia commends ongoing international efforts
to realize peace, including by the Quartet and the Arab
Peace Initiative. During his visit last month to the
region, including to Egypt, Jordan, the Palestinian
territories, and Israel, our Foreign Minister, Mr. Rudd,
underscored to both parties and to regional leaders that
now is the time to seize the opportunity for peace. As
he said publicly at the time that time was running out
and that what was needed was not just another peace
process, but a peace outcome. What is needed is not
another Road Map; we need to see the destination to
which the road is taking us.
Israeli and Palestinian leaders need to return to
direct talks as a matter of urgency. Both sides must
refrain from actions that undermine confidence,
including — decisively — the construction of
settlements. Australia unambiguously opposes new
Israeli settlements. They are illegal. They are not only
an obstacle to peace — they actively undermine the
prospects for achieving peace. They compromise the
future of a two-State solution, and they must stop. We
agree with the Quartet in its statement of 21 September
that Israel’s previous moratorium on settlements had a
positive and beneficial impact on the environment for
negotiations. In our view, a cessation of settlement
activity now would unquestionably assist peace efforts.
Australia is serious about its support for a twoState solution. We will continue and increase our
support for the practical establishment on the ground of
a viable Palestinian State. We have already provided
almost $70 million in direct budget support to the
Palestinian Authority, and Foreign Minister Rudd
announced in Ramallah in December that Australia is
now developing a five-year development partnership
with the Palestinian Authority that will include regular
budget support and the provision of scholarships

11-21096

S/PV.6470 (Resumption 1)

focusing on those disciplines critical to institutionbuilding. This multi-year agreement — the starting
point for an enhanced development partnership — is
the first of its kind by a development partner with the
Palestinian Authority and reflects our recognition that
an independent, viable Palestinian State requires
predictable funding to plan ahead and to budget for the
provision of services that any functioning State must
be able to provide to its citizens.
We are also increasing our support through the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, including our first multi-year
commitment, rather than the annual contribution that we
have made in the past to the core resources of the
Agency.
The situation on the ground in Gaza remains
extremely serious. We welcome the relaxation of some
Israeli restrictions on access to and from Gaza, and of
course we recognize Israel’s legitimate security
concerns. But we remain very concerned at the
humanitarian situation in Gaza. The easing of
restrictions already announced must be implemented
now, and we urge Israel to lift the remaining
restrictions.
Finally, I must note that Australia remains firm in
our support for the sovereignty, independence and
unity of the Lebanese State and its people. All parties
need to play a constructive role and, of course, refrain
from any actions that might create instability. We
encourage and support the current international efforts
to mobilize in support of Lebanon. We call on all
parties to cooperate with the Special Tribunal for
Lebanon, in accordance with resolution 1757 (2007),
and to allow it to complete its important work.
To conclude, there can be no doubt that the
situation between Israel and Palestine is — as was said
by the Permanent Observer of Palestine this morning —
at a critical juncture and that the prospects for resuming
a credible peace process are quickly fading. As one of
the Council members reminded us today, it is 20 years
since the current peace process was launched in
Madrid. It is, in fact, 65 years since the question of
Israel and Palestine has been before the United Nations
in one way or another. We very strongly agree with the
comment made this morning that this should and must
be the last year of the process. All the parties have an
historic and indeed human obligation to do more than
just recommit to peace and speak the rhetoric of peace.

11-21096

They and all of us in the international community need
to act to do all we can to achieve peace now and to
move, as another speaker recently said, beyond the
rhetoric and the inability to act to produce the ability
and determination to act, and then to act.
The President: I give
representative of the Sudan.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to greet the Council as it meets to
address the crucial and vital issue of the situation in the
Middle East, which is of great importance to all of us.
This is not the first time that the Security Council has
addressed the situation in the Middle East and the
challenge that it represents to the entire international
community. Everyone hopes that our collective efforts
to address this challenge will be commensurate with its
magnitude.
I take this opportunity to address a substantive
and important issue that no one can overlook, as it is
the main obstacle to the attainment of peace and the
relaunching of negotiations between the Palestinians
and the Israelis, namely, the construction and
expansion of Israeli settlements in the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem. The United Nations has
adopted many resolutions calling on Israel to abide by
international law and the Fourth Geneva Convention,
to put an end to the illegal practices that jeopardize the
rights of the Palestinian people, and to halt the building
and expansion of settlements. The United Nations
considers these settlements to be null and void. In this
connection, we would like to stress the following
points.
First, the international community, including the
Member States represented in the Council and
unanimous international public opinion, agrees that the
Israeli settlements in the West Bank and East Jerusalem
represent a flagrant violation of international law and
the United Nations Charter. It defies the will of the
international community and relevant international
resolutions, especially resolution 446 (1979), which
considered the construction of settlements of no legal
value, as it represents a serious obstacle to the
attainment of a comprehensive and just peace in the
Middle East.
Secondly, the International Court of Justice, in its
Advisory Opinion of 2004 on the building of the
separation wall, concluded that the wall represents a
violation of fundamental human rights.

25

S/PV.6470 (Resumption 1)

Thirdly, Israel’s ongoing construction and
expansion of settlements and its defiance of the will of
the international community undermine the negotiation
process aimed at achieving a two-State solution on the
basis of United Nations resolutions, the Road Map, the
Arab Peace Initiative and other terms of reference.
Fourthly, the expansion of settlements prevents
the resumption of negotiations between the two parties
and thus hampers the prospects for peace and a
peaceful settlement of the question of the Middle East,
the lack of which threatens peace and security in the
region.
As it witnesses the expansion of settlements in
the occupied Palestinian territories, including
Jerusalem, and the resulting dire consequences
following the wide-ranging international rejection of
these illegal activities, the Security Council, as the
organ entrusted with the maintenance of international
peace and security, should fully shoulder its
responsibilities. It should oblige Israel to freeze and
put an end to its settlement activities so as to pave the
way for the resumption of negotiations in order to
reach a two-State solution, and establish an
independent Palestinian State within the borders of
1967, with Jerusalem as its capital.
In conclusion, I would like to state that my
country, which is a sponsor and supporter of the draft
resolution under consideration, calls upon all the
members of the Security Council to adopt it if they
truly desire peace and security in the Middle East.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Rahman (Bangladesh): Madame President,
let me begin by thanking your country, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and you personally for steering this very
important open debate on the situation in the Middle
East. My delegation would also like to congratulate all
the new members of the Council: Colombia, Germany,
India, Portugal and South Africa. We wish them all the
very best in their work in the Council. I also would like
to convey our appreciation to Under-Secretary-General
Lynn Pascoe for his comprehensive briefing this
morning.
I also wish to state that the delegation of
Bangladesh aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the representatives of Egypt and Tajikistan on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and the

26

Organization of the Islamic Conference, respectively.
In addition, I wish to briefly make certain points that
Bangladesh believes to be of importance.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, has always been of major concern
to the international community and the United Nations.
A durable and sustainable resolution of the Arab-Israeli
conflict, including the issue of Palestine, which is the
core of the long-lasting crisis, must therefore be our
collective strategic objective. All Member States
should pledge complete commitment to this objective
and throw their full moral, diplomatic, political and
economic support behind its early realization.
Bangladesh is always ready to play a constructive
role in this collective endeavour to achieve a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle East
based on the two-State principle. Bangladesh unites
with the international community in reaffirming its full
support for the Palestinian people in their just and
legitimate struggle for self-determination and freedom
from continued occupation.
The people of Palestine are being denied their
fundamental rights to self-determination and right to
live freely in their own land, and displaced Palestinians
have been denied their rights to return home and to live
in dignity and safety. Unfortunately, this appears to be
a collective failure on the part of the international
community, and even more so of the people of Israel,
who suffer deprivation as they fail to rise to the
occasion by guaranteeing the people of Palestine their
fundamental right to self-determination and to a
sovereign State of their own, side by side with Israel.
In order to achieve a lasting solution in the Middle
East, it is very important to address the key issue,
which is the prolonged and illegal occupation of Arab
territories by Israel.
We are disheartened to see that, although Israeli
Prime Minister Netanyahu and President Mahmoud
Abbas of the Palestinian Authority pledged in
September 2010 to seek a framework agreement on
permanent status within a year, that process has
suffered a serious setback. This is because, regrettably,
Israel did not renew a 10-month settlement
moratorium, which did not include East Jerusalem,
when it expired at the end of September 2010, and
Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas has refused to
resume peace talks with Israel until it ends all
settlement activity.

11-21096

S/PV.6470 (Resumption 1)

My delegation believes that direct negotiations
will be successful only if there is sustained regional
and international support for the talks, the parallel
process of Palestinian State-building and the pursuit of
a just, lasting and comprehensive regional peace as
envisaged in the Fourth Geneva Convention and in the
relevant General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions, particularly Security Council resolutions
242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 425 (1978). Success also
requires regional and international support for the
principle of land for peace and the Madrid Conference
terms of reference, which guarantee Israel’s withdrawal
from all occupied Arab and Palestinian territories back
to the line of June 4 1967, and for the Road Map and
the Arab Peace Initiative, which are the best guides for
achieving a two-State solution.

11-21096

In conclusion, let me reiterate Bangladesh’s longstanding position that the continued illegal occupation
of Palestine over the past six decades is the root cause
of violence, unrest and destabilization in the region.
Let me also reiterate our full support for a lasting
peace for all inhabitants of the region, both Arabs and
Israelis, and our strong commitment for the realization
of an independent, sovereign and viable State of
Palestine with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, living
side by side and in peace with all its neighbours.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.25 p.m.

27
