A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/53/162
25 February 1999

Fifty-third session
Agenda item 110 (c)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/53/625/Add.3)]
53/162. Situation of human rights in Myanmar
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming that all Member States have an obligation to promote and protect human rights and
fundamental freedoms as stated in the Charter of the United Nations and elaborated in the Universal
2
Declaration of Human Rights,1 the International Covenants on Human Rights
and other applicable human
rights instruments,
Aware that, in accordance with the Charter, the United Nations promotes and encourages respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms for all and that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights states
that the will of the people shall be the basis of the authority of government,
Recalling its resolution 52/137 of 12 December 1997,
Recalling also Commission on Human Rights resolution 1992/58 of 3 March 1992,3 in which the
Commission, inter alia, decided to nominate a special rapporteur with a given mandate, and taking note of

1

Resolution 217 A (III).

2

Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

3

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1992, Supplement No. 2 (E/1992/22), chap. II,
sect. A.
99-76795

/...

A/RES/53/162
Page 2

Commission resolution 1998/63 of 21 April 1998,4 in which the Commission decided to extend for one year
the mandate of its Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Myanmar,
Gravely concerned that the Government of Myanmar still has not implemented its commitment to take
all necessary steps towards democracy in the light of the results of the elections held in 1990,
Noting the contact between the Government of Myanmar and the National League for Democracy, but
regretting the failure of the Government of Myanmar to engage in a substantive political dialogue with Aung
San Suu Kyi and other political leaders, including representatives of ethnic groups,
Noting with concern that the Government of Myanmar has not permitted a visit by the special emissary
of the Secretary-General,
Noting with deep regret the continuing failure of the Government of Myanmar to cooperate with the
Special Rapporteur,
Gravely concerned at the continuing and consistent violations of human rights in Myanmar, as reported
by the Special Rapporteur,
Noting with grave concern the content of the report of the Commission of Inquiry of the International
Labour Organization,5 appointed in March 1997 in accordance with article 26 of the Constitution of the
International Labour Organization, regarding the observance by Myanmar of the Forced Labour Convention,
1930 (No. 29), which indicates a widespread and systematic use of forced labour imposed by the military on
the civilian population,
Recalling the observation made by the Special Rapporteur that the absence of respect for the rights
pertaining to democratic governance is at the root of all the major violations of human rights in Myanmar,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on the
situation of human rights in Myanmar for his interim report;6
2. Urges the Government of Myanmar to cooperate fully with all United Nations authorities and
bodies, in particular and without further delay with the Special Rapporteur, and to ensure his access to
Myanmar, without preconditions, in order to establish direct contact with the Government and all other
sectors of society to allow him to discharge his mandate fully;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for his report,7 and notes with concern the
observations contained therein;
4. Deplores the continuing violations of human rights in Myanmar, including extrajudicial and
arbitrary executions, rape, torture, inhuman treatment, mass arrests, forced labour, forced relocation and
denial of freedom of expression, assembly, association and movement, as reported by the Special Rapporteur;

4

Ibid., 1998, Supplement No. 3 (E/1998/23), chap. II, sect. A.

5

See A/53/364, annex, paras. 41–49.

6

A/53/364, annex.

7

A/53/657.
/...

A/RES/53/162
Page 3

5. Notes with deep concern the increased restrictions on the freedom of movement and the large
numbers of arbitrary detentions and harassment of political activists, including elected representatives to the
Parliament, and urges the Government of Myanmar to permit unrestricted communication with and physical
access to Aung San Suu Kyi and other political leaders, and to protect their physical well-being;
6. Strongly urges the Government of Myanmar to release immediately and unconditionally detained
political leaders and all political prisoners, to ensure their physical integrity and to permit them to participate
in the process of national reconciliation;
7. Urges the Government of Myanmar urgently to expand and intensify its contacts with the National
League for Democracy with a view to engaging in a substantive political dialogue with the General Secretary
of the League, Aung San Suu Kyi, and other political leaders, including representatives of ethnic and other
groups, as the best means of promoting national reconciliation and the full and early restoration of
democracy;
8. Strongly urges the Government of Myanmar, taking into account its assurances given at various
times, to take all necessary steps towards the restoration of democracy in accordance with the will of the
people as expressed in the democratic elections held in 1990 and to ensure that political parties and nongovernmental organizations can function freely, and in this context notes that the National League for
Democracy recently established a committee to represent the Parliament temporarily;
9. Also strongly urges the Government of Myanmar to take all appropriate measures to allow all
citizens to participate freely in the political process, in accordance with the principles of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights,1 and to accelerate the process of transition to democracy, in particular through
the transfer of power to democratically elected representatives;
10. Further strongly urges the Government of Myanmar to ensure full respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms, including freedom of expression, association, movement and assembly, the right to a
fair trial and the protection of the rights of persons belonging to ethnic and religious minorities, to put an end
to violations of the right to life and integrity of the human being, to the practices of torture, abuse of women,
forced labour and forced relocations and to enforced disappearances and summary executions, and to fulfil its
obligations to end the impunity of perpetrators of human rights violations, including members of the military,
and to investigate and prosecute alleged violations committed by government agents in all circumstances;
11. Calls upon the Government of Myanmar to implement fully the recommendations made by the
Special Rapporteur;
12. Welcomes the accession by the Government of Myanmar to the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women,8 and appeals to the Government of Myanmar to consider
becoming a party to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,2 the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights2 and the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman and
Degrading Treatment or Punishment9 and the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination;10

8

Resolution 34/180.

9

Resolution 39/46, annex.

10

Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.
/...

A/RES/53/162
Page 4

13. Strongly urges the Government of Myanmar to fulfil its obligations with regard to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child,11 as set out in the concluding observations of the Committee on the Rights of the
Child;12
14. Also strongly urges the Government of Myanmar to fulfil its obligations as a State party to the
Forced Labour Convention, 1930 (No. 29), and the Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right to
Organize Convention, 1948 (No.87), of the International Labour Organization, and to implement the
recommendations of the Commission of Inquiry of the International Labour Organization regarding the
implementation of the Forced Labour Convention, and encourages further communication between the
Government and the International Labour Organization;
15. Stresses the importance for the Government of Myanmar to give particular attention to improving
the conditions in the country’s jails and to allow the competent international humanitarian organization to
communicate freely and confidentially with prisoners;
16. Calls upon the Government of Myanmar and other parties to the hostilities in Myanmar to respect
fully the obligations under international humanitarian law, including article 3 common to the Geneva
Conventions of 12 August 1949,13 to halt the use of weapons against the civilian population, to protect all
civilians, including children, women and persons belonging to ethnic or religious minorities, from violations
of humanitarian law and to avail themselves of such services as may be offered by impartial humanitarian
bodies;
17. Expresses concern that the situation of human rights in Myanmar, and the lack of stability, have
resulted in flows of refugees to neighbouring countries, and may have further negative effects on those
countries, and therefore calls upon the Government of Myanmar to create the necessary conditions to ensure
an end to the movements of refugees to neighbouring countries and to create conditions conducive to their
voluntary return and their full reintegration, in conditions of safety and dignity;
18. Welcomes the recent visits to Myanmar by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
purpose of discussions with the Government and with Aung San Suu Kyi and other political leaders, and
encourages the Government of Myanmar to engage in a broader and more regular dialogue with the SecretaryGeneral and to facilitate access by his representative to all sectors of society in Myanmar;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his discussions on the situation of human rights and the
restoration of democracy with the Government of Myanmar, and to submit additional reports to the General
Assembly during its fifty-third session on the progress of those discussions, and to report to the Assembly at
its fifty-fourth session and to the Commission on Human Rights at its fifty-fifth session on the progress made
in the implementation of the present resolution;
20. Decides to continue its consideration of this question at its fifty-fourth session.
85th plenary meeting
9 December 1998

11

Resolution 44/25, annex.

12

CRC/C/15/Add.69.

13

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.
