VIII.

31/191.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Financial emergency
Nations

of

the

United

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3538 (XXX) of 17 December 1975, by which it established the Negotiating Committee on the Financial Emergency of the United
Nations,
Reaffirming its determination to bring about a lasting
solution to the financial problems of the Organization,
Considering that the Committee was unable to complete its report68 in time for adequate consideration by
Member States at the current session of the General
Assembly,
1. Decides to defer to its thirty-second session consideration of the report of the Negotiating Committee
on the Financial Emergency of the United Nations;
2. Requests the Committee to keep the financial
situation of the United Nations under review in order
to promote a lasting solution to the financial problems
of the Organization;
3. Further requests the Committee to submit, if
necessary, a supplementary report on further developments;
4. Further decides to include in the provisional
agenda of its thirty-second session the item entitled
"Financial emergency of the United Nations: report
of the Negotiating Committee on the Financial Emergency of the United Nations".
107th plenary meeting
22 December 1976
31/192.

163

acceptance of the present statute as soon as possible
and to take appropriate action for the use of the services of the Joint Inspection Unit.
107th plenary meeting
22 December 1976
ANNEX
Statute of the Joint Inspeetion Unit

CHAPTER I
ESTABLISHMENT

Article 1
The General Assembly of the United Nations (hereinafter referred to as the General Assembly) decides that the
Joint Inspection Unit, created on an experimental basis under
General Assembly resolution 2150 (XXI) of 4 November 1966
and extended thereafter under Assembly resolutions 2735 A
(XXV) of 17 December 1970 and 2924 B (XXVII) of 24 November 1972, shall be established in accordance with the present statute and with effect from 1 January 1978. The functions,
powers and responsibilities of the Joint Inspection Unit (hereinafter referred to as the Unit) are defined in chapter III of
the present statute.
2. The Unit shall perform its functions in respect of and
shall be responsible to the General Assembly and similarly to
the competent legislative organs of those specialized agencies
and other international organizations within the United Nations
system which accept the present statute (all of which shall
hereinafter be referred to as the organizations). The Unit
shall be a subsidiary organ of the legislative bodies of the
organizations.
3. Acceptance of the present statute by an organization
shall be notified in writing by its executive head to the Secretary-General of the United Nations (hereinafter referred to as
the Secretary-General) .
l.

CHAPTER JI

Statute of the Joint Inspection Unit89

COMPOSITION AND APPOINTMENT

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2150 (XXI) of 4 November 1966, 2360 (XXII) of 19 December 1967, 2735 A
(XXV) of 17 December 1970 and 2924 B (XXVII)
of 24 November 1972, relating to the establishment,
setting up and continuation of the Joint Inspection
Unit,
Having considered the views submitted by the Secretary-General in his capacity as Chairman of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, 70 the Economic
and Social Council, 71 the Committee for Programme
and Co-ordination, 72 and the Joint Inspection Unit, 78
and the comments and recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions 74 on the question of the continuation of the
Joint Inspection Unit,
Taking into account the views expressed in the Fifth
Committee,
1. Approves the statute of the Joint Inspection
Unit as set out in the annex to the present resolution;
2. Invites the organizations within the United
Nations system to notify the Secretary-General of the
88 Ibid., Supplement No. 37 (A/31/37).
69 See also sect. X.B.6 below, decision 31/424.
10 A/31/75/Add.l and Add.1/Corr.l.
71 Official Records of the General Assembly,

Thirty-first
Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/31/3), chap. III, sect. H, and
chap. VII, sect. C.
1li Ibid., Supplement No. 38 (A/31/38).
78 See A/31/ 89 and Add. I.
74 A/31/325.

Article 2
The Unit shall consist of not more than eleven Inspectors, chosen from among members of national supervision or
inspection bodies, or from among persons of a similar competence on the basis of their special experience in national or
international administrative and financial matters, including
management questions. The Inspectors shall serve in their
personal capacity.
2. No two Inspectors shall be nationals of the same State.
Article 3
1.

1. Starting from the thirty-second session of the General
Assembly, in 1977, the President of the General Assembly
shall consult with Member States to draw up, with due regard
to the principle of equitable geographical distribution and of
reasonable rotation, a list of countries which would be requested to propose candidates who meet the qualifications
mentioned in article 2, paragraph 1, above.
2. The President of the General Assembly, through appropriate consultations, including consultations with the President of the Economic and Social Council and with the Chairman of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, shall
review the qualifications of the proposed candidates. After
further consultations, if necessary, with the States concerned,
the President of the General Assembly shall submit the list of
candidates to the Assembly for appointment.
3. The provisions contained in paragraphs 1 and 2 of the
present article shall govern the procedure for the replacement
of the Inspectors whose terms of office have expired or who
have resigned or otherwise ceased to be members of the Unit.

Article 4
The duration of the appointments of the Inspectora
shall be five years, renewable for one further term. In order
1.

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

164

to ensure continuity in the membership of the Unit, six of
the Inspectors appointed from 1 January 1978 shall serve for
a full term; the terms of the others shall expire at the end
of three years.
2. An Inspector appointed to replace one whose term of
office has not expired shall hold office for the remainder of that
term, provided it is not less than three years. Otherwise the
duration of the appointment shall be for a full term.
3. An Inspector may resign on giving six months' notice to
the Chairman of the Unit.
4. The term of office of an Inspector shall be terminated
only if, in the unanimous opinion of all the other Inspectors,
he has ceased to discharge his duties in a manner consistent
with the provisions of the present statute and after that conclusion is confirmed by the General Assembly.
5. The Chairman of the Unit shall notify the SecretaryGeneral of any vacancy for the necessary administrative action.
Such notification shall make the post vacant.

besides its own observations, experience and assessment of
priorities as regards subjects for inspection, any requests of
the competent organs of the organizations and suggestions received from the executive heads of the organizations and the
bodies of the United Nations system concerned with budgetary
control, investigation, co-ordination and evaluation.
2. A copy of the programme of work, as approved by the
Unit, shall be sent to the Secretary-General and, for information purposes, to the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions. The Secretary-General shall arrange
for its issue as a document of the United Nations and for its
transmission to the executive heads of the organizations and
to the bodies of the United Nations system concerned with
budgetary control, investigation, co-ordination and evaluation.

OHAPTER III

2. Annual reports by organizations to the Economic and
Social Council shall include information on the work of the
Unit as it relates to the respective organizations.

FUNCTIONS, POWERS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Article 5
1. The Inspectors shall have the broadest powers of investigation in all matters having a bearing on the efficiency of the
services and the proper use of funds.

2. They shall provide an independent view through inspection and evaluation aimed at improving management and methods and at achieving greater co-ordination between organizations.
3. The Unit shall satisfy itself that the activities undertaken by the organizations are carried out in the most economical manner and that the optimum use is made of resources
available for carrying out these activities.
4. Without prejudice to the principle that external evaluation remains the responsibility of appropriate intergovernmental bodies, the Unit, with due regard to its other responsibilities, may assist them in carrying out their responsibilities
for external evaluation of programmes and activities. On its
own initiative or at the request of the executive heads, the
Unit may also advise organizations on their methods for internal evaluation, periodically assess these methods and make
ad hoe evaluations of programmes and activities.
5. The Inspectors may propose reforms or make recommendations they deem necessary to the competent organs of
the organizations. They shall not, however, have the power
of decision, nor shall they interfere in the operations of the
services they inspect.
Article 6
1. Acting singly or in small groups, the Inspectors shall
make on-the-spot inquiries and investigations, some of which
may be without prior notification, as and when they themselves
may decide, in any of the services of the organizations.
2. The Inspectors shall be accorded full co-operation by
the organizations at all levels, including access to any particular information or document relevant to their work.
3. The Inspectors shall be bound by professional secrecy
as regards all confidential information they receive.
Article 7
The Inspectors shall discharge their duties in full independence and in the sole interest of the organizations.
Article 8
The Unit shall determine standards and procedures for the
conduct of inquiries and investigations.
CHAPTER IV
MODE OF OPERATION

Article 9
The Unit shall be responsible for preparing its annual
programme of work. In doing so, it shall take into account,
1.

Article JO

The Unit shall submit an annual report on its activities
to the General Assembly and to the competent organs of the
other organizations.
I.

Article 11
1. The Unit may issue reports, notes and confidential letters.
2. The Inspectors shall draw up, over their own signature,
reports for which they are responsible and in which they shall
state their findings and propose solutions to the problems they
have noted. The reports shall be finalized after consultation
among the Inspectors so as to test recommendations being
made against the collective wisdom of the Unit.

3. Reports of the Unit shall contain a summary of the
main conclusions and/or recommendations.
4. The procedure for handling and processing reports shall
be as follows:
(a) The Unit shall submit the original version to the executive heads of the organizations concerned;
( b) Translation of reports of concern to more than one
organization shall be arranged by the Unit; reports of concern
to only one organization shall be translated by that organization;
(c) Upon receipt of reports, the executive head or heads
concerned shall take immediate action to distribute them, with
or without their comments, to the States members of their
respective organizations;

(d) When a report concerns only one organization, the
report and comments thereon of the executive head shall be
transmitted to the competent organ of that organization not
later than three months after receipt of the report for consideration at the next meeting of the competent organ. In the
case of the United Nations, the Unit shall, when possible, indicate to which organs of the United Nations a report is of
essential concern and the Secretary-General shall take this into
account when distributing it. The Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions shall receive all reports
for information. As it deems appropriate, the Advisory Committee may choose to issue comments and observations on any
of the reports which fall within its competence;
( e) When a report concerns more than one organization,
the respective executive heads shall, normally within the framework of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, consult with one another and, to the extent possible, co-ordinate
their comments. The report, together with the joint comments
and any comments of the respective executive heads on matters
that concern their particular organizations, shall be ready for
submission to the competent organs of the organizations not
later than six months after receipt of the Unit's report for
consideration at the next meeting of the competent organs
concerned. Should, in exceptional cases, more than six months
be required for consultations, with the result that comments
would not be ready for submission to competent organs at the
next meeting following the six-month period, an interim submission shall be made to the competent organs concerned ex-

VIII.

Resolutiona adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

plaining the reasons for the delay and setting a firm date for
the submission of the definitive comments;
(f) The executive heads of the organizations concerned
shall inform the Unit of all decisions taken by the competent
organs of their organizations on reports of the Unit.
5. Notes and confidential letters shall be submitted to
executive heads for use by them as they may decide.
Article 12
Executive heads of organizations shall ensure that recommendations of the Unit approved by their respective competent
organs are implemented as expeditiously as possible. Such implementation may be subject to verification by the competent
organs of the organizations, which may also request the Unit
to issue follow-up reports. The Unit may also prepare such
reports on its own initiative.
CHAPTER V
CONDITIONS OF SERVICE

Article 13

For the purpose of the Convention on the Privileges and
Immunities of the United Nations,75 the Inspectors shall have
the status of officials of the United Nations. They shall not be
considered to be staff members.
Article 14
I. The Inspectors shall receive the salary and allowances
payable to United Nations staff members at the Director (D-2)
level, step IV.
2. Compensatory and insurance arrangements for the Inspectors shall be equivalent to those of a United Nations staff
member at the D-2 level, including provision for:
(a) Compensation under the terms of appendix D to the
United Nations Staff Rules for service-attributable death, injury or illness;
( b) Compensation for death or disability while in office,
or in receipt of disability benefits, comparable to the benefits
payable in respect of participants in the United Nations Joint
Staff Pension Fund under provisions for disability benefit,
widow's benefit, widower's benefit, child's benefit and secondary
dependant's benefit of the Regulations of the Fund;
(c) Participation in health insurance arrangements of the
United Nations on the same basis as staff at the D-2 level.

Article 18
The Unit shall elect each year from among the Inspectors
a Chairman and Vice-Chairman. The Chairman shall play a
co-ordinating role in respect of the Unit's programme of work
for the year. The Chairman shall be the formal channel of
communication with the competent bodies and the executive
heads of the organizations. He shall represent the Unit, as
necessary, at meetings of the organizations and perform on
the Unit's behalf such other functions as it may decide.
Article 19
I. The Unit shall be assisted by an Executive Secretary and
by such staff as may be authorized in accordance with article 20 of the present statute.

2. The staff, selected in accordance with Article 101, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United Nations, shall be appointed by the Secretary-General after consultation with the
Unit and, as regards the appointment of the Executive Secretary, after consultation with the Unit and the Administrative
Committee on Co-ordination. The staff of the secretariat of the
Unit shall be staff members of the United Nations and the
Staff Regulations and Staff Rules of the United Nations shall
apply to them.
Article 20

The budget of the Unit shall be included in the regular
budget of the United Nations. The budget estimates shall be
established by the Secretary-General after consultation with
the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination on the basis
of proposals made by the Unit. The budget estimates shall be
submitted to the General Assembly together with the report
thereon by the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination
and with the comments and recommendations of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions. The
Unit shall be invited to be represented at meetings when its
budget estimates are being discussed.
I.

2. The expenditures of the Unit shall be shared by the
participating organizations as agreed by them.
CHAPTER VII
OTHER ARRANGEMENTS

Article 21

The present statute may be amended by the General Assembly. Amendments shall be subject to the same acceptance
procedure as the present statute.

3. The Inspectors shall be entitled to such post-retirement
benefits as may be determined by the General Assembly.
4. The Inspectors and their dependants shall be provided
with the same standards of accommodation for all travel on
official business (including appointment, home leave and repatriation) as staff members of the United Nations at the D-2
level.
5. Each Inspector shall be entitled to annual, sick and
home leave on the same basis as staff members of the United
Nations holding fixed-term appointments of the same duration
as the Inspector.
Article 15
The Inspectors shall not accept other employment during
their term of office; nor shall an Inspector be appointed or
serve as an official or consultant of an organization while in
office as an Inspector or within three years of ceasing to be
a member of the Unit.
CHAPTER VI
ADMINISTRATIVE, BUDGETARY AND FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENTS

Article 16

The Unit shall be located at Geneva.
Article 17
The Secretary-General shall provide such office and related
facilities and administrative support as the Unit may require.
75 United

Nations, Treaty Series, vol. I, No. 4, p. 15.

165

Article 22

An organization may not withdraw its acceptance of the
statute unless it has given to the Secretary-General two years'
notice of its intention to do so. The Secretary-General shall
bring any such notice to the attention of the General Assembly
and, through the executive heads concerned, to that of the
competent organs of the other organizations.

31/193.

Joint Inspection Unit 76
A

PENSION COVERAGE FOR MEMBERS OF THE
JOINT INSPECTION UNIT

The General Assembly,
Taking note of the reports of the Secretary-General
on the question of pension coverage for members of
the Joint Inspection Unit, 77 the observations of the
Unit thereon, 78 the relevant paragraphs of the report
of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board79 and
76 See

also sect. X.B.6 below, decision 31/424.

77 A/C.5/ 1697, A/C.5/31/30.

78 A/31/89/ Add.I, annex.
79 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Ses-

sion, Supplement No. 9 (A/31/9), paras. 89-91.
