United Nations

A/RES/57/161

General Assembly

Distr.: General
28 January 2003

Fifty-seventh session
Agenda item 38

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/57/L.27/Rev.1 and Add.1)]

57/161. United Nations Verification Mission in Guatemala
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 56/223 of 24 December 2001, in which it decided to
authorize the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Guatemala from 1 January to 31 December 2002,
Taking into account the fact that the Government of Guatemala has reaffirmed
its commitment to the full implementation of the peace agreements,
Underlining the fact that substantive aspects of the peace agreements have yet
to be implemented and that the Commission to Follow up the Implementation of the
Peace Agreements has approved a new schedule for their implementation from 2000
until the end of 2004,
Taking into account the fact that the parties have requested the United Nations
to support the consolidation of the peace-building process until 2003, 1
Taking into account also the thirteenth report of the Mission on human rights, 2
Taking into account further the seventh report of the Secretary-General on the
verification of compliance with the peace agreements,3
Taking into account the report of the Commission for Historical Clarification,4
Stressing the positive role played by the Mission in support of the Guatemala
peace process, and emphasizing the need for the Mission to continue to enjoy the
full support of all parties concerned,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the work of the
Mission 5 and the recommendations contained therein,
1.
Welcomes the thirteenth report of the United Nations Verification Mission
in Guatemala on human rights;2
_______________
1

See A/55/389, para. 9.
A/57/336, annex.
3
A/56/1003.
4
A/53/928, annex.
5
A/57/584.
2

02 54877

A/RES/57/161

2.
Also welcomes the seventh report of the Secretary-General on the
verification of compliance with the peace agreements;3
3.
Recalls the report of the Commission for Historical Clarification4 and the
recommendations contained therein;
4.
Calls upon the Government of Guatemala to fulfil its commitment to the
full implementation of the peace agreements;
5.
Recalls that the Commission to Follow up the Implementation of the
Peace Agreements has rescheduled the pending commitments and included others
not initially scheduled;
6.
Takes note of the recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General 5 aimed at ensuring that the Mission can respond adequately to the
demands of the peace process until 31 December 2003, as well as of his proposal for
a further scaling down of the Mission in 2003;
7.
Takes note also of the agreement reached by the parties regarding the
importance of the continuing presence of the Mission in Guatemala until 2003;
8.
Takes note further of the meeting of the Consultative Group for
Guatemala, held in Washington, D.C., in February 2002, which provided new
impetus for compliance with the peace agreements, and looks forward to the next
Consultative Group meeting planned for the middle of 2003;
9.
Notes with satisfaction the progress made in the implementation of the
peace agreements in some areas, in particular significant legislative advances
through the approval of a package of laws on decentralization and of a law
criminalizing discrimination on the basis of gender, ethnicity and other criteria;
10. Also notes with satisfaction the election of a new Human Rights
Ombudsman and a new Public Prosecutor, as well as steps taken to establish a
professional judiciary;
11. Underlines with concern the fact that a number of key commitments
remain outstanding in the areas of fiscal, judicial, military, electoral and land
reform, as well as rural development and indigenous rights, and therefore urges that
those commitments be implemented without further delay;
12. Also underlines with concern the budgetary constraints placed on
institutions and programmes which are given priority under the peace process, while
special budgetary transfers have been made to the armed forces, exceeding both
budgetary allocations and targets of the peace agreements;
13. Notes that the consolidation of the peace-building process remains a
significant challenge that requires a concerted national effort to guarantee the
irreversibility of the peace process;
14. Notes with concern that the human rights situation has deteriorated, in
particular the climate of intimidation has worsened amid an increase in threats and
violence against judges, journalists and human rights defenders;
15. Calls upon the Government to implement fully the recommendations
contained in the report of the Mission on human rights, in particular those related to
the systematic impunity for crimes and human rights violations;

2

A/RES/57/161

16. Underlines the importance of implementing fully the Agreement on
Identity and Rights of Indigenous Peoples 6 as a key to fighting discrimination and
consolidating peace and equality in Guatemala, and highlights the need to
implement fully the Agreement on Social and Economic Aspects and Agrarian
Situation 7 as a means of addressing the root causes of the armed conflict;
17. Calls upon the Government to implement the recommendations of the
Commission for Historical Clarification, with a view to promoting national
reconciliation, upholding the right to truth and providing redress for the victims of
human rights abuses and violence committed during the thirty-six-year conflict, and
calls upon the Guatemalan Congress to establish, as recommended, the Commission
for Peace and Harmony;
18. Welcomes in this regard the recent agreement reached between the
Government and civil society to establish a National Reparations Commission, and
calls upon the Congress to adopt the draft law on the National Reparations
Programme;
19. Invites the international community and, in particular, the agencies,
programmes and funds of the United Nations, to continue to support the
consolidation of the peace-building process, with the peace agreements as the
framework for their technical and financial assistance programmes and projects, and
stresses the continued importance of close cooperation among them in the context of
the United Nations Development Assistance Framework for Guatemala;
20. Urges the international community to support financially, through
existing mechanisms of international cooperation, the strengthening of national
capacities to ensure the consolidation of the peace process in Guatemala;
21. Also urges the international community to support financially the
strengthening of the capacities of the United Nations agencies and programmes, as
the Mission will transfer some of its activities and projects to those agencies to
support the national efforts to comply with the commitments of the peace
agreements;
22. Stresses that the Mission has a key role to play in promoting the
consolidation of peace and the observance of human rights and in verifying
compliance with the revised timetable for the implementation of pending
commitments under the peace agreements;
23. Takes note of the request of the Government of Guatemala for an
extension of the mandate of the Mission until the end of 2004, taking into account
the fact that the new Administration is scheduled to take office in January 2004;
24. Notes that civil society organizations and members of the international
community have expressed concerns that voids will be created, particularly in the
areas of human rights, indigenous rights, demilitarization and the strengthening of
civil society, if the Mission departs Guatemala at the end of 2003, just as the new
Government takes office and before it has been able to demonstrate its commitment
to the peace process;

_______________
6
7

A/49/882-S/1995/256, annex.
A/50/956, annex.

3

A/RES/57/161

25. Welcomes the intention of the Secretary-General to initiate consultations
with interested Member States regarding these requests and to keep the General
Assembly apprised of progress in these talks;
26. Decides to authorize the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Guatemala from 1 January to 31 December 2003;
27. Requests the Secretary-General to submit, as early as possible, an
updated report to the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session, together with his
recommendations regarding the best way to accompany Guatemala in its peacebuilding process beyond 31 December 2003;
28. Also requests the Secretary-General to keep the General Assembly fully
informed of the implementation of the present resolution.
76th plenary meeting
16 December 2002

4
