UNITED h?ATIONS

S’ECURITY
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

TWENTY-NINTH

YEAR

‘Ii

NEW

COUNCIL

MEETING:

’

,.13 DECEMBER

:.
1974

YORK

CONTENTS
Provi$onal agenda (S/Agenda/ 1810) *....................................
Expression of thanks to the retiring President . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption ‘of the agenda .’. . . . . . . . . . ..*.........................
... . .... .
The situation in Cyprus:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations operation in Cyprus
(S/l 1568) . ..*.............................................*.......

Page

1
1
1

1

WPV.1810 1

..

i

.’

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United \Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol W...) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records ofthe Secur5ty’Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Securiry Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

EIGHTEEN

HUNDRED

AND TENTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Friday, 13 December 1974, at 3.30 p.m.
President:

Sir Laurence MCINTYRE

(Australia).

the Council table and to participate, without
discussion.

Prqsent: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic,
China, Costa Rica, France, Indonesia, Iraq, Kenya,
Mauritania, Peru, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United ‘Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Cameroon and United States of
America.
.)

At the invitation of the President, &fr. Rossides’(Cypru@,
Mr. Okay (Turkey) and Mr. Carayannis (Greece) tobkplaces
at the Council table.
3. The PRESIDENT: At this stage I wish to retill that in
the course of our consultations members of the Council
agreed that the Council should extend an invitation under
rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure to Mr; Celik. I
propose, if I hear no objection, to take it that the Council
agrees to invite Mr. celik under rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure, and accordingly, at the appropriate
moment I shall invite Mr. Celik to come to the Council table
to make a statement.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/lSlO)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2.

v&e, in the

The situation in Cyprus:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations operation in Cyprus (S/l 1568)

4. The Council will now return to the consideration of the
item concerning the situation in Cyprus, and I should like to
draw particular attention to the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations operation in Cyprus for the
period from 23 May to 5 December 1974 [S/22568]. I
further want to draw the attention of members ofthe Council to two draft resolutions which have just been distributed
[S/II573 and S/215741. These two draft resolutions were
prepared in the course of extensive consultations among all
members of the Council. Members of the Council glso
agreed in those consultations that ‘the draft resolutidns
should be voted upon before I call upon the first speaker
inscribed on my list.

l%e meeting was called to order at 5.50 p.m.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President
1. The PRESIDENT: Before *proceeding to the’ business
before the Council, I should like first of all to pay a tribute to
the work of my predecessor in the month of November,
Ambassador Scali of the United States. I am sure that the
Council would wish me to thank him for the deft performance of his duties during the month. I should also like to
congratulate him’on being able to keep his duties as light as
he was able to during that month.

5. Accordingly, if there is no objection, I shall put the two
draft resolutions to the vote. I shall first put to the vote draft
resolution S/l 1573.

Adoption of the agenda
l’he agenda was adopted

A vote was taken by show of had.

The situation in Cyprus:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
operation in Cyprus (S/11568)

72e draft resolution was adopted by 14 votes to none. 1
One member (China) did not participate in the voting.

2. The PRESIDENT:
I have received letters dated 13
December from the representatives of Cyp~s, Turkey and
Greece in which they request that they be invited, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure, to participate in th‘e discussion of the question
now before the Council. I should mention in this connexion
that the representativ? of Greece in his letter of request has
made an explicit reference to Article 32 of the Charter. In
accordance with the usual practice, I propose, if I hear no
objection, and with the consent of the Council, to invite the
three representatives I have just mentioned to take places at

6. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now proceed to put to the
vote draft resolution S/l 1574. It is my belief that thegeneral
feeling of the Council at the stage when we were considering
this draft resolution in our private consultations was that it
might be adopted by consensus. If I hear no objection to the
adoption of the draft resolution by consensus I shall take it
that the Council decides that draft resolution S/l 1574 shall
be adopted by consensus.
’ See resolution

I

364 (1974).

i%dr@t

resolution was adopted by consensus. 2

7.. The PRESIDENT:
Turkey.

I call on the representative

of

8. Mr. OLCAY (Turkey): In view of the protracted negotiations that took place before the presentation of draft resolution S/11573, .and in order to determine who are the
interested parties who have a voice in the decision concerning the extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP), and bearing in
mind the reference the document just adopted makes to a
Government of Cyprus in its text, I feel tonstrained through
you, Mr. President, to address the following question to the
Secretary-General:
who are “the parties concerned”
referred to in paragraph 81 of the report of the SecretaryGeneral as having been consulted and having given their
consent to the extension of the stationing of UNFICYP in
Cyprus for a further period of six months? Depending on the
answer I hope to receive, I shall indicate my Government’s
position cpncerning the extension of the mandate and the
resolution as a whole just adopted by the Council.

Natibns Force in Cyprus and in its paragraph4 recommended “the creation, with the consent of the Government
of Cyprus, of a United Nations Peace-keeping Force in
Cyprus”. It does not refer to the consent of any dther
Government or any other party. It merely speaks of ihe
Government of Cyprus, and on that basis every renewal of
the mandate was made. 1 shall not cite them all; I shall
merely cite the last renewal, which took place on 29 May
1974 [resolution 349 (1974)]. I do not know how matiy
renewals there have been over the I&year period, but the
resolutions always contained the following words:
“Noting that the Government of Cyprus has agreed
that in view of the prevailing conditions in the island it is
necessary to keep the Force in Cyprus beyond . . .“.
What has never been mentioned is the consent of such-andsuch a person-no
one but the Government of Cyprus.

9. The PRESIDENT: I would ask the Secretary-General if
he is in a position to answer the question of the representative of Turkey.

17. Now, is it useful to create problems by changing
things? Why change them after 10 years because of a new
reality? What is this new reality?To put it in a few words, it is
the reality of aggression and invasion, which was not
accepted as a normal or logical or good thing by the Security
Council, which in effect condemned it by calling for an
immediate cease-fire and withdrawal of the foreign troops
from the island. I need not go into the whole story now.

10. -The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I am quite ready to
answer the question put to tie by the representative of
Turkey. I wish to inform the Council that through my
Special Representative ifi Cyprus I consulted then Acting
President, Mr. Clerides, and the Vice-President, Mr. Denkta?, and I also consulted the Governments of Greece and
Turkey.

18. I do not see that a right can be created out of a crime,
unless the Security Council now wishes tostart a new idea in
that rcspcct. My dclcgation i;thcs it that the rcnc\v;ll is m;&
by the consent of the Government of Cyprus, and no.explanation would alter that reality of the resolution. Therefore,
whatever else is said or done is contrary to, what should be
done. That is all I have to say on that.

11. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of Turkey on a point of order.

19. Now, before I continue with my statement I wish to
thank the President and the members of the Council for
inviting my delegation to participate in this meeting. I
should also like to express to you, Mr. President, our congratulations upon your assumption of the office of the
President. We feel sure that your high qualifications, your
skill and great experience are significant assets for the proper
conduct of the deliberations of the Council.

12. I&. OLCAY (Turkev): Mr. President, do you expect
me, as I mentioned-in my-introductory
statement, to indicate my Government’s position on the basis of what the
Secretary-General has said, or would you prefer me to refer
to it in my statement? I am entirely at your disposal.
13. The PRESIDENT: In reply to the representative of
Turkey, I had assumed he would explain his position when I
invited him to speak.
14. Mr. ROSSIDES

(Cyprus):

Point of order.

15. The PRESIDENT: I am afraid I must tell the representative of Cyprus that he need not raise a point qf order, as I
now call upon him since his is the first name on my list of
speakers.
16. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): I rose on a point of order
because I thought the members of the Council were to speak
first, In relation to the matter that has been raised here in
regard to the report as to the parties concerned, I wish to
remind the Council that the parent resolution, which is at
the origin of the Security Council meetings and the mandate
on Cyprus, resolution 186 (1964), established th‘e United
*See resoiu&

365 (1974).
.I

20. Now, what is the situation? kt the present moment a
State Member of the United Nations is to a very great extent
occupied by the troops of an invading Power. A beautiful
and neat island of the Mediterranean now lies to a very
considerable extent in ruins. Its economy has been completely shattered.
21. Exploiting its military conquest of the northern half df
the island, the State of Turkey is taking a number ofsteps to
assimilate that northern part qf Cyljfus into Turkey. Turkish money is used freely in the north, replacing the Cypriot
currency, and is available in the banks organized by the
Turkish Cypriots in Kyrenia to replace those pre$ously
owned by Cypriots. Turkish stamps aie’ now used on letters,
and Kyrenia is no longer a city in Cyprus but a city ‘in
Turkey. The official name the occul$ing forces have given
Kyrenia is Girne. That does not matter; we welcome it. But
the address given is not “Girne, Cyprus”, but “Girne, Mersin, Turkey”. That is a reality the Security Council will of
course take into account, and it will act accordingly, with the

idea that aggression and invasion and the violation of every
international law creates a right. That is a new and novel
concept in the United Nations which will help the world
towards progress, towards peace, I’ expect. What is the
extent of the displacement of the Greek character or the
change of the Greek character?
”

29. And those of you-when
he was addressing the people
who congregated on certain occasions, referring to the situation in Cyprus-who
have been criticizing my Government
for trying to strengthen its military force, saying that it is not
proper for a neutral country, that it is not quite moral for a
neutral country to seek to acquire a great force, now see that
we must have a greater force. And he was right. Therefore,
how many others thought the same way? And what is the
effect of that? It is turning towards more and more armaments, in military alliances, or in their own defence. And the
effect of this will necessarily be a deterioration in the world
progress towards peace and disarmament.

22. By the Greek character, I mean the Cypriot character
that it bad in the north of Cyprus, occupied 80 per cent by
Greek Cypriots. A once bustling and predominantly prosperous town has now become deserted and in ruins. Turkey
has moved rapidly to cut the island in two and intends to
continue to occupy especially what it believes it can occupy
on its own terms, in other words, what it has conquered by
violence or force.

30. There has not been much progress in disarmament.
There has been an arms race and the arms race is continuing.
But now the hope is disappearing because by the trends of
the world, how can hope persist in face of the situation in
Cyprus? The psychological effect is that it is a blow to the
hope of mankind, apart from the implication of international security. We are asked to compromise. But what have
we to compromise about? What compromise can help
Cyprus and make up for the wrongs perpetrated on it in
violation of all the principles of the Charter and international law, every obligation, every responsibility and every
tenet of law and justice?

23. Two hundred thousand displaced persons have
become temporary refugees, out of a very small popuiation
of hardly 600,000, expelled from their homes by direct force
and by the threat of suffering miserable conditions if they
did not leave.
24. Humanitarian aid is welcome, and in spite of diffculties placed with regard to that humanitarian aid, it is still
welcome for it is desperately needed. But will that aid
assuage the international conscience while the crime continues? How much will the tending of wounds help while the
perpetrator of the crime continues his illegal work?

31. What have we left to compromise on? We have been
compromised by the invader and by the apathy that has
been shown. I do not say that we,have any complaint about
the Security Council having adopted resolutions. It adopted
very effective resolutions, intended to be effective, but which
remain unimplemented. The first resolution, on the very day
of the invasion of Cyprus [resolurion 3.53(1974)], called for a
cease-fire, called for the withdrawal of troops, for the immediate cessation of foreign military intervention and withdrawal of foreign troops. It was accepted by all sides and
accepted by Turkey.

25. What are we to think and what is the world to think of
this situation? I am sorry that I have to say things that are
unpleasant. They are unpleasant to the ear, but they are
tragic in reality. So we might suffer a little unpleasantness at
this moment in order to see the reality in Cyprus. Has there
been a previous occasion like that since the Second World
War and even during the Second World War? In some of the
details, you would find no parallel in the Second World
War, and even long before it. And this is accepted, I believe,
with an easy conscience.

32. Now, there is a peculiar thing. Although accepted and
although the cease-fire was to take effect from 22 July, the
invasion and the aggression continued on 23 July. And on
23 July the Council adopted a second resolution, resolution
354 (1974), which was more strict, this time demanding
“ . . . that all parties to the present fighting comply imme-

26. If it is not accepted with an easy conscience, then there
is hope. But if it is, it is a sign of the times in which humanity
finds itself at the present transitory period. Because it is a
transitory period and the omens are very clear in various
manifestations; I mean manifestations not in words but in
deeds, in the United Nations and outside it.

diately with paragraph 2 of Security Council resolution
353 (1974) calling for an immediate cessation of all firing
in the area and requesting all States to exercise.. .*‘.

27. What are the small countries, members of the world
body, to do who do not belong to an alliance and in that
respect have an independent existence, but subject to their
security being ensured by international security through the
United Nations? If they do not belong to an alliance, and
they belong to the non-aligned, what is their security in
terms of force?
1

So this reaffirms the previous resolution and made the
withdrawal of the troops more compelling. But the aggression was continued.
33. Now we come to the time when there was the Geneva
Conference, in which a specific agreement was then signed,
solemnly agreed upon, that there would be a cease-tire as of
30 July. But that did not mean anything. On 31 July there
was a prearranged operation carried out by the Turkish
forces. And the documents which fell into the hands of the
National Guard show that this was a pm-arranged operation which completely disregarded the agreement at Geneva. Those things are past, but I repeat them here because
they will lead to a very important conclusion that will have
to be recalled. I do not expect the Security Council members

28. What is the lesion to be learned from Cyprus? That if
you are a non-aligned country and you are not also militarily strong you have to ,belong to an alliance, or else provide
your own strength, po;wer and military force. The President
of a very respected country in Europe brought this point out
at .a significant moment when he said that the tragedy of
Cyprus now shows that there is no international security in
the world whatsoever.
3

to remember these things; they have to be recalled. Therefore, the aggression continued.

would give ‘some people and some international publications the right to say, “Well, after the affair of Cyprus;,we
can now say that only force wins”.

34. Now, after that, we have further resolutions recalling
the situation. And on 14 August a new and very ferocious
attack and invasion began. But what happened in the meantime? What happened was that during that period of the
violation of the cease-fire resolutions and agreements, the
invader, in complete command of the sea and the air,
brought in new forces, increasing his forces in the island
tenfold. The 40 tanks became 400, the troops increased to
40,000. And all this time there was no move made to call the
violator of the resolutions to order. No one said, “Look
here, we have adopted resolutions unanimously”-we
hear
about resolutions adopted with a majority vote, but these
were unanimous resolutions-“for
the withdrawal of the
troops. But instead, not only are you not withdrawing your
troops but you are bringing in ten times as many”. Who
objected to that? The Mediterranean Sea was a sea to be
used for aggression by Turkey. Cyprus had no air force, no
navy and no army worth mentioning, except for a small
National Guard. So the result was 400 tanks, modern tanks’
pitted against 9 ‘old tanks; and what was thought, at the
beginning, to be a normal invasion became an outright
slaughter. Meanwhile the Security Council was sitting there
very calmly, and those who should be the guardians of peace
in the Mediterranean never moved a finger.
35.

38. Is that a good example to set for the world? Is that a
wise thing to do-to do these things in the Middle East, to
choose that vuhrerable$oint? I must tell you-I feel this and
I am sure I am right-that
if there is to be a world conflagration, it will start from the Middle East, that area with which
we are playing now. To satisfy the whims of A and B, weare
playing with this situation. Where is our wisdom? That
reminds me of a poem by T. S. Eliot: “Where is our
wisdom? We have lost it in knowledge”.
As humanity
acquires more and more knowledge scientifically and. technologically, it loses its wisdom. The poem goes on: “Where
is our knowledge? We have lost it in information”. We are
flooded with information from all sides,.from the news
media, from television, from newspapers, from all kinds of
things. But does that help humanity in its wisdom?
39. I am sorry if my words disturb some and make others
want to go to sleep. But the fact remains that we have lost
our wisdom through our knowledge, and that is the only
explanation for why the world today appears‘& much worse
than it was before; Can moral degradation be compatible
with the progress of science? We have this problem now.
40. I am not going to elaborate on the global issue, which
is, as ,a matter of fact, the most important one. I am,
however, going to elaborate on this question of Cyprus; So
many months have passed since the tragic days of the Security Council meetings on Cyprus and the resolutions that
were adopted. But where is the implementation.of.those
resolutions? Are resolutions to be adopted by the United
Nations only to remain forever unimplemented, ,with
nothing being done to put them into effect? The Charter
provides clearly that Security Council resolutions shahbcthe words are “shall be”-implemented,
and it provides the
means for such implementation. Article 39 makes provision
for the determination of a case that calls for intervention by
the Council because there has been aggression. And there
was interventiog.yes,
by resohition. But another Article,
Article 41, provtdes for implementation and says that there
must be implementation by means falling short of the use of
force. Article 41 does ‘not call ‘for the use of force, but
provides for various other ways of bringing pressure on an
invader or an aggressor so as to stop him..That is provided
for in Article 41. And Article 42 ,says clearly that if those
measures prove inadequate to stop the aggression and the
war, or whatever it may be, then other measures should be
taken to that end. But it has been the practice, and some may
say it is a very ‘honoured practice, to adopt resolutions
without implementation and to patch things up somehow or
,’
,! :.
other.
:
‘.I ’

Now,-is this a hopeful sign for the future of the world?

Maybe it is. Maybe it is a trend of eventsthat will have to
take its course. Maybe it is inevitable, predetermined, ttiat
this should be the course. And the weapons used were
weaponsin the possession
of the invader asa memberof a
powerful alliance, under an agreementthat they were not to
be usedfor purposesother than defence.But during all those
six weeks when those weapons were being transported to
Cyprus, not a word was said to the invader. No one said,
“You have to stop this, becausethe weaponsyou are using
are being used illegally**.That is another aspect.
36. Should this becovered up?We understoodthat there is
a principle of avoiding cover-ups. Therefore I hope I will be
forgiven if I do not participate in the cover-up.
37. This is the situation in which we find ourselvestoday.
The fact that Cyprus is ruined is not very important. One
little country lessor one little country more doesnot make
much difference in the minds of many people, perhaps.But
our world is one and indivisible, and particularly in our era
of interdependence,what happensin one little country has
repercussions,and its moral effects cannot leave others
undisturbed. Whether they like it or not, whether they take
notice of it or not, in the very nature of things the repercussionsand ripples of this situation in Cyprus, which I need
not describe,cannot but affect the entire international community. In fact, they have affected it. We have noticed that
since then, within two months, there hasbeena significant
deterioration in the situation-in the Middle East. This has
been remarked and commented upon in the international
press,at leastin somepublications that I have read. And we
must not forget that the Middle East isthe mostdangerous
spot, where every effort should be exerted towards keeping
the concept of peace,the concept of the United Nations, the
conceptsof justice, non-aggressionand the non-useof force,
in the foreground, so asto avoid creating circumstancesthat

41. That has sometimes workedi but it will not always
work. And we have come to the time when it did not work at
all. This case will of course be followed by other cases when
it will not work. Wherever it did work, it did so in such a way
that allowed the situation of war to continue as, for instance,
in the Middle East;
’
,‘,
42. Security Council resolution 343(1973) was adomed
but it hasnot beenimplemented.In.‘the caseof the Middle
4

.
sequence. I read them in sequence in order to supplement
this present report. Leaving out the other things, I find in
document S1113531Add.25 that, only with respect to
UNFICYP,

Ea’st, there was a balance of power in aid of the resolution.
In Cyprus, there was no balance of power; it was purely
international security; in the circumstances of Cyprus, there
was no balance at all. And because there was no balance, it
was left quite derelict. But what does it matter?

“In Larnaca district, an UNFICYP
patrol vehicle,
painted white with United Nations markings and carrying a United Nations flag, was attacked by Turkish aircraft in the area two miles south of Goshi. The Turkish
aircraft made three passes at the vehicle, tiring at it on the
second and third passes. Of four soldiers of the Austrian
contingent in the vehicle, three were killed. The Force
Commander lodged the strongest protest with the Turkish Commander.” [S/11353/Add.25, para. 16.1

43. That should really give food for thought. I think that it
is time that some means of implementation be found in
order to save the situation in Cyprus. It is very easy to say:
“Oh, carry on negotiations’*. But will these negotiations be
carried out when the invader is riding astride a significant
part of the island and dictating his terms in Cyprusdictating them even right here in the Security Council? Can
these negotiations be equal, just and fair under the pressure
of the foreign invader in occupation, who says: “Now, if you
do not accept this or that, I am going to attack. And I am
free to attack because there is no international security at
all.” Is that the kind of situation that gives rise to hope?

Later, in the Famagusta area, we find:
“(a) Three killed, all members of the Austrian contingent. In this connexion, an inquiry made after the incident.. . reveals that the victims were killed by napalm.

44. I should like for a moment to return to the resolution
that has just been adopted by the Council [resolution 364
(1974)]. There were no complaints against this resolution;
but I would remind the Council that three points were raised
in the letter which I addressed to you today, Mr. President,
in respect of this resolution, to the effect that it should
contain, directly or by implication-and
I hope that it does
contain .it by implication-a
reference to all the interim
reports issued by the Secretary-General between 21 July and
31 October, so that the phrase in the resolution
“Noring from the report of the Secretary-General
6 December 1974.. .‘*,

“(b) 32 wounded..

para. 15J.

49. Was that all? No. Napalm fell everywhere; but I mentioned only cases with respect to the United Nations Force.
We also find in these reports the destruction of hospitals by
repeated bombings-every
kind of destruction.
50. ‘Then we come to the humanitarian aspect. Food sent
for distribution was not allowed by the Turkish troops to
reach the areas for which it was intended. They said: “We
shall take it; it is our business to distribute it”. But, as a result
of this attitude, the Red Cross did not think it worth while to
send any more food, according to the cases reported here in
these documents. I shall not take up any more time to point
out all these things, but I wish to emphasize that anyone who
wants to understand the situation in Cyprus cannot read the
Secretary-General’s last report only. He must take the pmvious reports into account, the reports which are the true
reports of the situation.

of

would include those reports by implication, because those
reports are the ones reflecting the situation in Cyprus, and
not the one dated 6 December 1974. Reading the latter
report only is not sufftcient to understand the situation
there.
45. Therefore, I shall take it that where the draft resolution
mentions
“i&kg
from the report of the Secretary-General
6 December 1974.. .‘;,

.” [S/11353/Add.28.

51. Now, in paragraph
report of 17 October
instructive-we
read:

of

11 of the, Secretary-General’s
1974-which
is really very

“The conditions of some 2,OOO’Greek Cypriots living in
central locations in areas under Turkish control give
cause for concern.” [S/ll468/Add.4,
para. 11.1

that necessarily implies &I the reports that have been issued
by the Secretary-General after the report of May 1974-and
these reports are most:significant.
t_

All that is of course an understatement. We know and we
agree and we accept the .understatement of the United
Nations report, because, to a certain extent, they have to
keep things quiet. But they cannot keep them so quiet as not
to show something of the reality.

46. That was the firs/point which I raised, and I consider it
very important. Anyone wishing to know.the situation in
Cyprus as of today has to be made aware of what has been
happening in Cyprus that led to this situation.

“The condition of some 8,000 Greek Cypriots who continue to live in the Karpas area has deteriorated. Little is
known of the conditions under which 2,500 Greek Cypriots continue to live in.. . the Kyrenia area.” [Ibid.]

47. If you read those reports, you will see something that
does not appear at all elsewhere. It is the repeated reference
to napalm bombings. If you read the report of the SecretaryGeneral dated 6 December 1974, you will find nothing
‘showing this fact. I shall quote from some of those reports.

Nothing is known. Why? He also refers to the 400 living in
Morphou in terrible conditions under Turkish control.
Why? Because the United Nations Force is not allowed to
enter the area. In this report, it repeatedly says that it is not
allowed to enter the area and that it is obstructed in its work;
whereas

48. Paragraph 6 of ‘the Secretary-General’s
report contained in document S’cll353 says that in Famagusta district
there was napalm bombing. If you give these reports a
thorough reading, you will find that there has been a continuous use of napalm. I did not know that there was such
extensive napalm bombing until I read these reports in

“In areas under National Guard control, UNFICYP is
free to move.. . without restriction and is therefore in a
5

position to make a major contribution towards the security and humanitarian needs of the Turkish Cypriots
there.” [Ibid., para. 4.1

rity and may further
measures.. .*’

deteriorate

‘unless additional

and then goes on
But the UNFICYP contingent was forcibly confined to the
Carl Gustav camp at Famagusta by Turkish forces and
there was some looting around the perimeter of the walled
city.

“ZZaving in mind the relevant provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations and in particular .its Article 2,
paragraph 4, which reads:
“ ‘All Members shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force. . .* ‘*.

52. There are other cases, although I shall not go into all of
them, of interference and not allowing the Force tooperate.
And in this report too the Secretary-General refers to the
poor conditions of operation of the United Nations Force.

I therefore believe it can be used in international relations
without its mandate being restricted at all in that respect. I
do not wish to elaborate further on this point, but we wish
the United Nations Force to be able to operate effectively
with respect to both its size and its mandate.

53. All this is said in respect of my letter to the President
and that is why in that letter I pointed out that to paragraph 5 of resolution 364 (1974), which reads:

57. Our warm thanks go also to Mr. Weckmann-Muiioz,
who carries out his grave and difficult work with patience
and skill. We are also indebted to the Commander of the
United Nations Force, General Prem Chand, who carries
out a most demanding and delicate task effectively and with
sincerity, patience and devotion to his principles, and to his
staff. We express our appreciation also to the officers and
men under his command for their selfless service and sacrifice. Our sincere gratitude is due also to the Governments of
the countries which, with a noble sense of responsibility and
devotion to the concept of preserving the peace of the world
through the :United Nations, ‘make the operation of
UNFICYP possible by means of their generous contributions in men and money.

“Appeals again to all parties concerned to extend their
full co-operation to the United Nations Peace-keeping
Force.. .‘*
should be added the words “allowing it the needed freedom
of movement,” and it should then go on as at present “in its
continuing performance of its duties”. So although it is not
there, I take it that it is there by implication, that this appeal
means “allow the United Nations Force freedom of movement”. I think this is something that the Secretary-General
particularly needs, in order for the United Nations Force to
be able to function. This was the second point, and I take it
that it is contained in the resolution by implication.

58. The PRESIDENT:
Turkey.

54. The third point was about the implementation of the
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions and,
particularly as the Assembly resolution is endorsed by resolution 365 (1974) just adopted, I consider the latter to be
satisfactory, for it implies the other two parts and in fact
contains these. Therefore I shall not take up any more time.
I know we are at a difficult stage, but it was fundamentally
necessary to mention these things.

I now call on the representative of

59. Mr. OLCAY (Turkey): Mr. President, I never know
whether it is proper under the rules of procedure for an
outsider like myself, who is yet a frequent participant in the
meetings of this august body, to address compliments to the
President. Nevertheless, I have done so in the past, so permit
me to express to you, as a personal friend, my delegation’s
satisfaction at seeing you presiding over this meeting of the
Security Council., Your well-known and widely acknowledged qualities as an experienced, diplomat, the tact and
patience you have displayed duringspme of the most critical
meetings of the Council and your close interest in and
knowledge of the problem of Cyprus cannot but be considered an assurance of a constructive debate to which we at
least, for our part, have been looking forward.

55. Before concluding, I should like to express once again
my Government’s deep appreciation and feelings of gratitude to the Secretary-General and his collaborators both
here and in Cyprus for their relentless and highly commendable efforts in promoting peace and harmony in Cyprus in
accordance with the principles of the Charter and the objectives of the United Nations.

60. My delegation has time and again made it clear that if
the reality of the situation in Cyprus is overlooked the
effectiveness of the United Nations in its peace-keeping and
peace-making endeavours will be seriously impaired. We
have made this clear formally in the Council whenever we
have been given a chance to express our views. We again
made it clear during the extensive consultations that were
held before this present meeting.
I
>,
6 1. We deeply regret that the’presentiesolution once again
fails to note this reality by referring in% fourth preambuiar
paragraph to an entity-namely,
“the Government of
Cyprus”which we consider to be nonexistent.

56. The United Nations Force, in very difftcult circumstances, is now doing what it can. However; it is my submission that the resolution under which the United Nations
.Force was established [resolution 186(1964)] gives it a mandate beyond the intercommunal mandate. It has an international mandate and therefore it can be deployed and can
intervene whenever it is necessary at this critical time to
preserve the cease-fire between the Turkish forces and the
Cypriot positions. The resolution shows very plainly that it
has a clear international character since it begins:
‘Noting that the present situation with regard to
.Cyprus is likely to threaten international peace and secu6

62. The Turkish Government will, of course, accept the
presence of UNFICYP in Cyprus solely because it sincerely
believes that its presence is essential and useful in the existing
circumstances in the island.
63. As for resolution 364 (1974) just adopted, I regret to
say.that my Government does not consider itself bound by
its provisions because, as I have explained, it fails to reflect
the reality in Cyprus.
64. .As regards the second resolution which the Council
has adopted [resolution 365 (1974)], I wish to say thefollowing. The resolution bases itself largely on General Assembly
resolution 3212 (XXIX). My Government’s interpretation
of resolution 3212 (XXIX) was given by the then Foreign
Minister of Turkey, Mr. Turan Gunes. My Government still
stands firmly by that interpretation.
65. This time the extension’of the mandate of UNFICYP
is taking place under completely new circumstances. It is
precisely because things have changed in Cyprus that the
Secretary-General, in his wisdom and as the depositary of
the Organization’s highest standards of law, has judged it
necessary to obtain from the only remaining representatives
of legitimacy in Cyprus their consent for an action affecting
Cyprus as a whole. This would be our definition of
government-if
there still is the.shadow of a government in
Cyprus-and
our interpretation of the term “government”
is the President and the Vice-President, or, more correctly,
the leaders of the Turkish and Greek’Cypriot communities,
who are striving, it is hoped, to create what is,needed more
*
than anything else m Cyprus, a legitimate government.
66. These ,new circumstances, and the events of last
summer that led to them, have been extensively discussed in
the United Nations, both in the Security Council and in the
General Assembly. Therefore, I do not intend to go into the
substance of the Cyprus question. However, I should like to
comment on certain realities that seem to have been overlooked, or seem to be out of their true perspective. I shall do
so not for the purpose of provoking or entering into any
polemics, but simply out of my desire for a healthy approach
to a peaceful solution of the problem. This will depend
largely on the recognition of certain facts, both by the
parties directly concerned and by any other State, for that
matter, which .is resolved to utilize its efforts in bringing
about a peaceful solution that would be acceptable to all.
67. The first point I feel myself in duty bound to make,
even at the risk of repeating myself, is the essence of our
problem, which consists in the answers to the following
questions: What is the Republic of Cyprus? Who is to speak
for the Republic of Cyprus? And is there actually a Government in the Republic of Cyprus?
,j
.’
68. We have alreadj~hstened to the statement of a Greek
ambassador; the ambassador of Greece will no doubt make
a statement after me. But the Republic of Cyprus was
intended to be a State based on two communities whose
Government also, naturally, was intended to be a Government of those two communities. The trouble started the
moment the Government on the island became the advocate
of the interests, aspirations and the supremacy of only one of
those communities. It then lost its legitimacy,and gradually

reduced itself to a mere de facto administration. That was,
and still is, the reason why I have persistently objected to
Ambassador Rossides’ speaking on behalf of Cyprus as a
whole. I do so not out of lack of respect for him: he has
always been a faithful representative, as far as I can judge,of
the interests of Hellenism; but this is precisely what disquahties him from the claim of representing the people of Cyprus
as a whole.
69. Now, during this General Assembly session, all those
who have sat behind the nameplate of Cyprus have shown
themselves to be, in the eyes and ears of the whole world, in
every single Committee, merely Greek representatives. In
fact, their speeches could have been interchanged with the
speeches of the representatives of Greece.
70. During this same General Assembly session, the Special Political Committee listened to the representatives of
both communities. Had not the Members of the United
Nations then become aware of the existing duality and the
differences of views? Has the membership of the Council
during the last 11 years witnessed any similarity between ’
what the Turkish Cypriot representative said in the Special i
Political Committee a month ago and what they have heard
from those who claim to represent Cyprus as they speak here
at the United Nations, or, for that matter, in the various
capitals of each and every country represented around this
table where Cyprus is purported to be represented7
7 1. Now, Ambassador Rossides, furthermore, seems to be
out ‘of touch with the realities of the island from which he
has been absent perhaps too long. After all, after all that has
happened, did he not, in an unbelievable display of bad
taste, utilize the occasion of the eulogy he pronounced for
the late U Thant to speak of the unitary-State formula for
Cyprus? On that occasion he usurped his capacity as Chairman of the Asian Group, just as the mission he heads has
been usurping,the Constitution of Cyprus for over a decade
here. That, I submit, should not be tolerated any longer.
72. In all honesty, I must say that that one-sided approach
did not contribute to the cause of peace, as events have
proved. I doubt that it will do so in future. Therefore, we
should have liked to see that duality reflected in clearer
terms in the offtcial documents of the United Nations.
73. Having said that, let me turn to another aspect of the
question. Anybody who is not very familiar with the problem of Cyprus, when reading the report of the SecretaryGeneral, could easily jump to a false conclusion. I am sure
that the image reflected by the report is unintentional; however, it seems to us that what happened in Cyprus last
summer was something between the Turkish forces and the
Turkish Cypriot fighters, on the one hand, and the Greek
Cypriot National Guard, on the other.
74. I notice that in his statement a moment ago;Ambassador Rossides also, in complaining that the report, if read
alone, would not give a true picture of the situation, mentioned that earlier reports should be read but he was careful
to start with reports from 21 July onwards.
75. Now, things happened before 21 July; yet this very
important element is manifestly neglected-an
element

which would increase the hardships of both communities. In
this connexion I must emphasize-because
usually little is 6
said on the subject-my
Government’s deep concern over
the Turkish Cypriots, some 30,000 of whom are still living in
Greek-controlled areas. We sincerely hope that the parallel
between their security and the over-all tranquillity in the
island will be rightly appreciated.
’ -a,
’

which played a vital role in the past, an element which still
plays a vital role, and which will no doubt continue to play a
vital but, it is hoped, more constructive role in the future.
76.’ We all know that nothing can occur in Cyprus to
which Greece can remain alien. In 1963, when the fighting
first broke out, it was the Greek national contingent which
actively took part in the attacks against the Turkish community. Later on it was the junta of Papadopoulos, as a result
of the agreement which eased the 1967 crisis, which pulled
back 10,000 Greek soldiers sent there upon the invitation of
Archbishop Makarios by the democratic Greek Governments which preceded the junta. It was the junta of Ioannides, about whose past activities the Archbishop’s speech
contained horrendous revelations, which later staged the
coup that, led to the events before 21 July.

82. Before ending my original statement, I should’like to
express our appreciation to the Secretary-General, to his
Special Representative and to the Force Commander for
their untiring efforts.
83. Since it seems that this is the last time I am addressing
the Council this year, I hope, let me also express my delegation’s deep appreciation to those outgoing members of the
Security Council. Together we have lived through important and sometimes crucial meetings. We shall remember
the good faith and understanding we have received from
them.
“

77. I would not be disclosing a military secret if I were to
say what is known to all that the fiercest battles of July and
August were fought between the Turkish and the Greek
national forces. Even the so-called army of Cyprus, illegal as
it is and as it always has been, the Greek Cypriot National
Guard, as it is called, was not only commanded, as it still
is, by Greek officers, but also to a large extent was, and is,
still composed of Greek soldiers of every rank. This is an
element which no student of the Cypriot question should
lose sight of.

84. ,Mr. President, that was the end of my original statement. You need not be unduly alarmed and I will not speak
for long after this, but I have some things to say and I am
prompted to say these things for the reason I am going to
explain at this point. First of all, the previous speaker, with
his skill, once again succeeded in luring me to answer some
of his allegations against my country. This is, one of the
reasons I am going to add a few more words;
Furthermore-and
this is a bit more serious-he is also the
author of a letter circulated a few days ago [S/11569] which
does provoke certain reactions.

78. These were the two main points I wished to comment
upon. Now, let me briefly reiterate my Government’s position to the benefit of some and, I hope, to the relief of all.
The Government of Turkey sees no alternative to the peaceful solution of the problem. As we have repeatedly made
clear at every official level, we have no territorial claim over
Cyprus. Our first and foremost anxiety is the security and
the well-being of the Turkish-Cypriot
community and,
furthermore, of the two communities in Cyprus.

85. 1 have expressed our desire to enter into meaningful
negotiations that will bring about a peaceful settlement.
This also seems to be the desire of the international community as a whole. To our friends who urge us to negotiate, I
have a plea to make. Show us someone to negotiate with.
The will to negotiate cannot only be displayed by appointing
negotiators. One must be in a mo’od and in a determination
for a dialogue. If I am not clear enough, I ,would now
recommend that the members of the Council read a document which was published on 6 December 1974,, the same
date as the Secretary-General’s report, therefore prepared in
advance, under the symbol S/l 1569, a letter submitted by
the representative of the Greek Cypriots. I ask the members
of the Council whether they consider that the mentality that
produced these pages of hatred, lies’and obscenity is ready
for negotiations. The letter is signed by the representative of
one of the parties to the Cyprus conflict and logically should
reflect the views of that particular party. Does it?

79. For the last 11 years we have tried every possible
peaceful channel to accomplish this through securing the
well-being of the members of the Turkish Cypriot community threatened in their existence. The stubborn resistance of
the other side to recognize certain facts brought us where we
are today. Turkey has intervened in Cyprus to put an end to
a situation which was not conducive to the peaceful coexistence of the two communities. My Government has no
doubts whatsoever over the legitimacy of its action, but it
does not consider it as an end in itself.
80. We are prepared, as we have always said, to enter into
meaningful negotiations with the other parties directly concerned to settle this question once and for all. Our experience has shown us that a bi-regional federal solution is the
only way to deal with the question. Such a solution will not
only be within the framework of the principles of the United
Nations but it will also satisfy the obligations set out by
international treaties which we have solemnly signed. It was
in this frame of mind that my Government welcomed the
constructive dialogue between the heads of the two communities in Cyprus.

.f
..
86. The official negotiators of that party in Cyprus say one
thing. Their so-called leader says another. And here their
representative has altogether another voice. Whom are we
to believe? And this is the problem of the so-called Government of Cyprus-the
Government of an independent and
non-aligned country which needs a foreign Government’s
blessing before entering into negotiations with the other
community in its own country. I consider that it is high time
to put an end to this masquerade and admit what everybody
knows by now to be the true situation.

81. It is greatly hoped that the recent adjustments within
the Greek Cypriot community will not adversely affect the
chances of negotiations. That would be a very sad thing
8

the Council, allow me to address to you my congratulations
on having assumed the Presidency of this Council. Everybody in this chamber looks to you with confidence. I shall
add that I personally look to you with admiration and
appreciation for the way you have conducted the difficult
consultations which took place for two days before our
meeting and all the efforts you deployed in the many days
before that.

87. As Ambassador Rossides has published a document
which is a compilation, more or less, of his earlier
documents-and
that makes it even more difficult to understand why he ehose that particular moment to present that
compilation-1
would just, to refresh the memories of the
members of the Council, mention other documents which
ought to be read in conjunction with the Rossides document. I must say, although I have not that kind oipride
of authorship, that their English style, while perhaps not
all that it should be, is at least more in consonance with
diplomatic language. The documents are the following:
S/I 1365-I shall spare you all the dates, because it is a long
list-S/l 1394, S/l 1409, S/l 1410, S/l 1412, S/l 1420,
S/l 1422, S/l 1425, S/l 1435, S/l 1439, S/l 1458, S/l 1462,
S/l 1466, s/l 1489, S/l 1493 and S/l 1505.

91. It is fitting, 1 believe, to start by thanking the Secretary-General. He has always been a key figure in the problem
of Cyprus, but in the six-month period covered by his report
and resulting in what I shall call the tragedy of Cyprus, his
task and role have been very different and very dif!icu!t. The
people of Cyprus as a whole owe much to him. But I shall
rather speak here of the people of Greece. We shall never
forget the way he helped during the actual fighting. He did
not help us, he helped everybody. That is his merit. And by
helping everybody he helped the United Nations. I am sure
my Turkish colleague will recognize that. He then helped in
establishing a cease-fire, and we all know how frustrating
that proved to be. He paid numerous visits to Athens and
my Government appreciated each one of them. After the
cease-fire, he arranged for the Nicosia talks, the talks on
which we all placed many hopes. The Secretary-General
helped mainly from New York. His representative, Ambassad&- Weckmann-Muflog
helped on the spot. It was very
often a very courageous enterprise. We have appreciated his
efforts and his wisdom. Being myself in New York, I have in
many instances to deal with the Under-Secretaries-General,
Mr. Guyer and Mr. Urquhart. I wish to praise their competence and thank them both sincerely for their human
approach to the tragedy and to myself.

88. Tragic as may be the loss of any innocent life or the
suffering-through
violence of any human being, war will
inevitably cause them. It is war itself that we should try to
avoid or eliminate. But what to me represents the ultimate
depth of the abyss in human behaviour, what none of the
individual crimes described in that document can, even if
proved to be true, ever reach in horror, is the incident
innocently related by the Pastor of the Orthodox Church in
Cyprus related to a!! distinguished representatives Members
of the Organisation who cared to listen to him, when the
Archbishop was referring to an offer made to him by a man
wearing the uniform of an honourable army, friendly to the
Archbishop, to mass murder the whole of the Turkish population of the island. Mr. President, neither you nor I norany
of the’ honourable persons in this chamber, including certainly I am sure Ambassador Rossides, are approached in
our daily lives by professional murderers offering to get rid
of our individual adversaries for us. Nor have I heard or
known of any such offer on a wholesale scale addressed to
any statesman in any honourable Government. What sinister atmosphere was allowed to reign in the Byzantine court
of Nicosia-I
prefer to use the name “Nicosia” instead of
“Lefkosa” in this particular connexion-for
such a conversation to be even possible, to be even thinkable. 1 am sure
that the mind of every person in this august body shrinks at
the image. And yet, if memories were not short, we should
all remember a picture published by the international
press-which
is usua!!y.rgnored by Ambassador Rossides,
but to which he has made ample reference in his last letter
because Turkey was the object of the press reports-of
a
photograph of Makarios wearing his pectoral cross and his
smile in the act of blessing a hand grenade destined to kill or
maim, if we!! aimed, a crowd of his own countrymen belonging to the wrong faith. That was the man, that is the man,
and when I look at it now I see even a kind of poetic justice
in the fact that the immediate successor of Makarios was
an uncommonly bloodthirsty common murderer. Bloodstained hands seem, for some obscure reason, of which
Freud would have perhaps given an analysis, to have a
particular appeal to the Greek Cypriots.

92. Last but not least I should like to express the appreciation of my Government to the countries which provided the
forces for UNFICYP as well as to those which made their
operation possible. The gratitude of my Government and
the people of Greece goes mainly to the families of those
UNFICYP members who perished for peace.
93. The report of the Secretary-General is the story of a
tragedy desperately trying not to appear tragic. It is reserved
and cautious. But we have never expected or wanted it to be
otherwise. It is not for the Secretary-General to pass judgement; we can do that, and the report provides us with ample
information and factual elements for us to do so were that
our purpose. It records the number of cease-fires and an
equal number of violations of the cease-fires and an equal
number of advances in the territory of Cyprus. I shall read
paragraph 26 of the report, regarding violations and
advances:
“In a number of cases, the observations of UNFICYP
in this regard were heeded, and the advancing troops were
withdrawn. In other cases, areas occupied after 16 August
are still being held. This applies in particular to Turkish
advances in late August in the Pyroi area, in September in
the Galini area, from late September to mid-October
north of the Dhekelia Sovereign Base Area, in late October south of Famagusta in the Dherinia area, and, most
recently, in the Yerolakkos area, west of Nicosia.”

89. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Greece on whom I now call.
:.>i
90. Mr. CARAYANNIS
(Greece): Mr. President, having
the feeling that I am by now a c!ient,a good client, I hope, of
9

_

,

\

I would emphasize and draw attention to the words “most
recently’*. But I shall continue reading the same paragraph,
since I like to be objective:

aIso. Allow me, in this respect;’ to read a dispatch from
Nicosia published in the London Dailv Telegraph of last
Monday; 9 December:

“There have also been some National Guard violations
by movement which have been observed and dealt with
by UNFICYP.”

“Disillusion is sweeping the 25,000 Turkish Cypriots
who followed their politicians’ call to abandon homes in
the south of the island and move north.’ ’ ”

In another chapter, the report recounts the number ofSecurity Council resolutions and the equal number of their
vioiations.

“Exact figures are impossible to obtain from the.
military-controlled sector, but it is known that thousands
have no homes, jobs or money.
“People I have met say they are living worse lives than
the Greek Cypriot refugees in the south.

94. But the most staggering picture-perhaps
because it
gives a strong sense of actuality-is
the comparison made in
the report between the occupied north and the free south,
especially the ,comparison with respect to the UNFICYP
operation. I quote from paragraphs 31 and 33:

“Some have managed to slip back to their homes,
mainly in the Larnaca and Limassol areas.
“Others would like to leave but believe, with justitication, that they would be prevented by the military commanders who are running life,in the north-rather
than
Mr. Denkta$ Turkish Cypriot administration.”

“Since the start of the Turkish intervention UNFICYP
has, in general, been restricted in its freedom of movement in areas controlled by the Turkish forces, and in
several cases the Turkish military authorities have
demanded the removal of UNFICYP observation posts
and camps from such areas.”
“. . . .
In the northern areas the restrictions imposed
by the military authorities have made it difficult to carry
out some of these tasks . . . . The inability of the Force to
provide the same protection for Greek Cypriots in the
north as for the Turkish Cypriots in the south has been
protested repeatedly by the Cyprus Government.”
’

98. I should like especially to address this last remark to
Mr. Celik, whom we would all be very happy to hear-in a few
moments and who recently spent a period of time in New
York and not in the occupied part of Cyprus. This is my
original statement, to use the phraseology of my colleague
from Turkey. I shall have to make two or three points in
reference to his speech and I hope to be much briefer than he
has been.
99. Referring to resolution 364 (1974), just. adopted
unanimously by the Security Council, Ambassador Olcay
announced to us that his Government would.not be bound
by the provisions of that resolution. I shall only say that it is
regrettable, and it is all the more regrettable that Turkey felt
that it was not bound by many other resoluti&
unanimously accepted by the Council.

95. It is obvious that the life of UNFICYP is deliberately
made difftcuh in the north. That is not fair to UNFICYP,
and it is not fair to the Greek Cypriots. And that is possible
only because the Turkish Government chooses to disregard
the resolutions of the Council. If the Turkish Government
had any intention at all of arriving at a negotiated solution,
as the Turkish representative has just indicated, it would, I
submit, be helpful so to indicate by changing its ,attitude
towards UNFICYP.

100. Ambassador Okay explained, at some length, why
and how his Government is not recognizing ttie Govern-’
ment of Cyprus. I shall only say that this also is regrettable,
especially in view of the fact thit there are 137 Governments
which recognize the Government of Cyprus, and Turkey is
the only one which does not. tie ended his’statement by
referring to a paper which was,’ I think, circulated to the
Council by the representative of Cyprus [ibid.]. I was quite
astonished to see that the representative’ of Turkey was
horrified by the paper and not by the actions described in the
paper. But I shall leave Mr. Rossides to answer that. In his
non-recognition of the Cypriot Government, he went so far
as to call Mr. Rossides the Greek Ambassador and myself
the Ambassador of Greece. Well, I shaH not ‘mind as long as
he calls me by the right name. I am on!) afraid that he may
spread some confusion in the Council, but I do believe that
by now the Council is used to these practices.
-

96. The Greek Government agrees with the recommendation of the Secretary-General concerning the further extension by six months of the stationing of the United Nations
Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus. We furthermore agree that
that extension is necessary and, as a matter of fact, vital not
only for the maintenance of the cease-tire, not only for the
security of the population and the humanitarian relief assistance it provides, but also, and I would say primarily, the
presence of the Force is necessary in the search for a peaceful
solution of the present situation. The presence of the Force
is making present life a little easier, but it will be a mistake, in
our view, if by doing so it prolongs this kind of life. That
must be understood by the most directly concerned Greek
and -Turkish Cypriots alike. The tragedy they both went
through will help them in that understanding. As a matter of
fact I am convinced that they will realize it and understand
it, if Turkey allows them to:

101. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is Mr.
Celik, to whom the Council has edended an invitation
under rule, 39 of the provisional rules of procedure. In
accordance with the decision taken at the outset of the
meeting I invite Mr. Celik to take a’piace at the Council
.,
:i
table.
.,

97.. A speedy solution of the Cyprus problem is necessary
to Turkey and Greece alike. It is also necessary to the oeace
of the whole region. But those who need it moit of all a;e the
people of Cyprus, Greeks and Turks alike. The present
situation spreads misery not only to the beaten Greek Cypriots. It spreads misery to the victorious Turkish Cypriots
_

At the invitation of the President, Mr. $eIik took a place at
the Security Council table.
10

President and the Vice-President of the Republic of Cyprus;
this can be the only valid interpretation of the fourth preambular paragraph of the resolution just adopted; because if,
by the term “Government”,
the Greek Cypriot administration is implied-which
does not and cannot in any way
represent the Turkish Cypriot community-then
I would
like to put on record that this resolution wihnot be binding
on the Turkish Cypriot community. The General Assembly,
having taken into consideration this reality on the island,
very wisely avoided using the word “Government”
in its
resolution 3212 (XXIX) which has been endorsed by the
Security Council today.

102. Mr. CELIK: Mr. President, I should like to thank you
and all the members of the Security Council for having
allowed me to participate in the deliberations ofthe Council
today.
103. Since 1964, when the Turkish Cypriots had been
forcefully ousted from their Government, Cyprus had been
represented at the United Nations by a Greek Cypriot delegation, which does not and cannot represent the Turkish
Cypriot community. I am therefore most grateful for the
opportunity
given me to present the views of my
community.

110. During the debate on the Cyprus question last month
in the Special Political Committee, where the representatives of the Greek and Turkish communities were given the
opportunity to present their views, I presented the Turkish
Cypriot case in a lengthy statement. I do not intend to repeat
here what I said a month ago, but as I did not find the
opportunity to do so in the plenary Assembly, where only
the Greek Cypriot side spoke, I would like to put on record
now the views of my community regarding resolution 3212
(XXIX) endorsed here today.

104. With resolution 364 (1974) just adopted, the mandate
of UNFICYP has been extended for another six months,
until 15 June 1975. The Vice-President of Cyprus, Mr.
Denktas, who is the leader of the Turkish Cypriot community and the President of the autonomous Turkish Cypriot
administration, who has been consulted on the matter, has
signified his consent through the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in Cyprus, Mr. Luis WeckmannMtioz, for the extension of the mandate.
105. We believe in the usefulness of UNFICYP and hope
that a peaceful solution to the Cyprus problem will be found
soon and that there will be no need for a further extension
after 15 June 1975.

111. In principle, the resolution is generally acceptable to
the Turkish Cypriot community. We welcome the call to all
States to respect the sovereignty, independence, territorial
integrity and non-alignment of the Republic of Cyprus.

106. I should like to pay a tribute here to all those associated with United Nations efforts: the distinguished
Secretary-General, his Special Representative, the Force
Commander, members of the Force and members of the
Secretariat. They all deserve our fullest commendation. I
would also express our gratitude to the countries which have
contributed men and money to UNPiCYP in Cyprus.

112. It is an historic fact that the Turkish community,
through its relentless efforts and sacrifices, has been the only
effective guarantee for the independence of Cyprus. Had it
not been for the Turkish community and Turkey’s guarantee, the Greek Cypriots, who never wanted independence
but instead, in collusion with and with the support of
Greece, struggled for enosis, would have destroyed the independent Republic and united the island with Greece long
ago. The Turkish community will continue to support the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Cyprus at all costs.

107. In the resolution just adopted, the word “Government” has been used. The problem of Cyprus is the problem
of government. The question of Cyprus is now not the
question of majorities and minorities. A minority can only
exist within a nation, and as there is no Cypriot nation there
can be no minority COmmUnity
in Cyprus. The fact is that we
have two distinct national communities in Cyprus, equal
partners and co-founders in the independence of the island.
The so-called Government of Cyprus as it stands today does
not represent the Turkish Cypriot community. Therefore,
the Greek Cypriot delegation at the United Nations can only
speak for the Greek Cypriot side.

113. We also welcome the commendation of the contacts
and negotiations that are taking place-on
an equal
footing-through
the good offices of the Secretary-General
between representatives of the two, national communities.
My community will do everything possible to assist in tinding a negotiated settlement.
114. As regards paragraph 5 of the resolution, concerning
the refugees, it will be appreciated that the solution of this
problem is closely linked to the final political solution. The
refugee problem in Cyprus is not new. It is new only for the
Greek Cypriot side. The Turkish community has lived with
the refugee problem for 11 years.

108. The truth is that since 1964 there have been two
completely separate,“distinct
administrations, one Greek
and one Turkish, administering the Greek and Turkish
areas respectively. The Greek Cypriot administration has
never provided governmental services in the Turkishcontrolled areas and Makarios’ writ never prevailed in those
areas. The Government, as such, therefore, is for all intents
and purposes non-edstent.

115. During 1964-1967, when the Cyprus crisis was at its
worst and Turkish villages, one after another, were suffering
largescale attacks from united Greek Cypriot and mainland Greek armed forces, so that Turkish Cypriots were
.afraid to return to their abandoned homes and villagesthese were either mixed villages where Turks were in the
minority, or small isolated Turkish villages surrounded by
large and hostile Greek villages-Makarios
kept calling
upon
the
Turks
to
return
to
their
villages,
promising
to
_

109. The Repnblic.bf Cyprus exists as an entity only in
international relations, whereas internally it is two separate
autonomous administrations. If there is anything at all left
that we may refer to as the constitutional Government of
Cyprus, it is the institutions of the presidency and the vicepresidency, that is, the Government as represented by the
11

repair their homes and to give them financial assistance for
rehabilitation, knowing full well that, under the prevailing
circumstances, they could not return, for security reasons.
116. But after the Kophinou crisis of November 1967,
when Greece and Turkey came to the brink of war, Greece,
under pressure, had to withdraw its troops, numbering more
than 10,000, from the island and Grivas was recalled to
Athens. There was a relatively normal situation on the
island and some of the Turks could venture to return to their
villages; Makarios, despite his previous oflicial statements at
the United Nations, in the international press and in other
forums, under various pretexts refused to allow them to
do so.
117. The Greek side refused to repair the homes of the
Turkish refugees, which were looted and destroyed by the
Greek Cypriots soon after they were abandoned in 1964; in
cases where the Turkish Cypriot administration could raise
the necessary funds for the repair of the houses, Makarios
arbitrarily assumed the right to decide who could and who
could not return to his home and village. The Greek Cypriot
administration started drawing up lists of “undesirables”
who should not be, and indeed were not, allowed to return
to their homes. Derelikay village in Potamia is a good
example of such practice. Not only were some Turks like
Yusuf Ali Kali refused permission to return to the village,
but the contractors were physically obstructed and prevented by the Greek Cypriot police from repairing the
houses.

reports from Cyprus are not very encouraging. Turkish
Cypriots who are being held as hostages or virtual prisoners
by the Greeks and who are under the constant threat of
murder, looting, rape and arson and who are trying to make
their way to the north are being exploited by the Greek
Cypriots and some of them are murdered in cold blood for
their money--like Nevin Mahmut, age 24;‘l?jeh Mahmut,
age 8; Meryem Niyazi, age 16, Ulfet Osman, age 23; and
Semay Osman, age 3. These are two young mothers,; two
children and a young teen-age girl who were murdered in
cold blood for their money while trying to make their way to
the north in a Greek Cypriot taxi only 10 daysago. This is in
the United Nations records, and it was given wide publicity
in the international press. The life of the Turkish Cypriots in
the south is miserable.
123. In reply to the representative of Greece, Ambassador
Carayannis, whom I greatly respect, I.should like to quotea
recent article from TheNew York Timeswhich appearedon
10 December 1974about the Turkish Cypriots in Paphos
and in southern Cyprus:
“Communal life hasto all interns stopped. Schools have
not reopened since the fighting. The elementary school
now housesrefugeeswhose homes’in town were destroyed or looted and villagerswho have soughtthe safety
of numbers. The high school burned down mysteriously
last month but had not been functioning anyway. Economic life has stopped. Shops have beenlooted and are
for the most part closed.Idlenesshasbrought an increase
in one business:the number of coffee-houseshas risen
from 10 to 23 to provide for the idle men. . . . Employees
of the Turkish communal administration . . . still get
their pay sentfrom Nicosia’sTurkish quarter. The other
principal sourceof funds in Paphos,asin Limassol,isthe
sale of Turkish belongings to Greeks. Furniture and :
household appliancesgo at bargain prices, becausethe
Turks hope eventually to be allowed to leaveand have no
other sourceof income.”

118. In other cases, such as Omorphita, on the outskirts of
Nicosia, from which 6,000 Turks were forcibly ousted by
Greek gunmen in December 1963, it was ruled that the area
was “too sensitive” to have any Turks around, and for 11
years Turks were inhumanly denied access to their homes
and properties.
119. Repeated applications by the Turkish side to set up a
joint committee, under the chairmanship of the United
Nations, for the rehabilitation of the Turkish refugees, free
from all political considerations and all bias, were rejected.
120. The refugee problem cannot be settled as long as the
security risk is present.
121. The illegal Greek mainland officers who carried out
the coup of 1 July are still in Cyprus, .commanding the
well-equipped Greek National Guard. In addition, Stavros
Stavrou, alias Syros, who was Grivas’ second-in-command
in the EOKA-B terrorist organization, has been recalled to
Cyprus to command armed Greek elements. Sampson and
his armed bandits are still at large and unprosecuted. We are
continuously threatened with sabotage and guerrilla warfare, and infiltration attempts into the Turkish area still
continue.
122. The question of the refugees, therefore, can only be
taken up within the framework of the final political settlement. There is another problem, however, which is more
important and more pressing than the problem of displaced
persons. There are today about 40,000 Turkish Cypriots in
the Greek sector who live in daily fear for their lives and who
are seeking asylum in the Turkish region of Cyprus. Recent

124. Well, it may be true that the Turkish Cypriot administration as it stands today is not really prosperous; we
cannot boast of prosperity. But I can say this much: our
peoplewould prefer security and theright to live to luxury, if
luxury there is in “free” south Cyprus. The fact remainsthat
Turkish Cypriots want to go to the north to savetheir lives.
When they are intercepted by the Greek Cypriot police or
the military and are forced to go back, not only do they not
have a hometo go to but they have no businessor sourceof
income; as they have lost or liquidated all for their
>a
livelihood.
‘,
125. This very pressing humanitarian problem must be
solved immediately. Turks from the south should be
allowed to go to the north and Greeksin the north who want
to go to the south should be allowed to do so, pending the
final political settlement. Any Greek Cypriot living in, the
north who wishesto go to the south is free to do so. i
126. The withdrawal of foreign armed forces and of the
foreign military presenceand personne’from Cyprus must
be carried out again within the framework of a political
solution which will settlethe Cyprus problem to the satisfaction of both communitieson the basis’bfnational equality
12

.’

and as security and mutual confidence areestablished on the
island.

some money to circulate in Nicosia. I hope that he is not
suggesting that we should go back to the old days of the
barter system.

127. Although this matter concerns more directly the
Government of Turkey, as one of the parties to the Cyprus
question, the problem has a direct bearing on the security of
the Turkish Cypriot community and cannot therefore be
dissociated from the political settlement. Only after the
Turkish Cypriots, who have been the suffering party for the
last two decades, enjoy full security of life and property
should the Turkish troops be withdrawn from the island.

134. Turkish stamps are being used in Cyprus. This is true.
They have been in use since 1964 when the postal services of
the so-called central Government were refused to the Turkish community. There have been whole villages which were
refused postal services until July 1974 and there is ample
proof, and examples, in the Secretary-General’s report to
the Security Council.

128. For 10 years there was no call by the Greek Cypriot
side’ for the withdrawal
of foreign troops from Cyprus
because those troops were the Greek mainland troops which
were invited to Cyprus by Archbishop Makarios himself. As
Archbishop Makarios admitted during his address before
the Security Council on 19 July 1974 [178&h meeting]:
“ . . . it was the Cyprus Government which invited the

135. Again, there has been an allegation that Girne-that
is the Turkish name for Kyrenia, and incidentally Turkish is
one of the official languages of the Republic, according to
the Constitution, and as we see now the Greek Cypriots
cannot suffer even a Turkish name or a Turkish town-has
been assimilated into Turkey, but this is not so. Because we
have been cut off from the outside world and have no postal
service, we have hired a post office box in Mersin-post
oflice box 10, Mersin, is the post office box -number in
Turkey-in
order to enable us to correspond with the outside world. This is a temporary arrangement which we hope
will be discontinued after the Cyprus problem is solved.

Greek officers to staff the National Guard. I regret to say
that it was a mistake on my part to bestow upon ‘them so
much trust and confidence.”
129. As I already said, the Greek mainland military presence on the island still continues, the Greek’National Guard
is still being strengthened and the security risk for the Turkish Cypriot community is still there.

136. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translation from Russian): First of all I should like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the
Presidency of the Security Council. Your Presidency of the
Council at the end of last year, as I recall, was not an easy
task in view of the important events of that time. You seem
to be unlucky, Sir, and complex problems, beginning with
the one before us today, are being encountered during your
Presidency. So I most sincerely wish you success m overcoming all these difficulties.

130. The Turkish Cypriot position on Cyprus is clear. As
repeatedly stated, we stand for a bi-regional federation. We
believe that geographic federation would prevent the recurrence of the bitter experientis of the past and would give
the Turkish Cypriot community the actual and physical guarantee which it badly needs and the opportunity to develop
economically without pressure and discrimination in the
future. Only under bi-regional federation would the two
communities treat and respect each other as equals and not
as enemies or virtual hostages, as they did in the past or as
they do even today. Geographic federation would also be an
effective guarantee for the independence and true nonalignment of Cyprus.

137. I should like to pay a tribute to your predecessor, Mr.
Scali, and express our gratitude to him for not making us
work too hard in November, which was very important at
the height of the work of the twenty-ninth session of the
General Assembly.
138. The Security Council is once again considering the
question of extending the mandate of the United Nations
Force in Cyprus. This is; of course, a problem which cannot
be solved without taking into account the continuing abnormality of the situation in that country. For more than five
months the tragedy of the Cypriot people has continued.
That people has become the victim of foreign political interference and military intervention. The future of an independent sovereign State which is an active participant in the
non-aligned movement is threatened. The intrigues of certain NATO circles-which
were mainly responsible for the
Cyprus tragedy-continue.
To promote their narrow and
selfish strategic interests in the Eastern Mediterranean they
threaten the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus.

131. The Turkish Cypriot community is ready for negotiations with an open mind and sincerity, and we hope that the
Greek side will respond favourably to bring about a lasting,
peaceful and realistic settlement. ,My community will not be
found lacking in goodwill and cooperation.
.:
132. I do not intend at this late hour to go into detail about
the eloquent but unfounded stories that we have just heard
from Ambassador Rossides. But there are a few points upon
which I should like to touch before I finish my statement.
133. We have heard complaints about Turkish money
being used in Cyprus.-in
.Turkish<ontrolled
areas of
Cyprus. Turkish money was in use in Cyprus before the July
events. Thousands of; Turkish tourists used to come to
Cyprus and they paid,,:both Turkish and Greek merchants
in Turkish money, and that money was acceptable. After the
July coup and the evepts that followed, Turkish money has
been more widely used, and I am sure that Ambassador
R&sides knows the .‘ieason behind it. We are not being
allowed to use the facilities of the Central Bank .in Cyprus,
which is under Greek Cypriot control, and we must have

139. From the statement of the representative of the
Republic of Cyprus at the United Nations, Ambassador
Rossides, it is clear that the situation in Cyprus continues to
be tense and fraught with the possibility of new dangerous
outbreaks. The foreign military intervention continues, despite the resolutions of the Security Council regarding its
13

conference on Cyprus, representation at which would reflect
the political pattern of the present-day world.

immediate cessation and the withdrawal of all foreign
troops. Those foreign troops remain on the territory of
Cyprus and the decisions of the Council are being ignored.
140. The people of Cyprus are undergoing profound suffering and deprivation. More than 200,000 people-that is,
more than one third of the,population of the countryremain in a tragic situation, as refugees deprived of their
homes; their property and the elementary necessities of life.
Their situation is worsening with the coming of winter cold
and rain.
141. We should be concerned to ascertain that the resolutions of the Security Council on Cyprus are not being implemented but are being transformed into more scraps of paper
by those who, at the present session of the General Assembly, loudly proclaim the need to strengthen the role and the
authority of the United Nations and ensure the implementation of its decisions. Those resolutions-and
I am thinking
in particular of resolution 353 (1974) and 357 (1974)-are
directed towards protection of the independence and territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus. They provide for
the immediate cessation of foreign military intervention, the
withdrawal of foreign troops and military personnel and the
restoration of the legitimate constitutional Government and
of.all the institutions of that Government.
142. The fundamental principles of which the solution of
the Cyprus problem must be based, as embodied in the
decisions of the Council, were strengthened by the authority
of the General Assembly, which discussed the Cyprus question from every angle and a month and a half ago unanimously adopted the important resolution 3212 (XXIX)
thereon. The delegation of the USSR believes that this
Assembly resolution, which was drawn up and submitted by
a large and influential group of non-aligned States and for
which all the States Members of the United, Nations
involved in the question of Cyprus voted, together with the
decisions of the Council, provides a sound basis for the
peaceful settlement of the problem of Cyprus on the basis of
the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations
and in the interests of the people of Cyprus. This resolution
of the General Assembly, which has just been endorsed by
the Security Council, contains an appeal to all States to
respect the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity
and non-alignment of the Republic of Cyprus and to refrain
from all acts and interventions directed against it. The General Assembly adopted that resolution, now endorsed by the
Council, which demands also the speedy withdrawal of all
foreign armed forces and foreign military personnel from
the Republic of Cyprus and the cessation of all foreign
interference in its affairs.
143. The General Assembly resolution also contains an
important provision to the effect that, if necessary, further
efforts including negotiations can take place, within the
framework of the United Nations, for the purpose of implementing the provisions of the resolution, thus ensuring the
fundamental right of the Republic of Cyprus to independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity.
144. One specific way of implementing this Genera1
Assembly resolution would be by holding an international

145. The Soviet Union has proposed the convening of
such a conference since the very beginning of the Cyprus
crisis. The Soviet Union continues to insist on that solution,
on the basis of the Assembly resolution on negotiations. So
far there are no alternatives to such a solution, for to fail to
settle the Cyprus problem within the framework of the
United Nations, on an open and just basis, would be to leave
the fate of the independent, non-aligned State of Cyprus to
the caprices of the behind-the-scenes intrigues of the NATO
military bloc. But that would be tantamount to international betrayal of the Republic of Cyprus and its people on
the part of the United Nations and its majority.
146. In this connexion, it must be stressed once again that
the results of the discussion of the Cyprus question in the
General Assembly, and the resolution adopted by that
body, are convincing proof and confirmation of the fact that
the States Members of the United Nations are well aware of
the inconsistency and of the complete bankruptcy of the
earlier London-Zurich system of guarantees imposed at one
time on the Republic of Cyprus.
147. It is now obvious to everyone that that system did not
reflect the interests of Cyprus and its people: rather, it was
imposed on Cyprus for the sake of foreign interests, and not
to guarantee the security and independence of Cyprus.
Indeed, it aimed at legitimizing imperialist interference in
Cyprus’ internal affairs, including military intervention. It
was a shameful anachronism of the era of imperialism and
gun-boat diplomacy.
148. The Soviet delegation, expressing serious concern
over the continuing tense situation in Cyprus, deems it
essential to reaflirm the position of principle of the Soviet
Union regarding the Cyprus crisis and the means to settle it.
Ever since the very beginning of the crisis in the Eastern
Mediterranean, the Soviet Union has supported the just
struggle of the Cypriot people against the intrigues of certain
NATO circles. The USSR steadfastly supported, and continues to support, the guaranteeing of the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus, and the cessation of all foreign interference in its internal affairs, and the
withdrawal of all foreign troops from its territory.
149. The Soviet position of princip’le on the Cyprus question has been thoroughly and with crystal clarity set forth in
the communications of the Soviet Government published as
Security Council documents, as well as in the statements of
Comrade Brezhnev, the General Secretary of the Central
Committee of the Communist Party, and those of Foreign
Minister Gromyko during the general.debate at this twenty‘ninth Genera1 Assembly session.
,
.
150. Indeed, from the very beginning of the events on
Cyprus, the Soviet Government has, from its position of
principle, condemned the aggressive acts against the Republic of Cyprus, and has from the very beginning supported the
inalienable right of the Cypriots to be,complete masters in
their own homeland and freely to determine their own
destinies. As was stated by Comrade Gromyko. in the pienary of the General Assembly, the main task is to free the,
14

Cyprus problem from its present impasse, to halt the violence against that country and its peop!e, to guarantee
respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of the Cypriot State; and, to that end, to convene a
representative international conference on Cyprus within
the framework of the United Nations.

munique of 24 November on this question, both parties
stated the following:
“Having discussed the situation existing in the Eastern
Mediterranean, both sides state their firm support for the
independence, sovereignty and’ territorial integrity of
Cyprus and will make every effort in this direction.
“They consider that a just settlement of the Cyprus
question must be based on the strict implementation of
the resolutions adopted by the Security Council and the
General Assembly of the United Nations regarding
Cyprus.”

15J. Subsequent events have clearly confirmed the correctness and timeliness of those proposals of the Soviet
Union regarding an international conference on Cyprus and
the dispatch of a Security Council mission to the island. The
active participation of the United Nations in the settlement
of the Cyprus problem is feared only by those whose selfish
plans for the Republic of Cyprus might be unmasked, or by
those who, instead of a settlement, prefer chaos and a
worsening of the situation in that region, in pursuing their
ignoble designs.

156. In turn, in the France-Soviet communique of
7 December 1974, released following the visit to France of
Comrade Brezhnev and his meetings and talks with the
President of the French Republic, Mr. Giscard d’Estaing,
the following mutual agreement on the Cyprus question was
set forth:

152. The Soviet Union, at the same time, stands ready to
give careful consideration and study to any other constructive proposal that may be made, our only condition being
that such proposals be honest and specifically directed
towards a solution of the Cyprus crisis, on the basis of the
restoration and maintenance of the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus as a
non-aligned State, with the withdrawal of all foreign troops
from its territory. That is the approach, and not behind-thescenes manoeuvres or imperialist dealings, which is in the
interest of the Cypriot people and which can be the solution
to the crisis. Unfortunately, it must be noted here that no
new constructive proposals have been made for the settlement of the Cyprus crisis, either by those who hesitated, or
by those who spoke against the Soviet proposals when they
were put forward. It should be recalled that some members
of the Security Councii and Member States of the United
Nations had at that time advised the Soviet delegation to
delay submission of those proposals, claiming that the parties concerned should be given time to test other ways and
means of settling the conflict.

“The Soviet Union and France express their concern
regarding the continuation of the dangerous situation on
Cyprus. They proceed on the premise that the settlement
of the Cyprus question should be achieved through negotiations and should be based on full respect for the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Republic of Cyprus and on the strict implementation of
the resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly of the United Nations on Cyprus. The Soviet
Union and France support the earliest withdrawal of all
foreign troops from the Republic of Cyprus and the
return to their homes of all refugees in conditions of
security.”
157. This position regarding Cyprus held by three permanent members of the Security Council, along with the resolutions of the Security Council and the General Assembly, is a
sound basis for the settlement of the Cyprus question. The
Soviet Union, as before, will continue to exert all efforts in
order to promote the settlement of the Cyprus crisis on the
basis of the restoration and maintenance of the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity ofthe Republic of
Cyprus as a non-aligned State in keeping with the lofty
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.

153. However, as is abundantly clear to everyone now,
those “other ways and means” have been used by certain
foreign circles not to solve the Cyprus problem in the interest of the Cypriot people, openly, through honest discussions, at a representative international forum within the
framework of the United Nations, but, in an under-handed
manner, to bypass the authority of the United Nations in
favour of behind-the-scenes conniving, at the expense of the
vital interests of the Cypriot people.
I

158. The Soviet Union resolutely condemns foreign mil:
itary interference in the affairs of Cyprus. It is firmly against
any attempts to partition the island. We stand for the immediate implementation of the decisions of the Security Council regarding the cessation of foreign military intervention
and the withdrawal of all foreign troops from the islandand
consider that a favourable climate must be created for the
solution by the Cypriot people themselves of the problems
of their own internal government system without any foreign interference. Of course, the solution of these problems
concerning the internal structure of Cyprus should be in
keeping with desires of the Greek Cypriots and the Turkish
Cypriots.

154. The Soviet Union, consistent with its policy ofprincipie and of fair play, is ready to use all the political means
available to it in order to promote a settlement ofthe Cyprus
crisis, under United Nations auspices and in keeping with
the principles of the Charter and the resolutions of the
Security Council and the General Assembly.

159. It is the duty of the Security Council to take specific
and decisive steps in order to achieve the implementation of
its own resolutions. The non-implementation of the decisions of the Council not only delays and worsens the tragedy
of the Cypriot people and maintains a hotbed ofconflict and

155. As everyone knows, the Cyprus problem occupied
an important place in the talks between Comrade Brezhnev
and the President of the United States, Mr. Ford, in Vladivostok last November. In the joint Soviet-American com15

tension in the Eastern Mediterranean, to the advantage of
those who oppose the strengthening of peace, international
security and detente, but it also undermines the authority
and prestige of the Council and the United Nations as a
whole, the enhancement of whose authority and effectiveness has been so much talked of from this podium at the
twenty-ninth session of the General Assembly.
160. Concerning the decision of the Security Council
regarding the extension of the mandate of the United
Nations troops on Cyprus for a new six-month period, the
Soviet delegation did not object to such an extension, taking
into account the fact that the Government of the Republic of
Cyprus agrees with this and that this extension is being
implemented through the continuation of the existing, that
is, voluntary financing of these troops. However, the extension of the mandate of these troops is just a weak palliative.
The Council should implement its decisions regarding the
settlement of the Cyprus question. That was and continues
to be the main task of the Council and the United Nations as
a whole.
161. Mr. DE GUIRINGAUD
(France) (interpretation
from French): Mr. P&dent,
first of ail, I should like to
-extend to you my congratulations on your assumption of the
Presidency of our Council. You have already fully deserved
these congratulations by the way in which you conducted
the delicate consultations prior to this meeting. May I also
express, in passing, my delegation’s appreciation of the way
in which our colleague of the United States performed his
duties as President last month.
162. In renewing the mandate of UNFICYP the Security
Council certainly did not take a surprising decision, still less
was it a decision without precedent in the annals of the
Council. A simple reading of the resolution that we have just
adopted would remind members that we have acted similarly
on more than 25 occasions since 1964. Beyond ail doubt,
circumstances have changed over the years. But whatever
may have been our encouragement to undertake any efforts
aimed at ensuring the establishment of harmonious coexistence between the two communities, and however impatient
we may have been over the delaying tactics so frequently
utilized as regards intercommunity negotiations, these circumstances have never been such as to allow us to envisage a
withdrawal of the Force.

report, according to which, in this very serious situation in
Cyprus, the presence of UNFICYP is essential to assist in
maintaining the cease-fire, to ensure the safety of the poplation and to contribute to the distribution of humanitarian
assitanceand aid. On the other hand, we are alsoconvinced
that the Force is able to servenot so much as a buffer but
rather asa link betweenthe parties, until such time as they
themselvesundertake, in a proper and more complete
fashion, negotiations which will make it possibleto settle
fundamental problems.
165. In that regard, sinceeverything dependson theconfidence which should be placed in the Force by the parties
concerned,we can only expresscertain concerns:beyond all
doubt, UNFICYP is in a situation which is not that for
which it wassetup in 1964and, in any case,sinceUNFICYP
did not and doesnot have adequatemeansavailable, it was
hardly able to maintain the positions at the time of the
Turkish military intervention; still lesswas it able to spare
the communitiesfrom the effectsof that intervention. However, today, in the defacro situation to which UNFICYP has
had to adjust, in order to safeguardits essentialmissionit
mustbe ableto count on the support and co-operation of the
parties. The Secretary-General’sreport states that in the
areasheld by the Turkish forcesit isdifficult for UNFICYP
to carry out some of its tasks becauseof the restrictions
imposedon it, particularly asregardsthe dispatchof patrols
and the installation of observation posts.We must appeal,
therefore, to the Turkish authorities and request them to
invite their local commandersto put an end to thoserestrictions. UNFICYP hasa missionassignedto it by the Council;it must perform that missionunder similar conditions both
in the north and in the south of the island in order to
guarantee the sameprotection ‘to the two communities.
166. The activities of’ UNFICYP can be evaluated
obviously only in terms of the situation in Cyprus. The
Council hasjust endorsedresolution 3212 (XXIX) unanimously adopted by the General Assembly. Before concluding, therefore, I should like to briefly reiterate the position of France on the generalaspectsof the caseof Cyprus.
167. I had furthermore, already setforth that position in
the General Assembly at the time 1 spokeon behalf of the
nine membercountriesof the European Community and, as
was observed by the representative of the Soviet Union,
Ambassador Maiik, that position was reaffirmed in the
France-Soviet communique issuedat the closeof the recent
visit madeto Rambouiilet by General Secretary Brezhnev. I
should like to mention the general tenor of our position.
L
168. First of all, we support the maintenanceof the sovereignty, independenceand territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus, principles which! in hourview, preclude any
settlementleadingto partition or ti, annexationof ail or part
of the island.This settlementshouldbe basedon implementation of the resolution adopted by our Council and by the
General Assembly. It should include the withdrawal of all
foreign troops on the territory of the;Repubiic of Cyprus.
f
169. Secondly, we considerthat the agreementof the two
communities is a prerequisitefor that settlement,sinceit is
their legitimate interestsand the protection of their identity,
within the framework of viable realisticinstitutions, which is

163. It goes without saying that today the situation in
Cyprus leaves no doubt as to the usefulness of maintaining
&Force. My delegation wishes to express its deep appreciation to the Commander of the Force, General Prem Chand,
as well as to the contingents composing the Force. Under
particularly difficult and exposed conditions, UNFICYP is
performing its mission with a devotion to which ail of us pay
tribute. Unfortunately, in recent months UNFICYP has had
to make a very heavy sacrifice to this cause of maintaining
peace. I bow to the memory of the nine soldiers who have
died in the performance of their duty and I extend my
profound sympathy to their Governments.
164. In unreservedly supporting the renewal of the mandate of the Force, my delegation has several considerations
in mind. On the one hand, we share the viewpoint expressed
by the Secretary-General at the conclusion of his excellent
16

involved. For that reason, we therefore support the dialogue
which has been undertaken between their respective representatives;a dialogue to which we attach paramount importance; we hope that that dialogue for which the parties have
just reaflirmed their support will be broadened without
delay to cover political matters.

phere, to be brief, which owed a lot to the patient work of
Ambassador Scali.
175. The last extension of the stationing of the United
Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus by the Security
Council, on 29 May of this year, took place in a climate of
some hope, some expectation and cautious optimism about
the prospects for the future of the island, optimism concerning stability at last for the two communities to live together
in peace, enjoying equal rights and opportunities and being
able to build their common destiny in an independent,
sovereign Republic of Cyprus whose territorial integrity
would be safeguarded. Events set in motion on 15 July and
the ensuing invasion of the island destroyed those hopes.

170. Thirdly, we attach particular importance to the very
distressing question of the refugees, a matter which concerns
almost one third of the population of the island. In addition
to its humanitarian aspects, which are particularly of concern to us, this matter is at the very heart of any settlement,
for if the problem is not solved promptly, it may well
degenerate into a very serious international problem. It is
therefore essential that a solution should be found in accordance with the resolutions adopted by the Council and by the
General Assembly, that is to say, one which would enable
the refugees to return safe and sound to their homes.

176. It is not my intention, nor, in our opinion, should it be
the task of the Council at this time, to recapitulate events, to
point to responsibility and to apportion blame. Over the
past months, however, the Council has adopted no less than
eight resolutions on the subject. As important, as appropriate and as timely as those resolutions were, viewing them in
retrospect we now have the feeling that they were more often
adopted in pursuit of events than in control of them. It is,
furthermore, a matter of regret to note that they were largely
disregarded, with all that implies for the authority of the
United Nations. What we must be concerned with at present, therefore, is looking to the future to grasp what is still
available in conciliation and settlement. Certainly, .the
actual fighting has stopped and open hostilities have subsided. Also, as the Secretary-General’s report points out,
numerous violations of the cease-fire-especially violations
by movements-still
occur. Yet problems of such a formidable character remain that more than ever the small island
needs and will continue to need the help and assistance of
the whole international community, its encouragement and
its understanding. All that would be in vain, however, were
the international community not at the same time to impress
upon the countries directly concerned-and
here I mean, of
course, Greece and Turkey-the
need to adopt an attitude
of realism, farsightedness and, last but not least, compassion
for the fate of the suffering people of both ethnic communities of Cyprus.

171. I cannot conclude this statement without expressing
my deep surprise over the statement made by Ambassador
Olcay, according to which his Government does not feel
bound by the resolution which the Council has just adopted.
I was no less shocked by the statement made to that same
effect by Mr. Celik, the representative of the Turkish
Cypriot community, when he stated that his community
would not be bound by the resolution renewing the mandate
of UNFICYP. Fortunately, we know through the report of
our Secretary-General that all the parties concerned have
given their,agreement to the continuation of the Force’s
mission. My delegation sincerely hopes that despite the
reservations expressed here, UNFICYP will be able to continue its humanitarian and peaceful role.
172. The case of Cyprus involves States with which my
country maintains traditional and friendly relations, not to
mention our special relations with them as a member of the
European community. Our country intends to avail itself of
those relations in order to encourage’the parties to embark
on the course of a reconciliation for their own benefit and
for the State of Cyprus as-a whole, as well as for the cause of
peace in that part of the Mediterranean.

177. Resolution 3212 (XXIX), which the General Assembly adopted unanimously this year, contains, in our opinion,
all the elements which, provided there is genuine political
will for their implementation, point a realistic way towards
the solution of the manifold political and humanitarian
problems involved.

173. Mr. JANKOWITSCH
(Austria): This is the last
month of Austria’s term in the Security Council, and this is
thus the last time we can join in the pleasant and timehonoured custom of extending, as members of the Council,
congratulations to our President. We take particular pleasure in the fact that these congratulations can be extended to
you, Mr. President, who shared with us two years of tenure
in the Council and who personally contributed so significantly to the common w.ork in that period. When you,
.Mr. President, terminate your high office at the end of the
month, you will rightly ,be able to look back on a time of
extraordinary personal achievement in the cause of peace
and international understanding.

178. The extension of the stationing of the United Nations
Force in Cyprus for a further period now appears to be more
necessary than ever before, and we draw satisfaction from
the fact that that view seems to be held by all the parties
concerned. The importance my Government attaches to the
United Nations presence in the island-politically,
through
the representative of the Secretary-General, militarily, and
now, of course, also in the humanitarian field-is well
known and has repeatedly been emphasized both in the
Council and in the Assembly.

174. I also wish to pay a tribute to the President of the
Council for the month of November, the representative of
the’united States, Ambassador John Scali. Under his Presidency the Council took a very important decision. Furthermore, that decision was taken under circumstances not too
often present--co-operation
and harmony-in
an atmos-

179. Here I wish only to record again our deep appreciation to the Secretary-General, his associates and his staff
here and in Cyprus, and especially the Force Commander,
17

,.

Lieutenant-General.
Prem Chand and the ‘SecretaryGeneral’s Special Representative, Mr. Weckmann-Mtioz,
for the extraordinary services they have rendered in the
cause of peace under most challenging and most difficult
-conditions. There .is no.doubt%nd
the Secretary-General
has pointed this out, in his report-that
the circumstances
prevailing at the time of the creation of UNFICYP and for
10 years thereafter have now changed dramatically. When
the Force was given its first mandate, in March 1964,;it was
not possible to contemplate this in the previous resolutions.
Nevertheless we believe that at present and for the foreseeable future the provisions of resolution’ 186 (1964) are broad
enough to be adapted,to changing circumstances.That is in
fact what the Security ‘Council has done on several occasions;
without changing the basis for the operation; it has interpreted the guidelines and functions of the Force in a way
that has made the continuing operation of the Force and the
fulfilment of it duties possible. However, in judging the
performance and success of the Force in general, one must
take into account not only the degree of willingness of the
parties to cooperate fully with it but also its over-all numerical strength.

(1974), renewing the mandate of the Force for a further
period of six months, what seem to be the prospects for the
future .and what possibilities remain for a settlement of the
problem?
184. The fundamental provision of the Zurich agreement
14 years ago was the elimination.of both enosis and partition. That ‘apparently must be the key to any settlement.
Proceeding on this premise, there must be a basic understanding and willingness to implement the provisions contained in previous ‘Security Council ,resolutions and in
particular in General Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX).
First and foremost, however, the plight of the refugees must
be alleviated by all possible means.
185. Inasmuch as we recognize the relationship between
this particular question and the general goal of building a
new constitutional order, we nevertheless feel that the
people uprooted from their homes and living in most miserable conditions-as
we have heard tonight from representatives of both communities-should
not be used as an
instrument of politics. Their fate should not be calculated
and exploited in terms of gaining political advantage.

180. As can be noted from the report, the SecretaryGeneral does not, under present circumstances, suggest an
increase in the strength of the Force; nor can any reduction
be realistically contemplated at this moment.

186. Other provisions of the resolutions mentioned above,
to which we attach particular importance, relate to the
withdrawal of foreign troops. Whatever guidance the Security Council and whatever help and assistance the international community can offer, it will finally be up to the two
communities themselves to shape ,their common destiny
without foreign interference.

181. This brings me to a problem, a serious one, which
should be of concern to all Members of the Organization,
and not only to the small number ofcountries which provide
troops and/or other‘. means of support for UNFICYP. I am
referring to the rapidly worsening financial situation of the
operation. As for the further renewal of the continuing
commitment to this peace-keeping operation, I can state
with all clarity that the apparent lack of success in bringing
about new ,and’increased revenue for the operation of the
Force, thus reducing the enormous deficit accumulated over
the years, is a matter.of grave concern to my’Government.
As my delegation has often stated; the principle of collective
financial responsibility should apply not only in cases like
the present operation in the Middle Past, where the costs are
assessed among all Member States, but also in cases such as
UNFICYP, where voluntary financing is in effect. Peace and
international security are indivisible,‘and their maintenance
in whatever region of the world must be’the concern of all
States. So, in our view; must ,be the concrete support of all
States for peace-keeping as one of the most fundamental
tasks of the Organization.
1,
,
.
,.
182. Only two ways seem’possible to bring the financial
crisis of the Cyprus operation under control: .reduction of
the Force or new and increased revenues. The first way does
not ,seem to be feasible under present circumstances and
would, furthermore, reduce the operating costs without
decisively affecting the accumulated deficit. What remains,
therefore, is the second ,way: to seek additional financial
means, especially from those States which have not found it
possible so far to make a contribution.

187. The talks between Mr. Clerides, on the one hand, and
Mr. Denktag, on the other, hold, in our view, the greatest
proniise, and we would like to express the hope that these
talks will be continued and the political issues attacked with
vigour and determination:The best opportunity to improve
the situation must lie in bringing relief to the refugees now
and in permitting them to return to their homes in safety, to
revive the agriculture and industry of the island, and thus to
embark on a new era of trust and co-operation between the
two communities. The paramount”objective of these and
other indispensable steps is the protection of the Cypriot
people from further bloodshed, the prevention of conflict
between Greece and Turkey, two countries with which my
country, Austria, maintains the most cordial and close relations, and thus ultimately the revival of faith in the authority
of ‘.the 1United Nations as the centre of all efforts to.solve the
~crlS1S.

,’

.

188. ,Let ‘me conclude, therefore, by addressing an appeal
to the parties, to their leaders, as, well as to the people, to
adopt a reahstic and statesmanlike attitude. Only then will
the opportunities which still exist not be thrown away.
189. Mr, CHUANG
Yen (China) (translation from Chinese): At the plenary meetings of the current session of the
General Assembly on 2 October3 and 1 November’ respectively, the Chinese delegation stated the position and views
of the Chinese Government on the question of Cyprus in a
comprehensive way. The Chinese delegation voted in favour

183. We have learned with considerable disappointment
that the further appeal by the Secretary-General in this
direction went almost completely unheeded. Now that the
Council has adopted what will be known as resolution 364

3 OfJciai
Records of the General
PIenary’Meetings,
2252nd m-tins.
’ Ibid,

18

2275th

meeting.

Assembly,.

Twenty-ninrh

Session,

of resolution 3212 (XXIX) on the question of Cyprus
adopted by the current session of &he General Assembly.
During the voting on the said resolution, the Chinese delegation pointed out that the wording of paragraph 6 of the
resolution should in no way be construed as a pretext for
permitting the super-Powers to interfere under any name
whatsoever. Based on the same position, we also support
resolution 365 (1974).

UNFICYP.
One armoured car squadron has now been
withdrawn. But for the time being we hope to maintain our
contingent at its present level. My Government, as members
of the Council may know, has recently announced some
reductions in our defence expenditure. We are glad to be
able to say, however, that in spite of the need for economies
in defence spending, we are nonetheless maintaining this
commitment to UNFICYP in the belief that in the present
circumstances it remains essential to the maintenance of
peace in the island.

190. Today’s meeting of the Security Council is mainly
devoted to the consideration of the question of extending the
mandate of UNFICYP.
The Chinese Government’s position on the question under consideration is well known. We
have always held different views in principle on the question
of the dispatch of United Nations forces. For that reason,
the Chinese delegation did not participate in the voting on
resolution 364 (1974).

195. We have noted the statement in the SecretaryGeneral’s report that he intends to give careful consideration to the future strength of UNFICYPin consultation with
his Special Representative, the Force Commander, the parties concerned and the troop-contributing
Governments.
We welcome this statement and we would urge the
Secretary-General to keep the size of the Force under continuous review in the light of the situation on the ground.
My Government hopes that a reduction in the size of our
own contingent might be made in the context of an over-all
reduction in the size of the Force as and when circumstances
might permit this to occur.

191. Mr. RICHARD
(United Kingdom): Mr. President, it
is my welcome and my pleasant duty initially to congratulate you upon your assumption of office as President of the
Security Council for this month and to express my delegation’s entire confidence in your ability to conduct our business in the most efficient and the most skilful manner. And I
also take this opportunity of expressing congratulations and
regards to Ambassador Scali, who was the President of the
Council for the preceding month, for the skill and the
efficiency with which he dispatched such business as we had
then.

196. We have also noted that section of the report which
comments on the financial situation of the Force. We are
seriously concerned at the growing financial burden carried
now by the contributing countries. The costs of the over-all
British contribution to UNFICYP
in 1974-1975 will be
almost double what it was in 1972-1973 if we continue to
provide full logistic support to non-United Kingdom contingents. It would be even greater in a full year with the
Force at the level to which it was reinforced as a result of
events this summer. This situation obviously cannot continue indefinitely. We rely on the Secretary-General to
explore, as a matter of urgency, ways in which these costs
can be reduced. We also look to those who do not contribute
troops to review urgently their financial contributions to the
UNFICYP Special Account, in the hope that the deficit may
be reduced.

192. We did not understand the speeches of the representative of Turkey and the representative of the Turkish
Cypriot community this evening as saying in fact that they
would not co-operate with UNFICYP if the mandate were
to be renewed. Indeed, rather the contrary, as we understood it, they pledged the cooperation of Mr. Denktag to
the continued presence of the United Nations forces’ in
Cyprus, but said that they could not accept, for what they
believe to be valid, constitutional and legal reasons, the
terms of the resolution by which the mandate was being
extended. I hope I am right about this, because otherwise the
situation we would be faced with in the Council this evening
would indeed be an extremely serious one.

197. In our view, this is not the occasion on which to refer ’
at length to the substance of the Cyprus issue. But may I
assure the representative of the Soviet Union-if
indeed he
needs reassurance-that
the United Kingdom shares the
views expressed recently by the heads of Government of
France, the United States and his own country. It makes
perhaps a rare example of unanimity among no less than
four of the permanent members of the Security Council, for
me to be able to say that, as we stated in the course of the
summer in the Council, we of course accept that the solution
of the Cyprus problem lies in the implementation of the
resolutions of the Council.

193. Turning now to the business before the Council, my
delegation is grateful for the clear and concise and comprehensive report that the Secretary-General has given us on
the activities of the United Nations Force in Cyprus for the
period from 23 May to 5 December. As he says, the period
under review was marked by the gravest crisis undergone by
Cyprus since the establishment of the United Nations operation in the island in 1964. In the circumstances we believe
that there is a real need for UNFICYP
to continue to
undertake its present tasks arising from the situation in the
island and in the aftermath of this summer’s fighting, and we
agree, therefore, with the Secretary-General that the mandate of the Force should be extended for a further six
months. The United Kingdom was therefore pleased to vote
for the resolution we have just adopted giving effect to this,
and we were also happy to join in the consensus which
approved the second: resolution.

198. Those Governments that have contributed men,
money and material to the United Nations operation in
Cyprus for so many years do have the right now to call upon
the parties concerned to do their utmost to achieve real
progress in the intercommunal talks. One might conclude
from the events of this summer that if little had previously
been achieved in the talks, what hope of real progress can
there be now? Perhaps we could, however, urge the opposite :
view. The tragic events must surely give a sense of reality and
a sense of urgency to the parties. I believe that if progress is

194. On the outbreak of hostilities in the island, the United
Kingdom Government made additional forces available to
19

not made in the near future, the opportunity to achieve a
peaceful settlement of the problems of Cyprus may be lost.

developments which so deeply affected the peace and territorial integrity of Cyprus, the presence on the island of the
United Nations Force served to alleviate the suffering and
.
prevented greater loss of life and’property.

199. In conclusion, I would wish to join with those who
have paid a tribute to the continuing efforts of the SecretaryGeneral, his Special.Representative, the Commander of the
Force, its offrcers and men, and the civilian staff of
UNFICYP. I also wish to pay a tribute to the police contingents, not least among them the one from your own country,
Mr. President, all of whom have served with conspicuous
success and.indeed gallantry in Cyprus. During the period
reviewed in the Secretary-General’s report, nine members of
the Force have died. Indeed, Mr. President, I believe that the
last death occurring in Cyprus was in fact that of an AUStralian. Sixty-live have been wounded in serving the cause
of peace.

295. It cannot’be disputed that, in the circumstances prevailing on the island, it is indeed appropriate to’extend the
mandate of the United Nations Force. The Force plays .a
decisive role in the cease-fire agreed upon under resolution
353 (1974) of the Security Council of 20 July 1974. It will be
recalled that that resolution included other provisions fulfils
ment of which is still pending. We cherish the hope that the
resolution will be implemenvd in full, and the presence of
the United Nations Force should play a decisive role when
the parties to the dispute decide to implement the draft
resolution’with regard to the withdrawai of all foreign forces
from Cyprus.

200. I reiterate my Government’s appeal to the parties to
the dispute to translate into reality the hope often expressed
in this Council that the sacrifices that have been made in
Cyprus in recent months may not have been futile.

206. Furthermore, my delegation has carefully considered
the report submitted to us at this time by the SecretaryGeneral [S/ZZ568]. Like its predecessor to which I referred,
it is a report that sets a clear course, and my delegation
would like to offer him our congratulations on the intensive
personal efforts that he himself has exerted in order to create
favourable conditions for conveying to the parties to this
dispute the desires,of the Council and the international
community that the problem of Cyprus be peacefully
settled, without prejudice to the sovereignty and the territorial integrity of that country.
:

201. Mr. SALAZAR
(Costa Rica) (interpretation from
Spanish): Mr. President, my delegation would like to join in
the congratulations expressed to you on your assumption of
the Presidency of the Security Council during this month.
In you we have a representative of a country which, in the
community of nations, has earned both admiration and
understanding. But we also have in you an intelligent and
respected representative who once previously, in the same
high post you occupy today, was able, during one of the
most critical periods for the Council, to guide the debates
with the same constructive diplomatic skill with which you
now preside over our meetings. I am certain that in this new
period as President of the Council you will equal your
previous successful performance.

207. In conclusion, my delegation, on the basis of the
above considerations, voted in favour of the draft resolution
contained in document S/l 1573 in consideration of the fact
that, in view of the circumstances prevailing in Cyprus, the
Security Council will be thus fulfilling its primary duty of
guaranteeing international peace and security.

202. I also wish to pay a tribute to your, predecessor,
Ambassador Scali, who, despite the small number of matters brought before the Council during his Presidency,
maintained a continuously attentive and vigilant attitude
at his post.

208. My delegation w& also pleased to vote in favour of
the draft resolution in document S/l 1574, which draws the
attention of the Council to resolution 3212 (XXIX) on the
question of Cyprus recently adopted unanimously by the
General Assembly,

203. We have been convened to examine the appropriateness of extending the mandate of UNFICYP. My delegation
is fully aware that the extension of the mandate is an essential measure, if we take into account the precarious situation
that prevails today in Cyprus. In a situation that was to a
certain extent normal, precisely six months ago, in that the
deplorable events that occurred in Juiy 1974 had not yet
taken place, my delegation agreed that the United Nations
Force, stationed there for more than 10 years, should
remain there for an additional period of six months. That
period is now coming to a close. My delegation based its
opinion then on the report that was before the Council at
that time, in which the Secretary-General, among other
evaluations of the situation in Cyprus, pointed out that
“
. . . . Despite the present quiet, thesituation in the island
is still tense and potentially dangerous” [S/Z1294 pam 7c/1.

209. Mr. NJINE (United Republic of Cameroon) (&~pretation from French): Mr. President, I should like first of all
to convey to you my delegation’swhole-hearted
congratulations on your assumption of the responsible oflice of President of the Security Council for this last month of 1974.
Your wide experience in matters of the United Nations, the
esteem and-the respect which your country enjoys throughout the world, lead my delegation to believe that our work
during this month is in good hands and that it will be
crowned with success.
,.
210. I should also like to take this opportunity onceagain
to say a few words of appreciation of the talent and the
objectivity with which our colleague, Ambassador John
Scali of the United States, served as President of the Council
during November.

204. The tragic events that were unleashed in July confirmed the prediction of the Secretary-General and the good
judgement of the Council in deciding to extend the mandate
of the Force. For it is indisputable ,that, in spite of the

211. Before getting to the heart of the subject, my delegation would like to address its warm congratulations to the
Secretary-General for the tirelessefforts which he continues
to make to bring peace back to Cyprus. The excehent report
20

which he was kind enough to submit to the Council, dated
6 December 1974, leaves no doubt as to the atmosphere of
crisis which still prevails in Cyprus as a result of the tragic
events that occurred during July and August this year. This
is particularly brought out in paragraph 80 of this report,
which reads as follows:
*
“The situation in Cyprus will undoubtedly remain
unstable and potentially dangerous so long as a settlement of the basic problems is not agreed upon.”

218. In conclusion, my delegation would like to pay a
tribute to the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Weckmann-Mufloz, the Commander of the
Force, to General Prem Chand, to the officers and to the
soldiersof the Force and to the staff of the United Nations
High Commissionerfor Refugeesfor their devotion and the
effectivenesswhich they displayed in dischargingtheir tasks
in particularly perilous conditions.
219. Mr. SCHAUFELE (United States’of America): Mr.
President,I thank you and the other speakerswho havesaid
such kind words about Ambassador&ah’s Presidency of
the Council last month. I shall convey them to him with
pleasure.

212. In view of the seriousness of the problems-political,
humanitarian and military-now
faced in Cyprus, my delegation considers that the presence of the United Nations
Peace-keeping Force in that country for a new period of six
months is fully justified. It is for that reason that my delegation supported the draft resolution we have just adopted.

220. As for you, Mr. President, we were already fully
aware of your qualities of wisdom, patience and strength,
which you displayedso convincingly when you lastpresided
over the Council. Although you may have somereservations
characteristic of your own modesty, we welcomeyou back
to the chair.

213. It is my earnest hope that this period will be put to
good use by all the parties directly concerned-not
to exacerbate the genuine disappointments and the grievances
of the past, but rather to find a definitive and just solution to
the problem of Cyprus based on the fundamental rights of
the Greek and Turkish communities.

221. The action that we have taken today will help to
provide further time for a negotiatedsettlementon Cyprus.
Our decision to extend the mandateof the United Nations
Force in Cyprus is not a substitutefor sucha settlement,but
it is an indispensableprerequisite.The needfor a negotiated
settlement that brings justice and peace to the people of
Cyprus is clear. During the past six months, nine members
of the United Nations Force havedied in Cyprus performing
the task which we have set for them.

214. In this connexion, my delegation is pleased to note
that in resolution 3212 (XXIX), which was adopted unanimously, the General Assembly has provided valuable information likely to make it easier to carry out negotiations
between the two communities of the island and to make it
possible for the Republic of Cyprus to exercise its fundamental rights to independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity in accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.
215.

222. Thousandsof Cypriots from both communitiescontinue to endure great sacrifices and hardship. It is my
Government’s hope that the parties will make good useof
the precioustime which our action today provides: time to
narrow their differencesand bring peaceto their people.

My delegation considers that the solemn commit-

ment of all Statesof the Organization to respectthe sover-

eignty and independenceof Cyprus and rapidly to withdraw
from it all the armed forces that may be stationed there will
be a positive contribution to speedmgup a movement
towards peaceon the island.

223. My delegation would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for the lucid, factual and objective report with
which he has provided us on the situation in Cyprus. We
wish alsoto commend the Secretary-General’sSpecialRepresentative in Cyprus and the Commander of the United
Nations Force, hisstaff and all his menfor their outstanding
contribution to the peaceand welfare of all the people of
Cyprus.

216. The return to Nicosia of Archbishop Makarios wasa
source of great comfort and confidence to my delegation,
which is convinced that the Cypriot headof State will in his
wisdom be able to give a decisive stimulusto negotiations
aimedat defining the constitutional structure of Cyprus and
restore agreement between the Cypriots of the two
communities.
217. The financial situation of the Force is hardly encouraging. The $27 million deficit referred to in paragraph 83 of
the Secretary-General’s report is all the more disquieting
becausesincelast July the task of the Force hasbeendive+
fied and is more than ever necessaryin the field. In the past
my Government has been in a position to make voluntary
contributions to the financing of the Force; however, in view
of the present international economic crisis,the generosity
of States, particularly those that have the least, appears
more and more hypothetical and, at any rate, it could not be
admitted here, unless an effort is made to move genuinely
and ‘seriously towards a final settlement of the conflicts
which led to the setting.upof the emergencyForce in the first
place. The sotution to the financial difficulties of the United
Nations should, we believe, be sought in this way.
21

224. It isalsoour sadduty to askthe representativesof the
Governments of the United Kingdom, Canada, Austria,
Denmark and Australia to convey our condolencesto the
families of those men who in the past half-year have given
their lives in Cyprus in the serviceof the United Nations. We
do so in the hope that all parties will make every effort to
ensurethat the task of the United Nations Force in Cyprus is
lessdangerousin the future than it has proved in the past.
225. My Government is in full agreementwith the view of
the Secretary-General that peacein Cyprus can only come
about through free negotiations among the parties concerned. This view has been affirmed by both the Security
Council and the General Assembly.We appealto the parties
to heed the world community’s united call for peace in
Cyprus. We urge them to pursue immediate negotiations
towards a just settlement, in a spirit of good will and
conciliation.

226. Mr. DE SOT0 (Peru) (inrerprerationfrom
Spanish):
Mr. President, the fact that you are presiding over our work
is a source of satisfaction and a reason for confidence on the
part of my delegation. We know that your ability, your
intelligence and your unending patience will on this occasion, as indeed it has in the past, be a guarantee of the success
of our work.

234. Furthermore, it is clear that the speedy withdrawal of
the foreign occupation forces is a prerequisite for respect of
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Cyprus.
235. Cyprus is a country friendly to Peru and, like Peru,
non-aligned. We cannot fail to express o’ur solidarity as
regards the aspirations to peace of all Cypriots.

227. I should like also to express our gratitude and admiration to Ambassador Scali for his very successful Presidency
of the Council last month.

236. Mr. EL HASSEN (Mauritania) (interp-erarion‘from
French): I should like first of all, Mr. President, to associate
myself with the congratulations which have been addressed
to you on your accession to the Presidency of the Security
Council for this month. We are convinced that, thanks to
your eminent personal qualities, with which we are all familiar, you will conduct our deliberations with success.

228. The delegation of Peru has studied very carefully the
excellent report of the Secretary-General on the operation of
the United Nations Force in Cyprus. We have no doubt
about the need for the continued presence of the United
Nations Force in Cyprus and it was therefore possible for us
to support unreservedly the decision to renew its mandate
for a further six months.

237. My delegation would like also to pay a tribute to your
predecessor, Ambassador Scali, who was President of the
Security Council during November.

229. Certainly the consent ofthe Government of Cyprus is
indispensable, but we believe that the additional consent of
the other parties concerned, referred to by the SecretaryGeneral in paragraph 81 of his report, should be interpreted
as a sign of the readiness which exists to find a solution to the
grave problem of Cyprus through co-operation.

238. May I now-and
I think this is entirely justitiedbefore going to the heart of the matter, express our thanks to
the Secretary-General for the tireless efforts which he has
constantly made in seeking a solution to the unhappy problem of Cyprus and tell him how satisfied we are with the
important results which his action has made possible in the
course of recent months.

230. We are pleased also that the Security Council has
unanimously endorsed resolution 3212 (XXIX) adopted by
the General Assembly at this session. This resolution, which
was accepted by all the parties to the July-August conflict,
contains a statement of principles which, if implemented,
could provide the basis for a solution of the Cyprus
problem.

239. Our satisfaction must also be expressed to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and his colleagues
with the exemplary manner in which they continue to carry
out their responsible and difficult mission.

231. A positive step reflected in the report is the beginning
of direct negotiations between the leaders of the Greek
Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot communities, Mr. Clerides
and Mr. Denktq. concerning the humanitarian aspects of
that conflict. We should be happy to see those negotiations
broadened to include political aspects.

240. My delegation voted in favour of the draft resolution
on the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus. In so doing, we wished to indicate
our support for the views of the Secretary-General, as well as
for those expressed by the parties concerned, to the effect
that the present situation makes it essential for that Force to
remain in the island for a further six-month period.

232. The personal intervention of the Secretary-General
had considerable influence in the decision to begin such
negotiations. I should like here to convey our thanks to him
and to his Special Representative in Cyprus, Ambassador
Weckmann-Mufioz,
not forgetting General Chand, for the
ability and moderation with which they have adapted to
their new and unexpected work in the island. I also pay a
tribute to the men of UNFICYP,
particularly those who
have laid down their lives for peace. We hope that the
positive steps referred to in the report will be put to the best
possible use.

241. It is indeed obvious that the grave situation currently
prevailing on the territory of Cyprus requires more than ever
before the presence of that international Force, the mission
of which is to maintain as rigourous a cease-fire as possible
and to give humanitarian assistance of various kinds. That
mission is more essential than ever for the creation of conditions conducive to a final peaceful settlement of this
problem.
242. Regarding the draft resolution in document S/l 1574
just adopted unanimously by the Council, my delegation
would like to say how gratified it is at that decision, which
conlirms the General Assembly decision.

233. Since at the end of this year Peru will cease to be a
member of the Council we shall no longer be directly concerned with the peace-keeping machinery in Cyprus, but I
should like to say that the principles embodied in the first
three paragraphs of General Assembly resolution 3212
(XXIX) which the Council had just endorsed should provide the best possible basis for coexistence and rapprochemerit between the two Cypriot communities. It is for them,
without foreign interference, to resolve their constitutional
question.

243. In conclusion, I should like once again to voice our
hope that tolerance and concord will return to the land of
Cyprus, finally making it possible for an over-all, final
solution to be found, whereby the interests of all Cypriots
can be safeguarded in a spirit of peace and brotherhood,
with scrupulous respect for the independence, territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Cyprus:
,,
22

244. The decision just taken by the Council will, we hope,
bring us closer to the realization of that hope.

that each community has a special relationship with Greece
and Turkey respectively, and we hope that the Governments
of those countries will play a constructive role in the endeavour to restore peace to the island.

245. Mr. ANWAR SAN1 (Indonesia): It is with great
pleasure that my delegation welcomes the assumption of the
Presidency of the Council for this month by you, Sir, a close
friend of long standing, and a distinguished representative
of a neighbouring country with which Indonesia maintains
the closest ties of friendship and co-operation. Your contribution to the work of the Council, especially during your
first Presidency in the most difficult month of October of
last year, has earned you the great respect and admiration
of all the members of this Council and I am confident that
under your wise guidance our work will again come to a
fruitful conclusion. What we have achieved this evening is
ample proof that that confidence is well merited.

251. In supporting the renewal of the mandate of
UNFICYP.
my delegation notes that the Force has been
present on the island for more than 10 years. In view of the
current situation, it can hardly be hoped that the present
extension of the mandate would be the last one. We sincerely
hope, however, that all parties concerned will exert their best
efforts towards the achievement of substantial progress at
the negotiating table so as to enable the Force to be withdrawn or substantially reduced in the not-too-distant future.
My delegation expects that when the forces are withdrawn
they will be able to leave behind a sovereign and ‘independent Cyprus with its territorial integrity as a non-aligned
country respected, and with its population on its way
towards establishing one true Cypriot nationality.

246. My delegation would also like to congratulate the
outgoing President, Ambassador Scali of the United States,
for the success of his efforts to secure for the Council a
relatively quiet month of November.

252. My delegation is happy that the Council has endorsed
resolution 3212 (XXIX), adopted unanimously by the General Assembly. It is our sincere wish that the parties concerned will loyally implement its provisions in order that the
two communities in Cyprus will be able to rebuild their lives
and their homes in peace and harmony.

247. My delegation would like to take this opportunity
also to thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report [ibid.] regarding the operation of UNFICYP during
the period from 23 May to 5 December, especially with
regard to the developments since the events of last July and
August. As the report makes clear, UNFICYP was called
upon to perform its functions in an entirely new situation,
not conceived in its original mandate. It is therefore with
great satisfaction that my delegation notes that in the face of
such a difficult and complex situation UNFICYP has not
failed to exert its best efforts in order to carry out to the
maximum extent possible, both its peace-keeping as well as
its humanitarian tasks in accordance with the relevant Security Council resolutions, while adapting its operations as
much as possible to the requirements of the new situation.

253. In conclusion, my delegation would like to pay a
tribute to the Secretary-General’s Special Representative,
Ambassador Weckmann-Mufioz,
the Commander .of the
Force, Lieutenant-General
Prem Chand, and to all
members of UNFICYP for carrying out their tasks under
the most exacting and perilous conditions with exemplary
courage and selfless devotion. To the representatives whose
countries’ contingents have suffered casualties, my delegation extends its deepest sympathy.
254. Mr. ZAHAWIE
(Iraq): Mr. President, may I state at
the outset, how gratified my delegation is at seeing the
Presidency of the Council in your most capable hands. We
congratulate you on the assumption of your high offtce,and
assure you of our cooperation in fultilling your duties.

248. My delegation commends the constructive role of the
Secretary-General which has since resulted in a series of
meetings between the leaders of the two communities in
Cyprus. It is to be hoped that those meetings, which have
already achieved some positive results, will pave the way for
more substantial progress in the settlement of the basic
problems of the island. My delegation subscribes to the view
of the Secretary-General that, so long as such settlement is
not achieved, the situation in Cyprus will remain unstable
and potentially dangerous.

255. May I also add my delegation’s voice to that of the
other members of the Council who have already thanked
and expressed their gratitude and appreciation to the
Secretary-General, his Special Representative, Ambassador
Weckmann-Murioz,
and all his other staff as well as the
international contingents serving on the island for their
dedicated and untiring efforts in fulfilling their mandate.

249. The Council has just adopted a resolution extending
the mandate of UNFICYP for another six months. My
delegation believes that the continued presence of
UNFlCYP is indeed necessary, not only to helpstabilize the
situation and to provide humanitarian relief, but also to
assist in the establishment of a climate conducive to the
peaceful settlement of the basic problems of Cyprus. My
delegation expects, in spite of the reservations expressed by
one of the parties, that UNFICYP can continue to count
upon the full co-operation of all parties in the execution of
its mission of peace. .-

256. My delegation has supported the two resolutions
adopted by the Council earlier this evening in the sincere
hope that they will make a positive~contribution towards the
settlement of the crisis in Cyprus. The Council now urges the
parties involved in the dispute to implement General Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX).
257. First, there must now be new guarantees ensuring the
independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and the nonaligned status of the Republic of Cyprus. There must be a
new initiative on the part of the parties concerned to draw
up a comprehensive plan dealing with the constitutionaI
necessity to give the Turkish Cypriots the guarantees which

250. My delegation would like to reiterate its view that
such a settlement remains the concern primarily of the two
communities of the island themselves. Of course, we know
23

would ensure their security. It is diffrcuh to see how the
humanitarian problems could be alleviated without such
guarantees which would restore some measure of mutual
trust between the two communities. It goes without saying
that there must be a movement towards the withdrawal of
all foreign armed forces and foreign military presence and
personnel from the island.

it strongly as one of the outside interferences
internal affairs of a non-aligned country.

in the

265. In continuing to consider the question of Cyprus, my
delegation continues to be guided by the supreme principle:
that the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Cyprus must
be respected by all States; we have noted with satisfaction
since we started discussing this issue that all member States
of the Council have accepted this principle. Because we,
firmly believe in the territorial integrity of Cyprus, we cannot, therefore, agree to the Council being used to endorse
the division of the Republic of Cyprus, against the wishes of
the people inhabiting that island.

258. We realize that such things are easier said than done.
Nevertheless, one must no! let an opportunity pass without
appealing to the parties concerned to find an alternative to
violent confrontation; everything must be done to encourage and assist them towards that end.
259. I must finaily add that my delegation’s understanding
of the statements made by Ambassador Okay and Mr. Celik
and their reservations concerning the resolution on the
extension of the mandate of UNFICYP is similar to Ambassador Richard’s understanding of those statements. And it is
in that context that we welcome the assertion made by
Ambassador Okay when he stated that his Government saw
no alternative to the peaceful settlement of the problem.

266. Equally, we cannot accept the stationing of foreign
troops in the sister non-aligned country of Cyprus. To this
end, we condemn the continued occupation of the island by
foreign troops, including those which invaded the island
after 20 July. We have called for the withdrawal of all
foreign troops and we want to repeat it here that in our.
opinion no lasting peace can come to this territory until
all-and I emphasize again all-foreign troops and occupations cease in Cyprus. The positioning of United Nations
troops should not be taken-as a permanent feature. We have
noted that those which have been stationed in Cyprus have
stayed there for more than 10 years. In our view it should be
viewed as a temporary means of giving the opposing parties
the opportunity to sort out their problems without confronting each other by force of arms. We believe the positioning
of troops between combating parties is an essential ingre- _
dient towards the solution of intricate problems such as the
one which we face now in Cyprus. But as I stated before, my
Government will not accept the perpetual stationing of
troops in Cyprus.

260. Mr. KIT1 (Kenya): Mr. President, allow me first of
all to join those who have spoken before me in congratulating you on your assumption of the Presidency of the Security Council this month. Your skills for negotiations we all
know; they have definitely assisted us during this time to
arrive at an agreed text despite numerous obstacles. As we
approach the end of the General Assembly session it is most
likely that we shall be faced with a number of complicated
issues that will come before the Security Council, but we
have no doubt that under your experienced guidance we
shall discharge our duties promptly and successfully.
261. Allow me also to oav a tribute to vour oredecessor.
the representative of the’umted States, Amba&ador Scali;
for the very efficient manner in which heguided the deliberations of the Council last month.

267. We do hope, therefore, that after the six-month
period, conditions will have improved sufficiently in Cyprus
to make it possible for the United Nations forces there to be
withdrawn. We appeal to all parties concerned not to use the
United Nations forces as pawns between themselves, but to
consider them as a genuine contribution by the international
community to assist them in arriving at an acceptable, lasting and just solution to their problems.

262. My delegation was ready to cast positive votes for the
two resolutions that we adopted this evening. As you are
aware, Mr. President, one of them was arrived at after
lengthy and arduous negotiations.

268. My delegation has been very much concerned about
the displaced people in Cyprus arising out of the violent
events that followed the military coup d’etat in July this
year. We have all called for the parties concerned to exercise
restraint, but in the view of my delegation, this is not sufficient. It is the inalienable right accepted by all of us that all
displaced people have a right to return to their homes and
property and we are calling on the authorities in Turkey to
assist all the people displaced from the areas they occupied
before the conflict of 20 July to return to their homes safely.
We attach great importance to this.
;

263. Our negotiations have been made rather difficult at
times by the uncompromising attitude of the parties concerned. Thanks to your efforts we managed to overcome
that. We do hope, however, now that we have adopted those
resolutions, the parties concerned will do their utmost to
implement the provisions of those resolutions and all the
other previous resolutions that have been adopted with
regard to the problem of Cyprus.
264. The positive vote of my delegation was guided primarily by my Government’s desire to achieve peace in
Cyprus. It should not, however, be construed, as we have
always stressed, as a passive endorsement of what has been
happening in Cyprus since 15 July of this year. We have
condemned and will continue to condemn the illegal and
unconstitutional efforts to topple the constitutional Government of Cyprus engineered by Greek military officers
attached to the Greek National Guard. Indeed, we condemn

269. The international community has already had an
experience of the consequences of denying displaced people
the right to return to their homes. We do hope that the
international community has learnt a lesson from the question of Palestine, We do hope that the authorities of Turkey
also have learnt a lesson from that experience. It is the view
of my delegation that we cannot solve the problems of
24

Cyprus if the displaced people continue to be denied the
right to live on their properties across the borders.

276. Our delegation voted in favour of continuing the
mandateof UNFICYP for a new six-month period. Having
done so, wewould like toexpressthe hope, which is reflected
in paragraph4 of the resolution, namely that sufficient progresswill be achieved during this period to permit a final
settlement of the Cypriot problem.

270. My delegation, therefore, hopes that the Council will
not repeat the mistakes of 1948 and will dd all that is in its
power to prevent a similar situation from developing in
cyprus*
1 . I’$ .‘: I,,% ., i-.,.
.,
‘.

277. Our delegationalso voted for the draft resolution in
document S/l 1573on the understandingthat the extension
of the mandateof UNFICYP should take place in accordance with Security Council resolution 186(1964) and the
subsequentresolutions,on the understandingthat the principle of the voluntary financing of UNFICYP should be
strictly adheredto.

271. ‘We feel that it is incumbent upon us to stress our
disappointment at the non-implementation of the resolutions that we have passed since July this year, particularly on
the question of humanitarian problems, and we appeal to
those concerned to implement them immediately because
we feel that anybody who is suffering has an inherent danger
of becoming violent.

278. Our delegation considersthat the Council has fultilled its duty by unanimouslyendorsingGeneral Assembly
resolution 3212(XXIX), which isconsideredby our delegation to be a decision of the United Nations that creates
favourable conditions for a peacefulsolution to the Cypriot
problem in the interestsof the Cypriot people.At the same
time, our delegationwishesto expressits viewsbriefly on the
substanceof this question, just as other delegationshave
done.

272. For its part, Kenya will do the little that it can do to
help the people of Cyprus settle their problems. But the
Council must at all times remember that it is dealing with a
people. It will be folly if the Council were to allow those who
are holding advantages now to dictate to the international
community all the solutions to the problems of Cyprus. The
Council will really make a mistake if it gives up the most
valuable weapon it has, namely, its ability to stand between
warring combatants and assist them to solve their problems
peacefully. We must stress again the need to implement the
resolutions of the Council, otherwise what we have been
witnessing and the acrimonious debates in the General
Assembly about the erosion of the dignity of the United
Nations will continue to worsen.

279. The extension of the mandateof UNFICYP hasbeen
carried out in very complex and tragic circumstancesand
the report submitted by the Secretary-Generalspeaksvery
eloquently of that difficult situation. Foreign troops continue to be stationed on the territory of Cyprus, despitethe
decisionstaken in the past on this subject by the Security
Council. In the report of the Secretary-General, as in the
statementsof the representativesin the Council, and also in
the statementmade by the representativeof Cyprus, it was
pointed out that it was in the interestsof the Cypriot people,
both the Greek Cypriots as well as the Turkish Cypriots,
that measuresshouldbe taken towards an urgent settlement
of the Cypriot problem, the causeof which is to be found in
the intervention of foreign forcesin Cyprus and the intervention of certain aggressiveNATO circles in Cypriot affairs.
The fate of Cyprus, which is an active participant in the
non-aligned movement, hasbecome a matter for barter in
those circles.

273. We have called previously on the twocommunities to
continue with their direct talks under the auspices of the
United Nations, and we urge them tocontinue. As we stated
before, we have great faith in the United Nations as the
proder instrument for the peaceful settlement of conflicts,
and, as we have stated in the General Assembly, we are not
too happy when we see an increasing number of States
trying to solve their problems outside the framework of the
United Nations, only bringing problems to the Security
Council when they appear to be failing to solve them, or.
bringing the solutions to the Council togive them the dignity
of the United Nations, while in doing that they are trying to
use the Council as a rubber stamp for their own interests. To
that end, we call on all Member States to assist the SecretaryGeneral to bring about a fruitful dialogue between the
communities and a quick return to the negotiating tables
where the people of Cyprus as a whole will not be excluded
as they weie during the-previous discussions at Geneva.
274. In conclusion, I should like to pay high tribute to our
distinguished Secretary-General, his Special Representative
and the Force. They have done a magnificent job and they
all deserve our support.
275. Mr. TCHERNOUCHTCHENKO
(Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist Republic) (translarion from Russian): Mr.
President,allow me to congratulate you on presidingover
the Security Council for the month of Decemberand to wish
you atl successin the performanceof your very responsible
task. !My delegationjoins in the expressionof gratitude to
your predecessorin this post, namely, the representativeof
the United States,Mr. Scali, who guided the Council’s work
during the month of November.
25

280. Our delegationconsidersthat there are very realways
and meansof solving the Cypriot problem. The resolutions
adopted by the Security Council, namely resolution 353
(1974) and 357 (1974). which were confirmed by General
Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX) adopted at this session,
all create the necessarybasisfor a political settlementof this
problem and for a just solution to the Cypriot question.
That solution should be basedon strict implementation of
the afore mentioned resolutions-and we have in mind primarily the provisions of the Security Council resolutions
and the General Assembly resolution which call for a cessation of foreign military intervention and the immediate
withdrawal from Cypriot territory of foreign troops and
military personnel-and the need for strict respectfor the
independence,sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Republic of Cyprus.
281. Unfortunately, we are compelled to note that the
basic provisions of resolutions 353 (1974) and 357 (1974)
have not beencarried out, and that is the fault of thosewho

are unsuccessfully trying to solve the Cypriot
through clandestine NATO circles.

problem

ognized that the continued presence of UNFICYP
in
Cyprus is essential, in the words of the Secretary-General, in
paragraph 81 of his report,
“ . . . not only to help maintain the cease-fire called for by

282. The negotiations at Geneva between the guarantor
countries demonstrated the lack of viability of the LondonZurich guarantees and the complete bankruptcy of this
system to the whole world. The facts have shown that it
would be wrong to consider the Cyprus question simply as
the problem of the relationship between the two communities on the island and to close one’s eyes to the outside
interference in the internal affairs of Cyprus. That was the
very cause of the Cypriot problem. That foreign intervention has made the problem even more acute.

the Security Council, to promote the security of the civilian population and to provide humanitarian relief assistance, but also to facilitate the search for a peaceful
solution of the present situation”.
287. My delegation has wholeheartedly supported this
decision and joins with other delegations in endorsing the
invaluable role played by the United Nations Force in
Cyprus, in commending it for its many accomplishments
and in asking it to carry on its tasks with the same dedication
and devotion to duty that has been characteristic of its past
performance.

283. Our delegation considers that we must achieve
prompt implementation of all the Council and Assembly
resolutions on the Cyprus question. Assembly resolution
3212 (XXIX) presents a broad pattern of waysand means by
which this problem can be solved. It contains important
recommendations. Paragraph 6 expresses the hope that
6‘. . . if necessary, further efforts including negotiations

288. To the Secretary-General and his Special Representative, Ambassador, Weckmann-Mufloz,
to the Commander
of the Force, Lieutenant-General Prem Chand, and to the
officers and men in the civilian staff of UNFICYP
we.
express our appreciation and our admiration for the courageous and competent manner in which, under difficult conditions, the various elements of the United Nations presence
in Cyprus have approached and carried out their task, with
losses and casualties, in the performance of their duties
that recently extended to my own country’s police contingent, as was pointed out by the representatives of the
United Kingdom and the United States, whose comments I
greatly appreciate.

‘can take place, within the framework
of the United
Nations, for the purpose of implementing the provisions
of the present resolution, thus ensuring to the Republic of
.Cyprus its fundamental right to independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity’*.
284. In our view, efforts aimed at solving the Cyprus
problem should be continued. We believe the proposal submitted by the Soviet Union calling for -the holding of an
international conference on the Cyprus question within the
United Nations framework and also the proposal calling for
the sending of a special mission of the Security Council to
Cyprus are very timely. Until now there have been no
alternatives. During the discussi& of the Cyprus question
both in the Security Council and in the General Assembly
our delegation has frequently come out in favour of condemning aggressive actions against the Republic of Cyprus
and the flouting of the rights of the Cypriot people, particularly its right to decide its own destiny and its own domestic
affairs.

289. The Secretary-General’s report, which provides the
details and frank record of events we have come to’expect of
it, describes clearly the many and varied tasks that have been
undertaken to ameliorate the grave problems that have
beset the people of Cyprus. It provides for us a picture of a
determined effort being made, and it gives us reason to hope
that for all the disorganization in the island a semblance of
normal life will begin to be restored.
290. More ominously, the report also reveals with stark
clarity the parlous financial situation of the UNFICYP
operation, which has already been underlined by ,other
Council members and which must give us all cause for
serious concern.

285. Our delegation considers that settlement of this problem should be based on full implementatidn of the resolutions of the Security Council and of the General Assembly.
That should be done by means of negotiation, with strict
observance of the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Cyprus. At the same time we
consider that the prompt withdrawal of all foreign armed
forces from Cyprus is extremely urgent. We also consider
that all refugees should be allowed to return to their homes.
Favourable conditions should be created so that the domestic problems of Cyprus could be solved by the Cypriot
people themselves without any foreign intervention whatsoever. Those problems should be solved having regard for
the interests of Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots. Our
delegation also considers that it is in the interests of peace
and security in that part of the Mediterranean that a settlement be found to the problem of Cyprus.

291. We are pleased to note that some progress has been
made in alleviating the plight of the refugees and other
displaced people. The international response to the
Secretary-General’s appeal on their behalf has been heartening, and we welcome also the co-operation of both Turkish
and Greek Cypriot authorities in facilitating the provision
of this aid to those areas and to those displaced persons in
and of both communities standing in the greatest need.
292. Our over-riding concern must surely be for the people
of Cyprus in their present tribulation, for their common
good and individual welfare, for their early return to n
normal way of life and for a beginning to economic and ’
social reconstruction.

286. The PRESIDENT: Speaking now as the representative of AUSTRALIA,
I wish to say that by adopting the
draft resolution in document S/l 1573 the Council has rec-

293. We have also, of course, been giad to note that,
following the Secretary-General’s visit to Cyprus in August,
26

a series of meetings have been held,between Mr. Clerides
and Mr. Denktag. These talks which paved the way for the
exchange of prisoners and detainees in October offer a
prospect of further agreements on humanitarian aspects of
the problem, and eventually, we would hope and urge, on
the difftcult political and constitutional problems.which in
our view only the parties themselves can settle.

representatives who spoke here referred to him as the representative of the Turkish community in Cyprus-and
again
without any remonstrance at their being out of order.
301. Therefore, that is what is causing the consideration of
this question to go on to a much later time. If something is
out of order, we have to bear the consequences for it’. I do
not understand this gentleman, Mr. Celik, coming here and
presuming to answer the representative of Greece and to
answer one or the other representative, as if he were here as a
duly accredited representative-and
this under the cover of
his presence in an individual capacity.

294. One of our objectives here must surely be not to
distract responsible and enlightened representatives of the
twocommunities
from the task of doing what they can to
build trust and confidence on the ruins created by suspicion
and hostility among and between all the parties that have a
direct and acknowledged interest in the future peace,
prosperity and independence of Cyprus.

302. Very well. Then let us forget about that. If he spoke as
a representative, which is abnormal, then 1 would have to
report that to my Government and they will have to consider what to do about it, whether they will want to send
someone to reply or otherwise, because I am not going to
reply to him. Otherwise, if he appeared here in his personal
capacity, this must be made clear in the record, that whatever he said as representative is to be deleted and not to be
considered.

295. I am also mindful of the fact that the Assembly has
already debated the question of Cyprus in recent weeks and
in its resolution 3212 (XXIX), has recorded its views on the
situation and enunciated certain valuable principles and
guidelines. 1
296. The draft resolution, which the Council has adopted
today and which was contained in document S/l 15741 has
enjoyed the support of all the parties directly concerned and
provides, in our view, an objective appreciation of the issues
involved and a useful and positive indication of the direction
in which events must now move if a peaceful and lasting
settlement.to the Cyprus problem is to be obtained.

303. Let me now turn to my colleague, Ambassador
Olcay, for whom I have a special regard-and
I wish to
continue to have a special regard for him-and
let us see
what he stated today in the Council.
304. We understood, Mr. President, as you know, that it
was necessary somehow or other to get the agreement of the
Turkish representative for the form that the draft resolution
would take, merely for practical reasons, because otherwise
they are not entitled to give or not to give their consent under
resolution 186 (1964). But we understood that that was what
was going to happen. Finally, we heard that they agreed to
the draft resolution. But no sooner was this done than the
representative of Turkey, Ambassador Olcay, found it very
convenient to say that he would not comply with this resolution. Now that confirms what I said before, that they have
been accepting the resolutions of the Security Council and
immediately violating them. They have been accepting and
signing the agreement at Geneva and at the same time
violating it. If 1 were some other person, I would have
rejoiced to have this occasion to expose them: that they say
one thing and do another, even on the same day and in the
same breath.

297. Now, as PRESIDENT,
I have one request from a
representative to be allowed to exercise the right of reply,
and I do hope that he and any other representatives who
may wish to speak again will have regard for the lateness of
the hour. It is not my wish, of course, to place any limit on
what the speakers may wish to say, but I do beg them to be
as brief as they can be.
298.

I call on the representative of Cyprus.

299. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): I will bear it in mind that
we must be brief at this time of night. But, ofcourse, it is not
our fault that we have reached this late hour. When you, Mr.
President, informed me that there was a proposal to invite
Mr. Celik to speak in the Council, and you inquired about
our reaction, I said that I was hearing this information for
the first time just then and in any case it was not normal for
these things to happen and I would have wished to have time
to communicate with my Government. If he were going to
speak as a representative, it would be altogether unacceptable, because then, if he were to be accepted as such, we
would have to bring in somebody else from Cyprus to speak
on these’matters, on behalf of the community.

305. But I am sad and I am sorry that he does this sort of
thing, first because Turkey is a country which is a neighbour
of ours and therefore we would like our neighbours not to
behave in this way. Secondly, if a Member of the United
Nations says one thing and does another, it accelerates the
progress towards the kind of dichotomy that I mentioned
the other day, the dichotomy between what we say and what
we do-which
is really one of the threats that endanger the
whole world.

300. But you assured me, Mr. President, that he was going
to come here to give some kind of statement or evidence in
his personal capacity as an individual, in accordance with
article 35 of the provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council. However, this Mr. Celik came here and immediately assumed the authority of a representative. He spoke
as a representative; he spoke as if he were doing this on
behalf of the community he speaks about. And he was not at
all interrupted by anyone. Of course, I could not raise a
point of order. I am not entitled to do that. And some

306. It is a kind of split personality. You split; you do one
thing here and you say another thing there. I should say that
there are three splits that threaten humanity today. The tirst
split is the splitting of the atom. Now that splitting of the
atom will probably bring the end of the world. The second
split is the splitting of countries, a focus for trouble and for
war, as is the case of Palestine. Everywhere where there is a
27

split, a division, a partition, is a focus of trouble. And all the
problems-or
most of them-that come before the Security
Council are cases of partitioned countries. So that is the
second split. The third split is what I talked about: the
dichotomy
between individual and national actions,
between words and actions.
307. Therefore, so much about this stand of my colleague
Ambassador Olcay. But there are other parts of his state-ment to which I have to reply. He asks how they can nego
tiate and says that they are ready to undertake meaningful
negotiations-forgetting
for a moment that they pretend
that it is the Turkish Cypriots that negotiate in Cyprus, that
it is not Turkey itself, that Turkey itself is not interfering in
Cyprus; it is the Turkish Cypriots.

he was trying hard to solve it, and that in the statements in
his report he proposed the dissolution of Cyprus and the
establishment of an independent, sovereign and unitary
State. I did not say that I was saying anything at that time
about a unitary State. I mention this fact justas I mentioned
many other facts in connexion with the life of U Thant, the
fact that on the problem of Cyprus he: was; until his last
moment, in support of that idea. Rightly or wrongly, it was
an idea that he,had. It may be that Ambassador Olcay does
not like that idea, but I was not abusing my position in
mentioning it among so many other things that I mentioned
and that he must have read.
313. In his report on the renewal of the mandate, U Thant
said he believed that both sides in Cyprus realized that the
Cyprus problem could not be resolved by force and that they
had indicated-they,
including Turkey, had indicated-that
a settlement could be worked out on the basis of an independent and unitary State of Cyprus. That was what SecretaryGeneral U Thant put in his report of 197 1 with regard to the
attitude of Turkey and Greece on Cyprus concerning a
unitary State. And there was no remonstranceon the part of
Turkey or anyone else to that because that was a fact. But,
with their split personality, they had changed, and they had
changed even on the same day.

308. But then of course, they say that in what they are
doing the Turkish Cypriots are merely the puppets of the
Turkish Government, and they say: “We are ready for
meaningful negotiations, but we do not know, because on
the other side ‘there is no sort of stable or legitimate
government”.
309. That brings to my mind some remarks that I have
here from the Times of London on this very point. Commenting on the spokesman from Turkey when he said that with
the return of the President it would not be possible to have
any negotiations because “we do not know where we
stand”, the newspaper wrote that it was a remark which
came, “well, ironically from the spokesman of a Govemment that has just been defeated on its first vote of contidence by 358 votes to Ii”. This is going on in Turkey, but
nobody has said that because of it, Turkey is not able to
speak or to negotiate, or anything of that kind.

314. In that same report of the-Secretary-General dated 20
May 1971, he said:
“In my view, what is needed to overcomeL&$fficulty
is an exercise of statesmanship by leaders of all the parties
concerned whereby they would restate publicly their
determination that the problem of Cyprus must be solved
by arriving, through peaceful means, at a lasting agreement based on the independence and sovereignty of a
unitary State of Cyprus.‘* [s/10199, para. 33.1

310. This also struck 77zeNew York Times. In their main
editorial, headed “The return of the Archbishop*‘, they
spoke of what is happening in Turkey-the
358 votes to
17-while
the Archbishop was “the constantly reTelected
President since independence, unopposed last time, and
before that with over 90 per cent of the votes”.

315. Now, in my remarks during the memorial session for
U Thant, I said that he had been very constructive and that
he had tried to go too far too soon. I said that his.idea was
that it should be solved through the establishment of an
independent and unitary State. To take that statement and
distort it, to say that I was abusing my position in order to
make propaganda when I said these things, among many
others, about U Thant, is surprising indeed. Should I conceal these things, in which they themselves‘ believed and
which they supported until a year ago? Who is wrong here?
Where does the wrong lie? And .why should he bring in
something like that when he knows very well-or he ought
to know, with his degree of intelligence-that
he is wrong,
that he is saying something that is ‘not true?

3 Il. Now, what is the effect of that? The effect of that is
again, ironically, what it should not be. As a matter of fact,
when the attempt to murder the Archbishop was made and
he had to flee from Cyprus, Turkey was disturbed over this
breach of constitutionality in Cyprus, expressing itself here
through Ambassador Olcay to that effect, saying that they
would not recognize the new regime because the other was
the legitimate one. But now, all of a sudden, it is the other
way around, Again we have a split personality: we say one
thing, consistently, and then another, inconsistently. This is
not, I must say in all fairness, a characteristic of Turkey
alone, or of any other country here represented. Unfortunately it is spreading, and the danger is great.

316. Next, the representative of Turkey, in his very suave
manner, spoke about the mentality that produced’my letter
to the Secretary-General of 6 December 1974, pages of
hatred, lies and obscenity. Which is the document that
contains obscenity? Is it my letter to the Secretary-General
recounting the actions of Turkish troops in Cyprus, which
certainly are obscene? Or should they be kept covered up? Is
a criminal court that tries men for rape to be judged a centre
of obscenity, or is it the persons who commit the rapes. who
are obscene? No, the obscenity here lies with the Turkish
troops. It is not my fault that I have to report it. I have todo
so, and the reports here are authentic reports, not unrelated

3 12. Now let us see what else Ambassador Olcay said. He
also said that I had abused my position as Chairman of the
Asian Group because I spoke about a unitary State. Is it that
Ambassador Olcay does not listen well, or that he cannot
read the text of my statement well? What I said on that
occasion, at the session in the General Assembly in memory
of our late lamented Secretary-General U Thant, was that
on the question of Cyprus he had taken a positive stand and
28

they have suffered, and what they are suffering now, and
what is happening in Cyprus is not a joke to be played about
with whenever one feels like making allegations.

to the reports by the United Nations Force on the rapes
committed.
317. I am very sorry that these things have to be said, but I
am,even more sorry that they have happened. And Ambassador Olcay, with his sense of propriety and decorum,
should turn to his troops and say, “Why ‘do you do these
things?“- unless he shuts his eyes torealities and his ears to
the facts and pretends that these are all lies. It is very easy to
do that, but it is not a responsible attitude; and I am very
sorry for the representative of Turkey for doing that sort of
thing, which falls much below the standard that I wish to
regard as his.

323. Now, another aspect is insinuated by Ambassador
Olcay’s statement, namely, that the Turkish Cypriots in
Cyprus have been suffering for 10 years, perhaps 20, in Mr.
Celik’s words. He raised the.figure. Why should he not
exaggerate a little? He could double the number, taking an
example from Mr. Olcay, Oh, they were suffering. What were
they suffering? They were secluded, they could not go out,
their houses were seized, everything they had was burned.
Terrible things were happening. Not one reported that, or
supported it, nor was there any idea of supporting it, Just
statements thrown out like stones. What were the facts? The
facts are that the Secretary-General was issuing reports
periodically, every six months-sometimes
every three
months, from 1964 until this date: I havegone through these
reports, all of them, and I will here give some of the quotations which show fully how wrong, how untrue, how irresponsible was the statement that they were suffering by
reason bf the attitude of the Government towards them. The
reports say clearly that they were suffering by reason of the
attitude of the Turkish leadership in Cyprus. Why? Not
because the leadership was so cruel as to make them suffer
unreasonably. No, the leadership was under the direction of
the Turkish Government. The Turkish Government wanted
to have the partition of Cyprus. We know that. We can even
go. back to prove all the reasons.

318.’ Furthermore, I think that letter has been so carefully
studied and examined that I doubt whether there was any
part of it that can be challenged, and I am prepared to give
the source of every part of it. In fact, I had occasion to ask
somebody who knows to point out to me anything that was
hot true, and he could not, except for one case of which he
was not quite sure.
319. Now+ therefore, I would request the representative of
Turkey, for his own sake, not to pretend that what is true is
lies because to merely accuse one of lies without being able
to challenge them with facts and documents is irresponsible
and below the standards of anyone who is a representative in
the United Nations, and I do not for a moment believe that
Ambassador Olcay is below that standard, for Ambassador
Olcay is an honourable man.

324. Now the proof of the pudding is in theeating. We
have seen what they have done in Cyprus. After all, they got
in to dismember the island. Now, with that idea they wanted
to keep the Turkish Cypriots away from the Greek Cypriots.
The two elements were working together, living in harmony
and peace. They were co-operating. That had to be broken
up because otherwise how could they have a situation calling for partition? It was natural that they should do that. It
was not honest. It was not straightforward,
but it was
natural in their frame of mind.

320. Next, what is the next thing he said, because there is
nothing that he said which cannot be refuted immediately.
He says that there are 30,000 Turkish Cypriots in areas
under Greek Government control who are in danger and
unprotected there. What does the report of the SecretaryGeneral say about this? It says that UNFICYP, in all areas
under the control of the Government and of the National
Guard, is free to move freely virtually without restriction
and is therefore in a position to make major contributions
towards the security and humanitarian needs of the Turkish
Cypriots, whereas they are not allowed to enter the other
part.’ And they are free here because there is nothing to hide
from UNFICYP. There is much to hide on the other side, so
that they can pretend that others are lying.,

325. So that started what is called an underground
organization-the
TMT, which was intended to force the
Turkish Cypriots to break off their relations with the Greek
Cypriots. The Turkish Cypriots are very nice people. They
were getting along very well and they did not like the idea of
spoiling their good relations. They were working together.
They were living together. They would not, so they had to be
forced by an underground organization-officers
in disguise sent from Turkey as we very well know. And they
made rules that any Turk that was seen to enter a Greek
shop would be punished by fines. If he was seen having
friendly associations he would go to prison or he would be
thrashed. And this was given in the committee-there
is a
committee on relations between the two countries presided
over by UNFICYP, I think-and
the details of this list was
given. But it was not enough to do that.

321. So it is the most ridiculous thing for anyone who is in
such a fragile glass to try to throw stones because those
stones come back. Therefore, here we are and the Government has asked that there should be a fact-finding committee appointed by the United Nations, by anyone, to inquire
into the occupied areas, and in the other part under the
Government’s control to see what is happing, but they
refused, they would not hear of it. They would not allow the
Red Cross, or UNFICYP or anyone else to go there. Still,
the truth will out and I was able to get all this information
verified to the last word, and I had to produce it. I was
‘instructed and I had to produce it. I refused to produce
anything that was not solidly supported and proved, and
this ‘is solid proof, a kind of White Paper, beyond all
challenge.

326. They perpetrated all sorts of crimes in that respect.
They killed Turks who tried to have any association-and
I
have their names, and even at this moment I can give them, a
list of them-and they forced them into enclaves and’kept
them there to keep them separate, but of course they could
not do that to the entire population so they managed to get

322 Unfortunately I wish they were lies because if they
were lies the people of Cyprus would not have suffered what
‘,

29

about 40 to 45 per cent. The rest were outside living in peace
and without trouble. And those who were there had guns at
the borders of the enclaves, creating animosity.
’

measures for their complete
[S/7001. par. 157.1

safety and protection.”

331. The report of 8 December 1966 states:
327. The Secretary-General, in his reports, and UNFICYP
tried repeatedly to make them abandon this confrontation
because there was no reason to do this. No, they would not
do anything like that. They were not allowed by Turkey to
do anything that would lessen the tension. After the first
events in which there was trouble the Government raised all
restrictions on movement, and the Turkish Cypriots had
freedom of movement throughout the whole of the island
without exception, but the Greek Cypriots could not enter
the Turkish enclaves because it was taboo to have relations
with the Greeks. even the most innocent relations.
328. In the Secretary-General’s
read:

“But the Turkish Cypriot leadership does not favour the
return of refugees to their homes and deters them from
going back to their villages . . .*’ [S/7611, para. 139.1
8;’
For some considerable time, the Government has urgedthe
refugees to return to their homes and it has repaired or
rebuilt abandoned Turkish Cypriot houses.
332. So, what in the previous report was given as a proposal that the Government was prepared to implement, in the
following report is actually indicated as being done; It goes
on to say that it is known that the Turkish Cypriot leadership does not favour the return, and so on and that to justify
this position, the Turkish Cypriot leadership stresses considerations of security and safety of the refugees, although
there can be little doubt that one of the reasons for its
attitude is a political one.

report of 10 June 1965 we

“The Turkish Cypriot leaders have adopted .a rigid
stand against any measures which might involve having
members of the two communities live and work
together”- these are the words of the SecretaryGeneral--” or which might place Turkish Cypriots in
situations where they would have to acknowledge the
authority of Government agents.*’ [S/6426, para. 206.1

333. I come now to Mr. Clerides and Mr. Denktas. In
February 1971, Mr. Clerides wrote to Mr. Denktag, givinga
list of villages where houses were being repaired and had
been repaired and pointing out that:

They even cut off electricity in order to prevent the two
communities from having any relations. The report goes on
to say:

“You will no doubt appreciate that repaired buildings if
unoccupied deteriorate, both due to natural causes as well
as due to the unfortunate practice of the furtive removal
of building material from houses long deserted.”

“Indeed, since the Turkish-Cypriot
leadership is committed to physical and geographical separation”-and
we see
now that it is being done through blood and iron that they
want to get geographical separation; then it was not done
by blood and iron but by forcing the Turkish Cypriots out
and making them suffer for that-“as
a political goal*‘not for any other reason- “it is not likely to encourage
activities by Turkish Cypriots which may be interpreted
as demonstrating the merits of an alternative policy”that is, a policy of peace and co-operation. “The result
has been a seemingly deliberate policy of self-segregation
by the Turkish Cypriots.*’ [Ibid.]

That was because, although the Government built, although
the Government repaired, although the Government did
everything required of it, the Turkish Cypriots were not
allowed to go back to their houses even though they wanted
to do so.
334. In the Secretary-General’s
is stated:

report of 10 March 1966, it

‘6

. . . UNFICYP feels that.. . some stepsshould be taken
by the Turkish Cypriot leadership towards relaxing its
policy of discouraging Turkish Cypriots from [returning
to their houses or even] circulating freely in places outside
its control.” [S/7191. para. 94.1

329. We hear now from the other side that this was forced
upon the Turkish Cypriots by the Government. Why does
the report mention these things, and there were no objections to it? The reports are Iilled with such instances. The
Government’s contention is thus borne out that
“ . . . the hardships suffered by the Turkish Cypriot popu-

335. Now you have a picture of the situation over the
years, of what was happening to the Turkish Cypriots who
were the victims of their leadership, and that leadership was
acting as the instrument of the Turkish Government in
keeping them there by force, to the destruction of their
economic comfort, in enclaves and under stringent conditions of life.

lation are the direct result of the leadership’s self-isolation
policy, imposed by force on the rank and file” [ibid.].
330. The SecretaryGeneral
states in his report of 10
December 1965 thau
6‘. . . the Government was prepared to provide concrete
assistance as follows: (a) to repair or totally reconstruct
all Turkish Cypriot houses which might have been damaged or destroyed in any village; (b) to give financial
assistance for the rehabilitation of all the Turkish Cypriots . . . (c) to provide them with the means for the exercise
of their profession or vocation.. . as well as to give
financial assistance to those who, owing to incapacity,
were unable to work; and (d) to take all the necessary

336. The reports repeatedly said that only in an integrated
economy could the Turkish Cypriots live normally. But how
could they, since they could not associate? And they now
visit this misfortune, this misery, upon the poor victims, the
Turkish Cypriots, as an instrument of war and partition
which makes greater misery.
337. I can assure you, and I am perfectly certain, that the
rank and file of the Turkish Cypriots are not satisfied tiith
30

this aggression and this invasion-not
the so-called leadership which acts for interests alien to those of the Turkish
Cypriots, but the Turkish Cypriots themselves. In this
respect I shall quote from another document, because I like
to give proof of what I say. It is very easy to make erroneous
statements., .
., ‘::
338. The PRESIDENT: Has the representative of Cyprus
completed his statement?
339. Mr. ROSSIDES: No, Mr. President. Iam very sorry,
but it is not my fziult as I said at the beginning 1. .
340. The PRESIDENT:

It is extremely late.

341. Mr. ROSSIDES: I know that ‘it is .late, but I have
asked whether we could adjourn until tomorrow, sir&without notice and at the last moment things have been said
which I must disprove. And I want to give proof. I should
like to continue, but if you order me to stop, I shall stop.
342. The PRESIDENT: Since I have inierrupted the representative of Cyprus, I should say to him-and I of course do
ndt want to become involved in an argument with my friend
Ambassador Rossides-that
‘I do not accept that the invitation to Mr. Celik to speak before the Council was in any why
out of order. Ambassador Rossides will remember that’ I
invited Mr. Celik to speak as an individual, in accordance
with rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure and noi
rule 35, I may say. No member of the Council raised any
objection, and Mr. Celik spoke and did so in order.
343. I now invite the representative of Cyprus to continue
with his statement.

ots against the Turkish invaders-or
even, incredibly
enough, in which Turkish Cypriots sought the help of
Greek Cvmiot friends for protection of themselves from
the Tut&h invaders.”
346. That is the situation in Cyprus &ay. That is the rote
of Turkey, that is the role of the Turkish Jroops,and that i
is the reality of the Turkish Cypriots and the Greek Cypriots.
347. The idea of’harmony between the Greek Cypriots
and the Turkish Cypriots has been expressed in many of the
Secretary-General’s reports.‘He said, it is a reality. In three
or four reports he said how eager they both were to live
together in peace, if they were allowed to, and to co-operate.
This feeling is deep in the hearts of the Turkish Cypriots.
They are Cypriots and th” others are Cypriots, and despite
all these things we are told here about Turkish and Greek
Cypriots not being a nation, .they are deep in their hearts
Cypriots. They love their-cquntry and they would love their
life,in Cyprus if they were,allo++ed, without outside interference, to’live in peace and coe$t. ‘b_: ‘,;
I
348. This is the tragedy ‘of ,cyprus, that’ hat&d was
imported, forcibly imported. ,And still it does not ‘flourish,
still it is not true. There may be hatred against the Turkish
troops because of their behaviour. And since they went there
oti a peaceful operation it. was.an occas,ionfor Turkey to
show peaceful feelings and create,a .better atmosphere of
co-operation betweenCyprus and Turkey asa whole instead
of treating the peopleasit did. But it could not do otherwise
becauseits purpose was to disme@e; Cyp’rus, and you
cannot dismembera countj in a friendly way. It is only
through blood and iron thai yoti .cai do it, and that is the
tragedy. And it is true, becauseMr. Ismet Inonu, who was
Prime Minister ,at the t”!, ‘saidhere:

344. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): I wish to apblogize. What
I meant, of course, was not that inviting him to speak was
out of order. He cotild of course be allowed to speak under
rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure. What was out
of order was his immediately assuming @at he was the
representative of the Turkish community, and the President
did not call him to order for that. That is all I meant. But his
invitation to speak did prolong and add to the discussion
tonight. It nedessarily did.,

“Officially we promoted the federation concept rather
ihan the partition thesissoasto remain within the provisionsof the Treaty.”
And his Foreign Minister, Mr. Erken, said:
“The ,radical solution would be to cede;one part of
Cyprus to Greece and the other, closestto the Turkish
coast, to Turkey.”

345. I refer to’the report of the World Council of Churches
which sent a miss& to Cyprus to report on the situation. It
said:

349. So, partition-but
how can you get partition when
they live intermingled? So we go in on this occasion, we
I dismember, we uproot arid expel the population-200,000
displaced persons, as appears in the latest report-in
order
“What is, nevertheless, of absolute significance for the : to make room to bring populations from Turkey and place
future of Cyprus is that, in spite ‘of everything that has
them there and have partition.
happened, there remarkably still exists to some extent a
willingness to reconstitute coexistence between Greek
/ 350. That is the whole pioblem of Cyprus. Y&I see it now,
Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots.‘*
naked in its truth, and, if there is obscenity in that, Iam very
sorry, but it has to be presented to the Security Council if it
--not between Greek Cypriots and Turkish troops, but
exists.
between Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots.
a

;-

35 1. The PRESI’DEN‘?;.I now call on thi r&esentative of
Turkey, reminding him .of ,my earlier appeal.
:
352. M;. OLCAY (Turkiy): You need nbt have made that
aljpeal to me, Sir, because my r&cord in the Co&it is rather
different from that of the i-epresenttitive who spoke before
.’
me.
.>

“The one major hope for the future is’that many Greek
Cypriots can still make a distinction between ,Turkish
Cypriots, with whom they are willing to try to live, and
the Turkish military forces from Turkey whom they
despise. It is absolutely imperative that this position’be
supported by any means possible. Numerous i&dents
are related in which Turkish Cypriots aided’Greek Cypri-

.’

,31,

T’
‘,’
,’

1..
j,_ I;.
: ,, .”
..- .’

;,

.’
,’

353. Were Ambassador Rossides the representative of
both the communities in Cyprus I should try to give a full
reply to his statement in detail and that would take more
time, of course. Thank God, he is not and therefore I need
not answer all that he has said. In fact, what he has said
would be answered better by the representative of the Turkish Cypriot community recognized as such by the General
Assembly earlier in the present session. I will confine my
remarks to a few points.
354. I would just say for the record that the lie is not an
element of Turkish diplomacy’s arsenal ofweapons and that
probably, since the phanariots left the service of the Sublime
Porte, it has never been used.
355. It is-too easy to say that because a list has been
established and circulated by Ambassador Rossides it
immediately acquires the quality of an historical document
which has to be considered as the gospel truth. What we
have heard today is Ambassador Rossides saying, “I have
produced this paper, therefore it is the truth. I have witnesses who can prove that it is the truth. I have documents
which I can provide to anyone who wants to see them.” I
would just remind the Council that in my previous statement [para. 87above] I mentioned a list ofdocuments which
I also consider as the expression of the truth. and every
member of the Council who is curious enough about what
has happened to the Turks of Cyprus can always consult
them.
356. Having said this-and this in a way is a reply to what
my colleague from Greece has said-1 am sure that he did
not listen with the attentian he would normally give to my
statement, as I give to his, because I did not express any
feeling when I mentioned the content of this document; I
only mentioned that I was shocked by its tone. This is not
really what I meant, and if I have given this impression I
really want the record to show that 1am sure there have been
excesses, and 1 attributed them to the act of war, and I said
how war itself was something to be avoided.
357. Alas, the Turkish Cypriots did not over the past 15
years keep records of their sufferings to be used as documents. Whether or not this period of time is considered
exaggerated by Ambassador Rossides, I do not know. I
suppose that since Cyprus has existed there have been Turks
suffering because of it.
358. Of course. he has carefully avoided the sub.ject 1
raised, of the Archbishop’s advise; on mass murder- I did
not expect him to answer it. No mention of it was made in
his analysis of the situation-of
the “political realities”, as
he calls them, in Cyprus, of the Greek dreams of enosisdreams in whose service tens of thousands of Greek “invitees” in uniform were introduced into Cyprus. There was no
mention of that.
359. I would say that most of what he has said could be
found in his earlier statements, and therefore it is possible
for me to produce a written answer to what has been said by
Ambassador Rossides, but I consider that even that is not
needed. I would merely direct members’ attention to the
various statements made by my predecessors, by myself and
by the representative of the Turkish Cypriot community,

each one of which statements can be found to be an answer
to many if not all of the assertions of Ambassador Rossides.
I would say that most of the statements he has made,
especially with regard to the mutual feeling of the Greek and
Turkish Cypriots towards the political situation prevailing
in the island when they were the absolute masters, can be
found to be, if not untrue, at least on many occasions, very
far from the truth.
360. The PRESIDENT:
Greece.

I now call on the representative of

361. Mr. CARAYANNIS
(Greece): Just for the record, I
should like to state that the Government of Turkey, nowadays deprived, I hope, of any phanariots, lied four times by
deliberately accepting four cease-fires which they did not
honour.
362. The PRESIDENT:
Cyprus.

I call now on the representative of

363. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): I shall not give a long
reply; I have said everything that needs to be said. I only
want to thank you, Mr. President, for your patience. It is 11
o’clock, and I know I am greatly responsible for this meeting
having lasted so long, so I want to apologize to all the
members and to you, Sir, for having kept you so long. I do
want to thank you for having conducted these proceedings
in such a satisfactory manner, and I want to thank all the
members who have spoken on the question of Cyprus, and
particularly those who have laid emphasis on the need.of
protecting the territorial integrity and independence of
Cyprus as a sovereign State, and the need for withdrawing
the forces and of permitting the refugees to return to their
homes. We are very grateful to all, and we thank them for
their contribution, and again apologize for keeping everyone so late.
364. The PRESIDENT:
Turkey.

1 now call on the representative of

365. Mr. OLCAY (Turkey): My Government has been
accused of lying because of non-compliance with cease-tire
agreements. Now, as I had occasion to mention several
times during the occurrence of those cease-fire violations,
the agreements referred to by my colleague from Greece
were a package, if I am not mistaken, which included many
clauses; if Turkey may not have abided by some of those
clauses, at least one of the reasons is that the other side did
not comply with its part of the bargain. I want this point to
be made clear.
I
366. The PRESIDENT: Since there are no further sneakers, it is my intention to adjourn this meeting. Before doing
so, however, I beg to trespass for one moment longer on the
patience of the Council on the following matter, which is
one of good order, I think.
‘_
367. You have noted that the pro&onal agenda for this
meeting, prepared in accordance with rule 7 of the provisional rules of procedure, which was adopted by the Council
at the outset of our meeting, contained the agenda item
“The situation in Cyprus”, which was inscribed on the
Council’s agenda consistently since the 1779th meeting on
1~

312

:.

16 July whenever the Council discussedmatters aflecting
Cyprus. Under this item we have just now further extended
the mandate of UNFICYP, which was last extended byresolution 349 (1974), at that time under an item which was
entitled “Letter dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council”. It is
thus ciear that the item of today has superseded the item
under which this matter was formerly considered, and with

the Council’s agreement, I wouid request the SecretaryGeneral to delete from the list of items of.which the Council
is seized the former item “Letter dated 26 December 1963
from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council”,
I hope I have made myself clear. If I hear no objection, it will
be so decided.
The meeting rose at Il.10 p.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
may be obtained
throughout,
the world.
Consult
your bookstore
Section, New York or Geneva.
COBIMEhSE

PROCURER

from
bookstores
and distrib‘utots
or write to: United
Nations.
&ies

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les ag?nces
depositaires
du man&: entier. Informez-vous
aup&
de votre libraire ou adresser-vous
i : Nations Unies. Section des ventes. New York ou Cen+vs.
KAP

COMO

fIO.lSJJJfTh

CONSEGUIR

HSJAJfHJf

OPrdHIi3AUHII~QI;16WlWHEHHJ,f~

PCBLICACIONES

DE LAS

Las publicaciones
de las Narionrs
Unidas
estin
buidoras
en todas pa&s
de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas. Seccidn de Ventas. Nueva York o Ginehra.

NACIONES

HAUHH

CNIDAS

en venta. en Ilbrerias
y cssas dlstria su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones
.

Liiho in United Nations, New York

00500

74-82001-November

1983-4.425
