UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTIETH

YEAR

1831st

MEETING:

16 JUNE 1975

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

1

agenda (S/Agenda/ 1831) . . . . ..*...............,..............

Adoption of the agenda . . ..#........,*..,,,....,,..........,......,....

1

The situation in Cyprus:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations operation in Cyprus
,...,.....,*..,.,.........
(S/11717) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*.*.....*.......

1

S/PV. 1831

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Ofjcial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions
of the Security Caancil. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1831st MEETING
Held in New York on Monday,
President:

Mr. Abdul Karim

AL-SHAIKHLY

(Iraq).

4. My purpose is not to accuse, but to state established facts. If the facts point in a certain direction,
lead to certain inescapable conclusions or raise certain
unavoidable questions which need to be answered,
let those questions be answered or else the conclusions
should be given due consideration for fruitful action.
For only thus can we bring into focus the true picture
of the tearing of the fabric of the non-aligned Republic
of Cyprus, of the tragedy and continuing suffering
of its people, of the anxiety regarding their present
survival and of their anguish about their future.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China, Costa
Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy, Japan, Mauritania,
Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland,
United Republic of Cameroon,
United Republic of
Tanzania and United States of America.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

agenda (S/Agenda/l831)

of the agenda

5. On 13 June [/830th meeting], during a short statement, I said that all the members of the Security
Council had made statements but that, alas, only a few
voices had been heard referring to the continuing
invasion of Cyprus, the terrible plight of the refugees,
the fate of the missing persons, the suffering of their
families and the Greek Cypriots in the north in enclaves
behind the lines of the Turkish army of occupation,
without work, without freedom of movement, without
schools, without medical care and under severe
restrictions which increase daily. I did not mean to
be critical.

The situation in Cyprus:
Report of the Secretary-General
on the United
Nations operation in Cyprus (S/11717)
The meeting

was called to order at 3.40 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Cyprus
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
operation in Cyprus (S/11717)

6. I understand the reticence of the members of the
Council. I. understand their silence, based on their
wish to have a short and unheated debate in order to
contribute positively to a better climate, a climate that
would facilitate the negotiating process, in which so
many hopes have been placed. As a negotiator,
I
appreciate the importance of, and need for, a good
climate within which to carry out my very difficult
task. However, as an ordinary man, who lives daily
amidst the pain and suffering of thousands of persons,
I cannot bring myself to attach importance
to the
expediency of silence for the sake of a superficial
good climate, at the expense of the continuing human
pain and suffering of the people of my country-particularly when no progress has been made towards a
solution by the process of negotiation,
when no real
intention is shown by Turkey for genuine negotiations
and when, by a series of calculated faits accomplis,
Turkey,
ignoring
all resolutions
of the General
Assembly and the Security Council on the subject, has
been using the ensuing time to consolidate its occupation of 40 per cent of the territory of the Republic of
Cyprus *

I. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions taken by the Security Council at its 1830th
meeting, I propose now, with the consent of the
Council,
to invite the representatives
of Cyprus,
Turkey and Greece to participate
in the discussion
without the right to vote.
At the invitation
of the President,
(Cyprus), Mr. Olcay and Mr. Papa&as
places at the Council table.

16 June 1975, at 3 p.m.

Mr. Cierides
(Greece) took

2. The PRESIDENT:
The first speaker is the representative of Cyprus, on whom I now call.
3. Mr. CLERIDES
(Cyprus): I have asked to speak,
after another resolution on Cyprus has been adopted
by the Security Council [resolution
370 (IP75)] and
after all the members of the Council have made their
statements on the issue of extending the mandate of
the United Nations Peace-keeping
Force in Cyprus
(UNFICYP)
and on the report of the SecretaryGeneral. I am indeed grateful to the President of the
Security Council and to the members for giving me
this opportunity to speak.

7. I said that my purpose is not to accuse and that
I shall state established facts. What are the established
facts? It is an established fact that on ’ 15 July
1

1974 a criminal coup was staged in Cyprus by the
military dictatorship of Greece.

months in the history of Cyprus and in the life of its
people. He does so in conformity with Security Council
resolution 367 (1975), which requested him to keep the
Security Council informed of the progress made
towards the implementation
of General Assembly
resolution 3212 (XXIX).
That resolution urged the
speedy withdrawal of all foreign forces and military
personnel from the Republic of Cyprus and the taking
of urgent measures for the return of,the refugees to
their homes under conditions of safety.

8. It is also an established fact that shortly after that
criminal coup-to
be more specific, on 20 July 1974
Turkish forces landed in Cyprus, allegedly under the
Treaty of Guarantee ,l which provides that the
guarantor Powers have certain responsibilities
to
prevent the abolition
of the independent
State of
Cyprus and to reinstate the constitutional
order
established by the Zurich and London agreements.

13. Regrettably,’ the Secretary-General
has not been
able to report any progress. Has the SecretaryGeneral reported any progress in the implementation
of
Security Council resolution 365 (1974), which reaffirms
and endorses the previous resolution of the General
Assembly calling on all States to respect the -sovet--’
eignty, independence,
territorial
integrity and nonalignment of the Republic of Cyprus and demanding the
speedy withdrawal of all foreign forces and military
personnel from the territory of the Republic and the
urgent return of all refugees to their homes? Regrettably, again the answer is that no progress whatsoever
has been made.

9. It is also an unquestionable
fact that the military
dictatorship in Greece was overthrown and the duly
elected democratic Government has been ,established
and is now pursuing new policies with regard to
foreign and domestic affairs and with regard to Cyprus
that are diametrically
opposed to those of the dictatorship. In Cyprus also, those brought to power by the
military coup of the Greek dictatorship have ceased
to be in power.
10. Eleven months have passed since the date of the
landing of the Turkish forces in Cyprus, and despite
the tremendous changes that have occurred both in
Greece and in Cyprus, despite the acceptance by all
parties concerned of the principle of a peaceful solution of the Cyprus problem through free negotiations
on the basis .of respect for the sovereignty,. independence, territorial integrity’ and non-alignment-of
the
Republic of Cyprus, the Turkish forces remain as an
occupying force on the island, having under their
military control 40 per cent of the territory of the
Republic,
while one third -,of the Greek Cypriot
population is denied by the military forces of occupation access to their homes, properties,
businesses
j.,
and families..

14. In paragraph 68 of his report, the SecretaryGeneral has clearly and unmistakably
stated:
.“It is more urgent than ever that real progress
.should be made so that the nresent highly unsatisfactory situation can be brought to an end and the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly can be fully implemented.”
15. The Council is now informed by the most
authoritative
report of the Secretary-General
that
during the past nine months nothing has been done for
the implementation
of the resolutions of the Assembly
and the Council. No one can blame or criticiie the
United Nations, the General Assembly or the Security
Council for failing to adopt resolutions containing the
right principles, in conformity
with the Charter for
the solution of the problem of Cyprus.

11. Is what I have said so far fact or fiction? Or is it
a mixture of fact and arbitrary conclusions? The
criminal Coup is a fact; the landing in Cyprus 11 months
ago of Turkish forces is a fact and not a nightmare;
the occupation of 40 per cent of the area of the
Republic is a fact, not tiction;.so is the displacement
by the Turkish forces of occupation of one third of the
Greek Cypriot population
of the’ island and their
reduction to the states of destitute, homeless refugees.

16. Both the General Assembly and the Security.
Council ‘call for respect for the independe,nce, sovereignty and territorial
integrity
of the non-aligned
‘State of Cyprus, but how is that independence’,
sov.ereignty and territorial
integrity
respected by
Turkey when it continues to maintain
under its
control the northern ‘part of Cyprus, preventing the
expelled inhabitants from returning to their homes,
and when the very existence of the Turkish forces in
Cyprus poses a further threat to the rest of the island?
How does Turkey respect the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Cyprus when so far it
has obstintiely
and persistently refused to make any
clear-cut statement to the effect that the Turkish
forces will be withdrawn, or at least to give an indication of the time of a total withdrawal? How does
Turkey respect the resolutions of the Security Council
and the General Assembly, which have called for the

12. Their continuing tragedy. is also an unbearable
fact borne out by paragraph 60 of report of the
Secretary-General,
which says:
.
“The situation of confrontation resulting from the
events of July and August 1974 has persisted. The
Turkish armed forces remain in control of the
northern part of-the island. Nearly one third of the
Greek Cypriot population
continues to be displaced.”
In this short sentence, with concise accuracy and
objective impartiality,
the Secretary-General
sums up
the turbulent events and human suffering of 11 tragic
2

-

speedy withdrawal of all foreign forces from the_.
territory of the Republic,
when, instead of speedy
withdrawal, there is a steady increase in Turkish
forces in Cyprus, which, from the level of 35,000
troops in November
1974, have now reached the
level of 43,000?

.21. Qrthequestion
of the.conditions under which the ’
Greek Cypriots live in the enclaves in the north, I
shall quote paragraph 40 of the report:
“The Greek Cypriots in the north continue to live
in difficult conditions,
with restrictions on their
movements outside their own village areas; they are
largely dependent on relief supplies for subsistence.”

17. Since 1 November
1974, both the General
Assembly and the Security Council have repeatedly
demanded that the refugees be allowed to return to
their homes; but not only have the Turkish forces
not permitted the refugees to return but those very
same forces have in certain areas in the north evicted
Greek Cypriots from their villages and homes and
placed them under guard, in conditions which the
International
Red Cross has described as unbearable,
in order to make their houses available to the Turkish
Cypriots. In addition to thousands of Greek Cypriot
refugees being made homeless by the Turkish forces,
this new action creates another category of Greek
Cypriot refugees who have been removed from theirhomes and their villages.

Further, the same paragraph clearly shows that the
Turkish forces have evicted Greek Cypriotsfrom
their
villages since the adoption of General Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX).
I continue quoting from that
paragraph:
“Two hundred and fifty [Greek Cypriots] were
concentrated in Morphou from surrounding villages;
all but 21 of these have been evacuated to the south.
Of the 350 who were originally confined to the Dome
Hotel in Kyrenia, only 53 remain. Seven were permitted-by the Turkish Cypriot authorities to return
to their Kyrenia homes.”
Seven people were permitted by the Turkish Cypriot
authorities, with the consent of the Turkish army,
to return to their homes. Permission is now needed for
a Greek Cypriot to live in his own home.

18. Both the General Assembly and the Security
Council have called for free and genuine negotiations
for the solution of the problem of Cyprus. But how can
free negotiations be conducted when there are 43,000
Turkish troops in Cyprus, when these troops create
by their action unbearable pressure on one side by
preventing
the return of 200,000 Greek Cypriot
refugees in contravention
of the relevant resolutions
of the United Nations?

22. On the question of the restrictions on the movement of UNFICYP
in the areas under the control of
Turkish forces, which render the Force incapable of
providing the needed security to the Greek Cypriots
living behind the Turkish
lines, I shall quote
paragraph 7 of the Secretary-General’s
report:

19. How can there be negotiations on an equal footing
when the Turkish forces continue to evict Greek
Cypriots from their homes, when they create new
pressures by daily restricting the freedom of movement of the Greeks in enclaves in the north? HQW can..
there be free negotiations
when the Turkish army
refuses freedom of movement to UNFICYP
in the
areas under the control of the Turkish forces, thus
denying protection to the thousands of Greek Cypriots
in enclaves behind the Turkish lines, and when these
Turkish forces of occupation are deployed and poised
ready to invade the rest of the territory of the Republic unless the views of Turkey with regard to the
solution of the problem are accepted? Can negotiations on an equal footing, as provided by the relevant
United Nations resolutions, take place under such
conditions?

“Owing to the continuing restrictions applied by’
the Turkish forces to its freedom of movement,
UNFICYP
has been limited in its ability to provide .’
~- security-to-Greek
CyprioWiving
in the north.”
Here we are talking about the security of 10,000 human
beings living behind the Turkish army.
23. And on the question of new restrictions imposed
by the Turkish forces on the Greek Cypriots living in
enclaves in the north, I shall quote paragraph 18 of
the report:
“In recent months, new restrictions have been
placed by Turkish forces on farming, grazing and
harvesting in areas where Greek Cypriots had been
permitted to carry out normal agricultural activities
under UNFICYP
escort prior to February 1975. This
has caused additional hardship to the population in
the forward areas and UNFICYP
is continuing its .
__. efforts to have these restrictions removed, par-ticuTai+y as no suchres&c?ions
are imposed on the
Turkish Cypriot villages in the south.”

20. In order to demonstrate some of these facts, I
can do no better than to quote passages from the
report of the Secretary-General
which we have before
us. On the question of the Turkish forces occupying
the northern part of Cyprus and denying...the..retu~~of the Greek inhabitants to their homes, I quote the
following from paragraph 60: “The Turkish armed
forces remain in control of the northern part of the
island. Nearly one third of the Greek Cypriot population continues to be displaced.”

24. By way of contrast, I shall now quote passages
from the Secretary-General’s
report which show how
3

31. Does not the fact that the Turkish forces in
Cyprus carry out, encourage and permit the confiscation of Greek Cypriot property, and the colonization
of Cyprus by Turks from Turkey, prove that this is
an army of occupation?

the Turkish. Cypriots in the south are treated by the
Government. Paragraph 35 of the report states:
“At the present time, there are some 10,700
Turkish Cypriots in the south, of whom 7,250 are
being provided with food and allowances by the
Greek Cypriot authorities,
who apply the same
criteria to them as apply to needy Greek Cypriots.”
25. Paragraph 42 of the Secretary-General’s
is also relevant in this connexion:

32. Does not the continuing
eviction of Greek
Cypriots from their homes in certain northern areas
prove that the Turkish forces are forces of occupation?

report
33. Does not the fact that the Turkish forces in
Cyprus give cover to Turkey and the Turkish Cypriots
to consolidate the faits accomplis created by the
Turkish invasion prove that these forces are an army
of occupation and not peace-keeping forces?

“Distribution
of social welfare benefits and
pensions to Greek Cypriots in the north and to
Turkish Cypriots in the south was begun in January
1975, and a total of about f160,OOO has been paid
out in conjunction with the welfare authorities of
both sides.”

34. From the factual questions I have posed, any
reasonable man-any jury of 12 ordinary men-would
have reached the decision that the Turkish forces
in Cyprus are an army of occupation and not a peacekeeping force.

26. The facts contained in the Secretary-General’s
report clearly establish that the Turkish forces continue to prevent the return of the refugees to their
homes, that they continue to evict from their homes and
villages Greek Cypriots who remain behind in Turkish
areas, and that they are taking more and more
restrictive measures against the Greek Cypriots in
the north, refusing freedom of movement to UNFICYP
and depriving the Greek Cypriots of its protection;
and all this at a time when free negotiations on an
equal footing and in a spirit of goodwill have been
repeatedly proposed by United Nations resolutions
and accepted by all the parties concerned.

35. The role of the Turkish army in Cyprus is to
occupy 40 per cent of the area of. the Republic, to
assist in changing the demographic
composition
of
the population of the Republic, to prevent the return of
one third of the Greek Cypriot population to their
homes, to reserve by force 40 per cent of that area
and 70 per cent of the resources of the Republic for
the Turkish
community,
which constitutes
only
18 per cent of the population of the island, and finally,
by the continuous presence of those forces in Cyprus,
to turn that 40 per cent of the area of the Republic
into a Turkish province.

27. I have stated that I will not accuse but that I
will give undisputed facts which should move the
Security Council to take a new and closer look at
what is happening in Cyprus. We should examine
who is responsible for such happenings and what
further measures are needed to remedy this unbearable
situation.

36. What is the remedy for this grave situation?
There is only one remedy, and this can only be the
urgent implementation
of the relevant resolutions of
the General Assembly and the Security Council.
37. I have already stated that no one can criticize
the United Nations for failure to adopt resolutions
and take decisions in accordance with the principles
of the Charter. On the other hand, no one can conceal
the fact that Turkey has ignored all such resolutions,
and has indeed acted contrary to them. If this situation is allowed to continue, the effectiveness of the
United Nations, in which so many hopes for peace
and international law and order have been placed, will
suffer an irreparable blow, and the word will be
fast returning to the era of premeditated
aggression,
occupation, annexation, colonization and the destruction of the independence of small States.

28. Perhaps the representative of Turkey will complain that I have called the Turkish forces in Cyprus
an army of occupation, when Turkey contends that
the Turkish forces in Cyprus constitute a peacekeeping force. Let us examine seriously whether the
characterization
of the Turkish forces in Cyprus as
an army of occupation is warranted by the facts or
whether it is an unwarranted, arbitrary conclusion.
29. Does not the fact that Turkey insists on maintaining and strengthening the number and equipment of
the Turkish forces in Cyprus and persistently refuses
to begin their withdrawal, contrary to the relevant
United Nations resolutions, confirm that the Turkish
forces are an army of occupation?

38.

The representative of Guyana has stated [183&h
that Turkey bears a heavy measure of responsibility for the non-implementation
of the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council. He has rightly warned that, should the
Secretary-General
be unable to report any progress
in his next report the Council and the Assembly, which
would be in session at the time, will be required to

meeting]

30. Does not .the fact that the Turkish army in Cyprus
has expelled, and prevents the return of, one third of
the Greek Cypriot popu!ation of the island to its homes
prove that this is an army of occupation and not a
peace-keeping force?
4

although the orevious negotiations were interrunted
because of the unilateral action taken by the Turkish
side in declaring a Turkish Federated State in Cyprus,
and despite the fact that resolution 367 (1975) rejected
the declaration
of a Turkish
Federated State in
Cyprus and asked the parties to refrain from any action
which might jeopardize the negotiations between the
representatives of the two communities,
the Turkish
side proceeded, after the time for the second round of
talks was agreed upon, to fix a date on which the
Turkish referendum on the so-called Turkish constitution would be held; and that date coincided with the
time for the second round of the Vienna talks.

take a new look at the situation, and perhaps to
participate more directly in the search for peace in
Cyprus.
39. I agree fully with that view. Three resolutions of
the Council have called in clear terms for the implementation of the relevant resolutions
of the General
Assembly and the Security Council. All three resolutions have been ignored by Turkey.
40. It has been established beyond doubt that no
progress whatsoever has been made in the implementation of the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly, and that responsibility for their non-implementation
rests on Turkey.
It is now pertinent to examine whether there has
been any progress in the negotiating process called
for by repeated resolutions of the Council. As the
Secretary-General
stated in paragraph 66 of his
report: “the deadlock over the fundamental basis of
a settlement persists.” He further stresses, in paragraph 67: “It seems to me essential that the negotiating process between the community representatives
should be maintained and, if possible, accelerated”.

45. Is this indicative of a good will to negotiate?
Does it demonstrate a will to find a negotiated solution of the Cyprus problem, or, really, does it clearly
show that the Turkish side, encouraged by Turkey,
is attempting
to consolidate an illegal position and
make the defucto situation, by a series of faits accomplis, an unavoidable and inescapable conclusion of
those negotiations?
46. During the first round of talks at Vienna, certain
suggestions were made for the return of the refugees
to their homes under conditions of safety in four
areas in Cyprus. Mr. Denktag promised to study the
suggestions and, after consulting his military experts,
give the views of his side at the second round of the
Vienna talks.

41. The question which arises is whether it is
possible to maintain or accelerate the negotiating
process when the Turkish side has no real intention
of negotiating but, on the contrary, by a series of faits
accomplis, intends to consolidate its position.
42. I do not wish to appear pessimistic, but as a
realist I have to face reality. There has been no real
intention on the part of the Turkish side to negotiate,
unless by negotiation the Greek side will be brought to
accept the Turkish terms. In other words, negotiations,
from the Turkish point of view, are tantamount
to
accepting, or surrendering to, the Turkish demands.
The Greek Cypriot side, during the negotiations, stated
clearly and fully its views on the solution of the Cyprus
problem. It proposed a bi-communal
multiregional
federation and elaborated its views on its proposals.
The Turkish side proposed a biregional federation,
but has persistently refused to submit or explain in
detail what that means and what the various aspects
of the federation would be.

47. When the second round of the Vienna talks
started, Mr. Denktas informed us that all the Turkish
side would do at that stage was permit 10,000 Greek
Cypriot refugees to move south, on the understanding
that the Greek Cypriot side would also permit 10,000
Turkish Cypriot refugees to move north. In other
words, in the view of Mr. Denktas, the return of the
refugees called for by the Security Council was
equivalent to an exchange of populations-an
exchange
of populations which is contrary to the letter and the
spirit of all the resolutions of the Security Council.
48. In fact, if it had not been for the great skill,
persistence and patience of the Secretary-General,
the talks carried out in Vienna would have been impossible to maintain
and would have been impossible to maintain and would have been terminated.
A just tribute must be paid to the Secretary-General
for all his efforts .with regard to finding a peaceful
solution of the Cyprus problem, but it is important
to remember
that, with all the skill, ability and
persistence of the Secretary-General,
the Security
Council must not. feel that it has placed on his
shoulders the entire responsibility
for the solution
of the problem. Measures are needed from the Council
to strengthen the process of negotiation by making
possible the implementation
of its various resolutions
and those of the General Assembly, the implementation of which would create a new situation, a new
climate in Cyprus which would facilitate the task of
finding a peaceful solution to the problem.

43. Despite the fact that it was agreed to hold talks
in Vienna and,the first round of those talks was held
between 28 April and 3 May 1975, Mr. Denktas,
who attended the talks, alleged that the Turkish side
was not ready to state its case but had merely, come to
hear what Mr. Clerides had to say. Surely Mr. Denktag
knew, from 12 March 1975, when Security Council
resolution 367 (1975) was adopted, that negotiations
under the auspices of the Secretary-General
would
take place. He further knew, weeks in advance, that
a date had been fixed for those negotiations. Yet he
alleged that he came unprepared and not ready to
state the Turkish Cypriots point of view.
44. Do these facts show any serious intention,
or
any intention
at all, of negotiating?
Furthermore,
5

49. I recollect that during the examination
of the
problem by the Security Council on 12 March 1975
I warned the Council that the measures it had adopted
were inadequate to prevent the destruction of the
Republic of Cyprus. I stated then:
_.,,.I

opinion of any reasonable man-time
to agree that the
problem has reached the cross-roads and that new
ways of solving the problem, including the Soviet
proposal for an international
conference on Cyprus,
should be accepted, if we are to get out of the deadlock
.brought about by the Turkish occupation of Cyprus.

“We believed that the- situation~was~~stich’ that
certain urgent measures had to be taken to protect
the existence of Cyprus as an independent State.
We regret that despite the fact that we have outlined
with clarity the measures which we considered
necessary they have not been adopted by the
Security Council. The Security Council, in its
wisdom, has adopted measures which are less
effective in our opinion. We bow to the wisdom of
the Security Council. We however point out that the
Security Council, in its desire. to compromise,
to
take measures which would offend nobody, ,may
have compromised
the very existence of the
Republic of Cyprus. We hope and we earnestly pray
that we may be proved wrong.“’ [1820th meeting,
para.

53. In conclusion, I should like to state that, despite
the unwillingness
of the Turkish side to negotiate,
despite the fact that the Turksih forces continue to be
in Cyprus, we shall attend the next round of talks
fully prepared to discuss every aspect of the problem
but we expect-in
fact we have the right to demandthat the Turkish Cypriot side will come to the talks
also prepared to discuss every aspect of the problem,
which includes the question of the return of the
refugees to their homes, the question of the withdrawal
of the Turkish forces from Cyprus and the extent of
the area that the Turkish Cypriot side wants to be
placed under its administration.

205.1

54. If these aspects are not discussed in the negotiations in July, then I am afraid that we shall be
convinced beyond any doubt that by continuing the
- process of negotiations we simply subscribe to the
consolidation
of the de facto occupation of Cyprus;
but we shall never accept or comply with that.

50. The question is: have we been proved wrong?
Have the 11 months which have elapsed shown any
.’ improvement in the situation? Have they removed the
danger of the destruction of the independence,
the
sovereignty, the non-alignment
of the Republic of
Cyprus? Is it not clear to all that Turkey does not
55. The PRESIDENT:
The members of the Council
intend to withdraw its forces from Cyprus? Is it’not
will
recall
that
it
was
decided
at the 1830th meeting,
clear to all that there has been an increase both in
in
accordance
with
the
understanding
reached
numbers and in strength of weapons in the hands of
during prior consultations,
to extend an invitation
the Turkish forces in Cyprus? Is it not really clear that
under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure to
no effort has been made by the Turkish side to assist
Mr. Vedat Celik. In accordance with that decision, I
in finding a solution of the problem? If the Secretarypropose at this time, with the consent of the Council,
General in his next report does not report any real
to invite Mr. Celik to take a place at .the Council
progress either towards the implementation
of the
table in order to make a further statement.
Council resolutions or towards finding a solution
through his negotiations, it will be very urgent and
56. Mr. CELIK:
Mr. President, I should like to
important for the Security Council to take another
thank
you
and,
through
you, each and every member
close look at the situation in Cyprus and to act, and
of the Council for having allowed me to speak for
to act decisively, before the independence of Cyprus
a second time. I have asked to speak in order to
is totally destroyed.
‘comment
on some of the points raised by Mr. Clerides
-’ -----‘:- _._- _,.-~_I~ _- _._. ..___ --and some. of those who spoke last Friday [/830th
51.
I
should
like
to
pay
a
tribute
to
the
work
done
_’
meeting],
and to express the views of the Turkish
by UNFICYP.
I must, however, stress that this work
Cypriot
side
on the political problem of Cyprus.
falls short of its requirements,
not’ because of any
inability on the part of UNFICYP
but because of the
57. Last Friday, when I said that I was speaking for
restrictions imposed on its movements by the Turkish
forces in Cyprus. I believe iE.is really a paradox that
and on behalf of the Turkish Federated State of Cyprus,
UNFICYP,
legally and authoritatively
established by
Mr. Clerides questioned my status and accused me of
resolutions of the Security Council, should be prehaving created yet another fait accompli, as he put it.
vented by an army of occupation from carrying out its
I do ont intend to go into all that again, because I am
sure that both Mr. Clerides and all the members of the
full task.
Council know very well what my status is and whom
I represent. I do represent one of the two sides to the
52. I should like also to pay a tribute to the work of
Cyprus problem, one of the two national communities
the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General
in Cyprus, the Turkish Cypriot community, which has
in Cyprus and also to that of the Commander
and
recently been restructured as the Turkish Federated
all the officers and men of UNFICYP
and to those
State of Cyprus to constitute the Turkish wing of the
countries that are continuing either to maintain confuture, and I hope not-too-distant
future, Federal
tingents in Cyprus or to provide funds for their
Republic of Cyprus.
maintenance. It is, in my opinion-and,
.I think, in the
.

6

58. Every time the problem of Cyprus comes. up
for discussion at the United Nations in the General
Assembly or the Security Council-nd
it comes up
very often, in fact it recently .started coming up
practically every other month-the
debate, instead of
exploring the avenues of an early peaceful settlement,
immediately
takes the form of a futile struggle of
mutual accusations, which seems to us barren and
definitely very harmful. I do not intend, therefore, to
enter into polemics with Mr. Clerides. .I was in factquite prepared to be satisfied with the short statement
that I made last Friday, 13 June, not because I had
nothing much to say, but because my side does not
believe in the usefulness of such a debate at a time
-when the two sides are engaged in negotiations. My
side does not believe in the exploitation of the political
problem in various international forums simply for the
sake of,political
propaganda. We do not believe that
an expression of solidarity or support that one side
may obtain from some international
conference
sui generis,
which most probably feels more compassion for, than it has knowledge of, Cyprus, can
possibly contribute to the acceleration of a peaceful
solution.

say, is most unfair. Mr. Denktas,. whom,.incidentally,
I accompanied to Vienna on both occasions, attended
the talks well prepared and with a full mandate. It may
be that what he gave Mr. Clerides did not satisfy the
latter or the Greek Cypriot’side,
which he represents,
but it would be incorrect to say that Mr. Denktas
.was unprepared and that Mr. Clerides today, after
having attended two rounds of talks in Vienna, does
not know the Turkish Cypriot position.

59. We do not believe that even the best of the international forums-these
very chambers-can
do much
to solve the problem of Cyprus if we, the interested
,parties; do not get down to some serious business,
and in a spirit of goodwill and co-operation negotiate
a peaceful settlement with mutual concessions and
accommodations.

“There was an exchange of views on the powers
and functions of the central government, and certain
papers were submitted.”

64. Mr,. Clerides knows our views regarding the
structure of the State-that
is, for example, that we
stand for biregional federation. He knows our views
regarding the powers and functions of the central
Government.
He also knows the Turkish Cypriot
position regarding the geographical and humanitarian
aspects of the problem. He has our proposal for .a
transitional joint central Federal Government.
65. Let us examine the developments
during the
first and second rounds of the Vienna talks. During
the first Vienna talks held from 28 April to 3 May
1975-arid here I quote from the final communique
issued at the end of the first round:

-Those
papers were submitted
continue:

by Mr. Clerides-I

“In order to facilitate further consideration
of
this matter, it was agreed to set up an expert committee of the two parties to examine detailed
proposals and to report back to the negotiators
at their next meeting with the Secretary-General
in
Vienna.” [S/I 1684, annex.]

60. In my brief statement today, therefore, I shall
try to examine how much we have done during the
intercommunal
talks, what we must do and how it must
be done if we are to solve this very difficult and
complex problem in the foreseeable future.
61. We must bear in mind what the nroblem is. when
and why it started, and decide on what we must do in
order to speed up a settlement.

66. What happened ? As soon as we returned to
Nicosia we appointed the Turkish members of the
Committee of Experts, and the firstjoint meeting of the
Committee was held on 12 May 1975. Unfortunately,
however, we ran into difficulty
at the very first
meeting. The Greek Cypriot side, instead of carrying
out serious negotiations with us in Nicosia, preferred
to run to Strasbourg and to have recourse to the
European Commission
of Human Rights, where it
submitted an application against Turkey, which was
scheduled to be heard on 22 and 23 May.

1

62. We have heard the statement of Mr. Clerides.
Although I must reject much of what he said, I understand why he came to New York and why he said
what he did. I do appreciate that he may have’some
internal problems in Cyprus, but with all due respect
I do not share his pessimism and I cannot possibly
share his line of thought and his, or his side’s, approach
to the problem. Although
a solution has not yet
been found to the problem of Cyprus, although we
have not ,yet managed to break the ice, the Vienna
talks are going on. Serious and constructive negotiations are continuing on important matters of substance
and I am sure that with patience and goodwill,, with
mutual concessions and accommodations,
a peaceful
and just solution can and must be found.

67. Mr. Denktag’ spoke to Mr. Clerides and asked
for a postponement
of the Strasbourg hearing, informing him that otherwise we would have to send our
experts toStrasbourg and the Committee would therefore be unable to complete its work and draw up the
required report on the purpose and -functions of the
central government of the future Federal Republic of
Cyprus in time for the second round of Vienna talks.

63. We have heard Mr. Clerides accuse Mr. Denktas,
the representative of the Turkish Cypriot community at
the talks, of going to Vienna unprepared. This, I must

68. I regret to say-and here I would like to clear
Mr. Clerides of any personal responsibility,
because
7

principle of political equality that federation implies.
We have made it abundantly
clear to the Greek
Cypriot side what we mean by political equality. We
are not after numerical equality at each and every level
of the central government set-up. We ask for equality
at the policy-making
level; we ask for equality at the
managerial level; we ask, in other words, for an equal
say and effective representation
on such questions
as our security, the independence of the island, and
equal status for the two national communities.
But,
unfortunately,
our Greek friends still cannot abandon.
the 80 per cent-20 per cent complex, which led to
the collapse of the first attempt to create a livable
State of Cyprus.

I am sure he must have tried his best to keep his
promise-that,
despite a promise by Mr. Clerides that
the Strasbourg case would be postponed, we were
double-crossed by the Greek side. We found out in due
course that, contrary to their promises, the preliminary
hearing of the case would be held as planned.
69. Mr. Denktas again contacted Mr. Clerides, who
said that Mr. Loucaides, their legal counsel, had acted
without authority and that the matter would be
rectified. Until the last moment we were given the
impression that the case had been postponed; at the
last moment, we were informed again that the case
was on, but that someone would be sent to Strasbourg
to ask the Chairman of the Commission for a postponement. But, to our great surprise, when the time came
a whole team of Greek Cypriot legal experts clandestinely rushed to Strasbourg for the hearing-in
fact, they rushed so fast that they had an accident and
suffered a couple of broken limbs, unfortunately.

74. If we are negotiating federation, the head of the
Greek Cypriot community should stop speaking of a
unitary State-no
matter how strong an expression
of solidarity he may receive for his present so-called
Government from some conferences or organizations.
Instead of making misleading
statements about a
unitary State, Makarios should start talking to his
people about federation in a realistic way so that the
people start finding out for themselves what federation
means. They should know what is meant by political
equality in a federation, what the system of rotation
and how states are represented in the federal set-up.

70. That naturally led to our experts going to
Strasbourg as well, so the work of the Committee of
Experts was disrupted and the report which we had
promised to submit on the views of the Turkish Cypriot
side regarding the powers and functions of the central
federal government could not be prepared in time.
Nevertheless, we went to Vienna, and Mr. Denktas,
despite the absence of a concrete paper, presented to
Mr. Clerides the Turkish Cypriot position on the
matter. For example, Mr. Clerides knows in broad
outline our position on the powers and functions of the
central government;
he knows what we mean by
political equality in federation; and he knows how
strong a central government we would like to have and
why we ask for it.

75. If Makarios
rejects federation-and
from his
statements it appears that he does-then
a serious
question arises about Mr. Clerides’ mandate.
76. This is, I think, the most important
factor
holding back a quick settlement.
Does the Greek
Cypriot side accept a biregional federation? Does the
Greek Cypriot side accept political equality? These
are fundamental issues which have to be cleared up
first, before any meaningful negotiations can proceed
on matters of detail.

71. During the first round of the talks in Vienna,
among other things, agreement was also reached in
principle on the reopening of the Nicosia airport: “A
joint committee will be set up in Cyprus by the leaders
of the two communities
for the purpose of opening
the airport for full civilian use” [ibid.]. That committee
has not yet been set up. Why? In Makarios’ own words:
“Because the Turkish side insists on equal representation which, if accepted, would create a bad precedent
for the powers and functions of the central government
which are currently being negotiated”.

77. “1 shall never sign an agreement”, says Makarios,
“which will give legality to the Turkish Cypriot position within its present context.” What is the present
Turkish position? It is the unavoidable position which
has emerged because of the illegal and unconstitutional efforts. of the Greek side to violate Turkish
rights and unite Cyprus with Greece. It is a de f~~cto
separation, a regrouping of the communities,
forcibly
imposed on us by the Greeks.

72. We are negotiating federation. This is obvious
from the official proposals
exchanged
between
Mr. Denktas and Mr. Clerides which are mentioned
in the report of the Secretary-General of 18 February
1975 [S///624].
This was also confirmed by the
Secretary-General
in his last report, paragraph 66 of
which reads: “The discussions concentrated in particular on the powers and functions of the future
central government of a federal State of Cyprus, the
structure of that State, the territorial extent of .the
zones which constitute, it...“.

78. I do not think that anyone in these chambers
exfiected an overnight solution of the problem of
Cyprus. The problem with which the United Nations
has been burdened for the last two decades is a complex
one. The past 11 years and especially the carp of
15 July 1974 have made it even more complicated.
79. In the first round of the talks it was hoped that
we would find the avenue which would lead us in the
right direction towards a just and lasting solution.
Great patience and very good statesmanship are needed
for any headway to be made. It appears that the Greek

73. Now, if we are negotiating federation-and
we
are-the interested parties should accept at least the
8

.

Cypriot side needs some time to rethink;
some time to readjust.

it may need

Cypriot negotiator at the talks, replied to Mr. Denktas’s
proposal, Makarios’s spokesman in Nicosia came out
with a statement which was tantamount to a refusal.

80. What is more important,
we need to have a
suitable atmosphere in which to negotiate and to realign
ourselves to present realities and circumstances.
I
do not think that one could possibly claim that the
present atmosphere and the circumstances prevailing
in the island today are the best and are what are
needed for this purpose.

87. Our offer still stands, and we hope that it will
receive serious consideration by the Greek side.
88. The Turkish side is constantly being criticized
by the Greeks for not respecting of for not having
implemented
the United Nations resolutions. That is
most unfair and unjust. I think that we are more
justified in criticizing them for the very same offence.
I think it would be more true to say that they are
blocking the way to the implementation
of the United
Nations resolutions by insisting on not seeing reality
and by not accepting a realistic solution to the problem
of Cyprus.

81. Another important point is that we should choose
between serious negotiations and propaganda. I hope
that the Greek side will realize that it cannot put up
a political fight at each and every international forum
to which it can possibly gain access and at the same
time carry on meaningful
negotiations
with us in
Vienna. It cannot, for example, be in Strasbourg and
Nicosia at one and the same time because things said
and done in one forum are bound to have adverse
effects in the other.

89. I shall not enter into polemics here on this issue.
But it is obvious that the two sides have very widely
differing views on this matter. There is definitely
no Turkish defiance of or reluctance to implement the
United Nations resolutions. The question of the implementation of the United Nations resolutions is a matter
of practicability;
it is a matter of approach; it is a
matter of priorities. Resolutions can be implemented
only with reasonable practicability:
100 per cent of the
refugees cannot go back tomorrow,
for obvious
security reasons. Turkish withdrawal before settlement
is impossible. The main idea of the resolutions is the
call for agreement between the two national communities. Otherwise, it would mean the end of the
Turkish territory;
it would mean the end of our
security; and it would mean the complete hand-over
of the Turkish Cypriot community to the Greeks again
and therefore the end of Cyprus independence in the
long run.

82. We need a political truce. We have to have one
if the negotiations are to succeed, for peaceful negotiations are incompatible
with mutual accusations.
Unilateral
actions by the Greek Cypriot administration in international
forums and conferences should
cease. Otherwise, forces will continue to be constantly
put in action between the two sides, forces which it
will be very difficult, if not impossible,
to reverse
later on. Positions become very rigid and the negotiators gradually lose their flexibility.
83. That is why we officially proposed at the second
phase of the Vienna talks the formation of a joint
transitional
federal government.
What is this joint
interim federal government expected to achieve? It
will halt further separation between the two national
communities,
a separation
that unfortunately
is
becoming wider and wider each day, and will help,
we hope, to introduce an element of co-operation
between the two communities.
People, I regret to say,
are beginning to think that two homes of love are better
than one home of hatred. That is a notion we must
dispel and dispel very quickly.

85. All this will bring some elasticity and flexibility
into the negotiations and make a solution easier.

90. There is a difference in the approaches of the two
sides to the problem. For the Greek Cypriots the
Cyprus problem is a question of “Turkish aggression”
or “Turkish occupation”
which started in July 1974.
So for them a solution of the problem relates to how
to achieve or how to negotiate a Turkish withdrawal.
For us that is not so. For us there is no aggression;
there is no occupation. The Turkish troops came to
Cyprus under international
treaties, not to annex
territory, but to protect the independence of the island
and the security of the Turkish Cypriot community.
The presence of the Turkish troops on the island is
not an aggression but an attempt to prevent consolidation of an aggression that was already put in motion
in 1963 and was accelerated by the 15 July coup
engineered by the junta against Makarios, the aim of
which was to end the independence,
sovereignty,
territorial integrity and non-alignment
of the island.

86. That was a very serious proposal, very seriously
made;.it should be very seriously considered. Unfortunately, it .has not been very seriously considered.
A very serious proposal has been taken very lightly
-so much so that before Mr. Clerides, the Greek

91. For the Turkish Cypriot side, therefore, the
problem started, not in 1974 as claimed ,by our Greek
friends, but in 1963. For us it is a.matter of negotiating
coexistence between the two national communities
which are the co-owners of the isiand and partners in

84. It will, we hope, establish a process of consultation between the two sides. It will run common
services and normalize life in some fields, with the
obvious effect on the people. Cyprus will be represented outside as one body, and we hope that the
political
struggle will cease and rigidity
will be
prevented.

9

its independence. ‘It is a matter of finding a just and
permanent solution. The riiht exercise, therefore,
would be a sincere effort to find a settlement,
to
rearrange our home. We must rearrange it in such
a way that the Greek Cypriot leadership will not be
in a position to usurp all governmental powers again
and to treat the Turks as unwanted aliens.

houses in the south? This, I think, is the problem
.,
Cyprus.

100. At the root .of all this lies the feeling .of
insecurity of life and property caused by the policy and
practice of the Greek Cypriot leadership of the last
11 years. If I may quote from paragraph. 1 I of the.
report of the Political
Affairs. Committee
of the
Parliamentary
Assembly of the Council of Europe;
adopted by the Assembly on.24 April l975,

92. We must re-establish communal
equality and
provide for absolute security of-life and property so
that the past cannot repeat itself. We must have actual
and physical guarantees. We have to prevent misuse
of power by one side against the other.

“Economic,
social and educational inequality, as
well as insecurity for personal life. during the last
11 years, were the origins of intercommunity
mistrust
and fears, of political tension, and regional .as well
as communal isolation between the minority Turkish __
Cypriot and the majority Greek-Cypriot
populations... it was a fact which created in the TurkishCypriot community
a feeling of being underprivileged and oppressed.‘**

93. The.. humanitarian
problem,
as we have
repeatedly stated on previous ,occasions in this very
chamber, is common to both .communities.
In fact
we ‘have lived with a refugee problem for the last two.
decades.and we know how a refugee feels.

.

of

94. With regard to numbers, it suffices to restate the
known fact that more than one third of the Turkish
Cypriot population on the island has been displaced
since the cuup of July 1974. Paragraph 36 of the
Secretary-General’s last report refers to this. One thing
that that report does not elaborate upon, naturally,
is ‘the fact that for most of the Turkish refugees,
unlike the Greek Cypriots, this is the fourth displacement in the last two decades.

‘The Committee visited Cyprus in September 1974 and
carried out an on-the-spot investigation of the situation
on the island.
101. Allegations that there is importation of population from Turkey with a view to changing the demographic character of the island are completely baseless
and untrue. It will sufhce here to quote from an
official letter addressed to the Secretary-General by the
President of the Turkish ,Federated State of Cyprus;
Mr. Denktas, [S//17/8], dated 9 June 1975. He wrote:
L‘ . . . allegations that there is massive emigration
from Turkey to Cyprus and a deliberate policy to
change the demographic character of the island...
are not only-completely
contrary to the truth but
also a distortion of the true facts. All that has
occurred is that skilled technicians and workers
have been imported from Turkey on a temporary
basis as ‘guest workers’, and Turkish Cypriots who
had previously been denied the right to live in their
own country by the Greek Cypriot administration
are now being given the opportunity to return.”
:
That official statement, a very recent one, still stands,
and I do not think it needs any further clarification.
Incidentally,
over decades I have never heard of
any obstacles preventing.any mainland Greek, in or out
of uniform, from coming and settling in Cyprus.

95. We appreciate the solution of the refugee problem
from the humanitarian .point of view. We appreciate
the importance of the .problem from the point of view
of the economy of the island as a whole. But, unfortunately;we
cannot put the. cart .before the horse, as
the Greek Cypriots .want to do. That should never
be.a pre-condition to negotiations or settlement. And
that is where we differ from the Greek side.
%. For the Greeks the question of refugees is a
question of a house or some property they left in the
north. For the Turks the question is a matter of life
and death; .it is a matter of security, and therefore
a matter of a political settlement.
..
97. Property loss. can be regained;. it can be compensated for. But security, if lost,‘cannot
easily be
regained, and life, once lost, is irreplaceable. That is
what our Greek Cypriot friends seem to be finding
difftcult to understand.

102. The referendum held in north Cyprus on 8 June
1975 is not a new fait accompli, as the Greek side
calls it. It is a completely internal affair of the Turkish
Federated State of Cyprus and has nothing to do
with the other side. It is part and parcel -of the
proclamation
of the Turkish Federated’State,
which
took, place on 13 February 1975 and was exhaustively
debated in these chambers late last February and
early in March [1813th--1820th
meetings].

98. We should first have a peaceful settlement. We
should restore peace, security and confidence. Then
the humanitarian
problem and the question of the
withdrawal of Turkish troops would be settled without
difficulty.
99. Why is it that the GreekCypriot
displaced persons
want to go to the north despite the Turkish .military
presence? Why’is it that the Turkish displaced persons
in the south want to go’ to the north? Why is it that
displaced persons in the north refuse to go to their

..

103. When the ,Turkish Federated State of Cyprus
was proclaimed, a legal working programme was drawn
_^
10

.,

109. What were and still are a few minor problems in
Cyprus became an unbearable
situation in New
York. I do not think I need elaborate further.

up whereby a new constitution wouldbe drafted within
so many days; it would be adopted by the Constituent
Assembly within a specified period; it would be
reported in the official gazette by the President within
10 days after adoption and would then be presented
to the people through a referendum within 15 days of
publication in the official gazette.

110. On Friday we were criticized by ‘Mr. Clerides
for having set up a new communications
system
whereby north Cyprus will be communicating
with
the outside world through Turkey by telephone and in
every other way. It is easy for Mr. Clerides to raise
this matter here in the Security Council for propaganda
purposes. But I wonder whether it has occurred to
Mr. Clerides to wonder how the Turkish Cypriot
community
managed for the last 12 years without
telephones,
without postal services and without
communications
with the outside world. It would be
more helpful if, instead of criticizing a situation which
they themselves caused, the Greek Cypriot leadership
would realize their mistakes and take urgent measures
to rectify them.

104. This is a legal working programme which cannot
be halted. The referendum has given legality to the
Constitution of the Turkish Federated State of Cyprus
as far as the Turkish Cypriots are concerned, but we
cannot see why it has caused so much excitement and
alarm among our Greek Cypriot compatriots. It is not
a new development.
It brought nothing new. It did
not change the status of the Turkish Federated State
of Cyprus. On the contrary, the referendum brought
a new element which should please the Greek Cypriots.
105. The new Constitution of the Turkish Federated
State of Cyprus, which was voted upon by the Turkish
Cypriot community last week, contains a basic article
which provides that, after agreement has been reached
on a federal constitution,
this Constitution
wil! be
amended accordingly.

111. Establishing communications
with the outside
world cannot possibly be regarded as a fait accompli.
We have to survive; we have to carry on our economic
life, and we must have communications
with the outside world. We cannot sit back and wait for another
12 years for the Greek side to give us basic fundamental rights, including the right to communicate with
the outside world.

106. Transitional
article 2 of the Constitution
reads
as follows: “When the Constitution
of the Federal
Republic of Cyprus comes into force, the necessary
amendments shall accordingly be made to the Constitution of the Turkish Federated State of Cyprus”.

112. We have also heard statements to the effect that
the Turkish Cypriots in the south are enjoying the same
social benefits and receive equal treatment as the
Greeks, and that they enjoy full freedom of movement and security.

This gives Mr. Denktag, the Turkish negotiator in the
talks, a mandate freely to negotiate a federal constitution which may embody articles different from the
provisions of the present Constitution of the Federated
State. It does not, therefore, prejudge or prejudice the
final federal constitution.

,113. The unfounded nature of this allegation
is
obvious from the following
statements made by
Mr. Clerides himself in a panel discussion on the
Greek Cypriot television on 29 May 1975, in which
other Greek Cypriot party leaders also participated.
I quote Mr. Clerides:

107. It is worth noting that the question of the
referendum was never raised with us as an issue in
Nicosia. We were never approached for a postponement. But unfortunately it became an issue all of a
sudden in Vienna at the beginning of the second round
of the talks, and it is being exploited here in New
York, after it has taken place.

“We must, in a practical way, solve the problems
of the Turkish Cypriots in the south. This we should
have done long ago.
“The budget of the Republic, for example, should
include a provision for improving the living conditions of the Turks living under ‘government’ control.
This was not done in the past. The Turkish Cypriots
must feel that they enjoy security oflife and property.
But this is not enough. They must also work. They
must be given an opportunity for economic development. They must enjoy freedom of movement in the
region under the control of the Republic, because
they should be able to sell their produce.

108. Mr. Clerides has claimed that the situation of the
Greeks in the north is unbearable.
This is what
Mr. Clerides said to the press on 25 April of this year,
after his joint visit with Mr. Denktas to the Greek
villages on the Karpas peninsula:
“I can say that they were very happy to see me,
and I was very happy to see them; they had no
major problems.
There are one or two minor
problems which Mr. Denktas and I can discuss and
I feel sure that we can find a solution.”

“The
State should solve these fundamental
problems of the Turks. We should educate”-maybe
he should have said,, “We should re-educate”“our National Guard soliders so that they should
not look upon the Turkish Cypriots as the national
enemies”-or
natural enemies-“of
the Greeks.”

I wish Mr. Denktas could have made a similar statement after the subsequent joint visit to Paphos, where
they visited the stranded Turkish Cypriots.
11

114. Does this show that the Turks are fairly treated
in the south? If I may quote, from another party leader,
Mr. Papaionnou,
leader of AKEL,
the Communist
Party in Cyprus:

& the best and only way to solve the problem of
Cyprus. We stand for the independence’, sovereignty,
territorial integrity and non-alignment
of the island.
119. My side still will continue to do its best to
reach a just and lasting solution within this framework, and in our efforts to do so we hope that we
shall receive the necessary co-operation
from the
Greek Cypriot side. We fully agree with what the
Secretary-General
said during the recent talks, that:

“Turks in the south should be given a feeling of
security, so that they can consider themselves as
equal citizens of the Republic.
“We must begin, as a State, to treat them in the
same way as we treat the Greek Cypriots.
“Practical
measures are required
confidence of the Turks.

“It is essential to maintain the negotiating process
and not to allow the search for a settlement to
lapse, even if we are fully aware that the time may
not as yet be ripe for a breakthrough.”

to gain the

“First of all, the State should set a good example.

120. Peace talks cannot and should not be abandoned
under any pretext whatsoever.

“Then our Ministers should set a good example.
The Ministers should not forget that they are the
Ministers not only of the Greeks but of the Turks as
well. They should visit the Turkish villages and
take interest in the problems of the Turkish villages.

I now call on the represen121. The PRESIDENT:
tative of Cyprus, who has asked to speak.
122. Mr. CLERIDES
(Cyprus): I fully concur with
the last statement of Mr. Celik that the talks should
not be abandoned and that an effort should be made
through the talks to find a solution. But I wish to add
that negotiations should not be protracted, as he stated
in the beginning of his speech, when there is really
no intention of negotiating and when the time set aside
for the protracted
negotiations
is used for the
consolidation of the defucto partition of Cyprus.

“The Turks must enjoy the same rights as the
Greeks. When their security is endangered, those
who violate the laws, those who are involved in the
activities against the Turkish Cypriots, must be
severely punished.”
Are they not 15 years late?
115. In their statements last Friday, some of the
members of the Security Council used the term
“Cypriot
people”, implying that there is a Cypriot
nation in Cyprus. Not only is the concept totally
opposed to what we Turks in Cyprus consider as an
acceptable definition of the word “people”,
but it is
also one of the rare occasions where we happen to find
ourselves in agreement with the highest authority of
the Greeks, on the Greek conception of nationhood:
no less a person than the Ethnarch himself, Archbishop Makarios,
whose views in this respect has
been quoted several times and can be found in the
past records of the Council.

123. Mr. Celik has said a few things which, as they
were taken out of their context, required some detailed
clarification.
Mr. Celik had said that Mr. Denktag,
during the first round of the Vienna talks, came fully
authorized and fully prepared to explain the position
of his side. Perhaps Mr. Celik means that he had
full authorization to take copious notes of what I was
saying, because I asked Mr. Denktas the following
question: “Are you ready to tell me what are the
powers and functions of the central government in a
federated bicommunal State, or are you not?”

116. The question of missing persons has again
been raised today, despite official statements made by
both sides-at
least by my side-to
the effect that
there are no prisoners of war or detainees in the hands
of the Turkish authorities.
We do believe that this
humanitarian
issue should not be exploited
any
further.

124. Mr. Denktas’ answer was: “I am not ready. I
came to hear, what you have to say.” To show both
my willingness to negotiate and my readiness to
negotiate, I then handed Mr. Denktas a paper containing a list of powers and functions I propose for
the federal government,
a list giving in detail the
functions I proposed for the regional governments or
authorities. Mr. Denktas said: “Well, I cannot discuss
it now, I need expert advice”.

117. Again, Mr. Clerides has elaborated in detail
on the number of the Turkish troops in Cyprus and
on their actions and behaviour, but he failed to refer
to Greek mainland military presence in Cyprus. What
their number is, how long they have been in Cyprus
and for what purpose, we do not know. Or are they
not considered tc be foreign troops at all?

125. I asked Mr. Denktag the question: “What is
your side’s position with regard to the extent of the
area that should come under Turkish administration?”
Mr. Denktas said: “I am not in a position to give you
my side’s views on this issue”:

118. I shall not take any more of the time of the
Council. We do believe that the intercommunal
talks

126. I asked Mr. Denktas: “What is your view with
regard to the return of the refugees to their homes,
12

either as a preliminary
step or in connection with the
solution of the Cyprus problem?” Mr. Denktas majestically said that he was not prepared to state the
percentage ,of refugees, or the areas to which they
could return, either as a preliminary
gesture or in
connection with the solution of the Cyprus problem.

133. These are the details. I come now to the substance of the problem. Mr. Celik says that there have
been no faits accomplis during this period. I therefore
asked Mr. Celik: “Does not the proclamation
of a
so-called separate State and the subsequent holding of
a referendum constitute a fait accompli?” The Turkish
side had, years ago, established a separate administration; it had established so-called Turkish laws under
which this separate Turkish
administration
was
working and operating.

127. I asked Mr. Denktag what his side’s views
were on the question of the foreign forces in Cyprus,
in connexion with the final solution; and Mr. Denktas
looked at me in amazement, saying that he was not
prepared to state his position.

134. Why was it necessary, at the most crucial point
in the negotiations, to declare a separate State and then
to proceed to prepare, as he calls it, a legislative
programme for a referendum on that constitution?
And how can he state that this does not affect the
Greek side, when that very constitution,
which is
alleged to have received the consent of the Turkish
Cypriots, contains provisions by virtue of which the
confiscation of Greek properties in the north would be
legalized-and
that in addition to their de facto
confiscation and exploitation. Mr. Celik would have us
believe that this does not affect us. He tells us: “Do
not worry: there is a provision that this constitution
will be amended when a federal government is agreed
upon.”

128. In fact, Mr. Denktag took pages of notes of what
I had to say, and yet Mr. Celik will tell us that
Mr. Denktas came to Vienna, during the first round,
to negotiate seriously, and with full authority to do so.
I take it that his authority was to take notes.
129. Now, Mr. Celik has told us a long and, if I
may say so, tedious story about the Greek “doublefaced” action with regard to our recourse to the
European Commission on Human Rights. First he tried
to present that as a recent development.
However,
the recourse which we have had to the Commission
was filed in September 1974, before either the intercommunal talks or the talks under the auspices of the
Secretary-General
were accepted or commenced.
It is a fact that the Turkish side said that, since
this recourse was to be had on the date fixed by the
Commission and not by us, their experts in the Committee of Experts which had been set up to study the
powers and functions of the central government would
have to attend, and therefore the work of the Committee would be delayed.

135. But the negotiation is not only on the powers
and functions of the federal government: it is also for
the powers and functions of the other authorities. Yet
Mr. Denktas and the Turkish community,
under
guidance from Turkey and with experts from Turkey,
have decided unilaterally
to define what the powers
and functions of the regional governments or regional
authorities would be, and he is surprised to hear that
we think that this is another fait accompli.

130. We immediately
cabled, requesting an adjournment. The Turkish side-the
Turkish Govemmentwas informed by the European Commission
of our
request for an adjournment.
However, the Turkish
Government insisted on a hearing. We then received a
telegram from the President of the Commission
in
which he stated that in view of the confused situation
of the parties, he would maintain the hearing.

136. Mr. .Celik tells us our only concern about the
refugees is that they return to their homes, whereas
the Turkish Cypriots are actually concerned not only
about their property but about the safety of their lives.
We are very much worried about the safety of the
lives of Greek Cypriots. If we were to cite facts, we
could demonstrate clearly that in recent months-if
we accept what Mr. Celik has now stated, that there
are no prisoners in the hands of the Turkish side or of
Turkey-2,700
people have been brutally murdered
since their captures, for there is ample, irrefutable
evidence, borne out by independent witnesses, that
thousands of people who were arrested by the Turkish
forces have not been accounted for. Yes, our concern
is not only to return the Greek Cypriots to their homes;
it is to return them under conditions of safety, as the
relevant resolutions. of the General Assembly and the
Security Council require.

131. We then sent only a junior member of the staff
of the Attorney-General’s
offtce to request an adjournment; but again we were informed that the Commission would maintain the hearing. Consequently,
we
sent, not merely a team of great experts-neither
hurriedly nor furtively-but,
in addition, the AttomeyGeneral.
132. That hearing lasted only two days. Despite that
fact, 10 days after the hearing was over, the Turkish
Cypriot members of the Committee
of Experts on
the powers of the central Government had not returned
to Cyprus, but had disappeared.
When I asked
Mr. Denktas where they were, he said he would try
and contact them and tell them to return to Cyprus
so tliat the Committee could .proceed.

137. Mr. Denktas has quoted me as saying, after a
visit to the north, that the people were happy to see
me and I was happy to see them. Yes, they were
happy to see me because for 11 long months they had
not been allowed to see anybody, either from their own
community, their own Government or even their own
13

relatives. It is a fact that I stated that they had some
problems which Mr. Denktag and I could solve, but
those problems cannot be solved, and Mr. Denktas
cannot solve them, because the Turkish army would
not agree to their solution. What they had were small
problems. Freedom of movement from their villages
to other villages and to the rest of the island-that
is a small problem. What were their other problems?
Medical services did not exist. Hundreds of sick
people had no access to medical services. What were
their other small problems? Their children could not
go to school, because no schools were allowed to be
operated in the Turkish area. What were their other
tiny problems? The fact that they were penniless,
because they could not sell their produce. What was
another problem? The fact that there was no freedom
at all, and arbitrary arrests were being made of those
people. If I said publicly-and
I did say publicly-that
they had some problems, it was to pacify public
opinion, which would have revolted, and to avoid
creating tension at a time when it still seemed possible
to have some negotiations. Remember, my visit to the
Karpas peninsula took place only a few days before
‘the first Vienna talks. I did not wish to create anxiety
and I did not wish to create tension before the first
Vienna talks, where I had hoped Mr. Denktas would
come to negotiate and not to take notes.

Greek Cypriots, while the Turkish Cypriots are not
contributing
at all in the taxation of, the country.
Furthermore, they have not only freedom of movement
but they have also employment in the south.
140. It would be an acrimonious debate if I were to
answer every statement of Mr. Celik’s and I do not
want such a debate. What I can say to Mr. Celik,
and through Mr. Celik to the Turkish Government
and the Turkish Cypriot people, is that, if they want
a solution on the basis of a bicommunal
federated
State, we are ready to negotiate such a solution, to
look forward to it and to be constructive, but if what
they want is the acceptance of the so-called realities
of the occupation of Cyprus by 43,000 Turkish troops,
of the restrictions preventing 200,000 Greek Cypriots
from returning to their homes, then we are quite
open: we are not prepared to negotiate a solution
on these realities. In so saying, we are not trying to
hide-as the Turkish side is doing instead of negotiating-behind
excuses that it is not ready to put its
case. If the case they wish to put before us, and they
dare to put before the world, is that the present reality
is that 40 per cent of the island will be reserved for
18 per cent of the population, that 200,000 people will
remain refugees and that the Turkish forces will remain
indefinitely
in Cyprus, then let them state their case
clearly here and now, and if that is their case, then
there is no point in returning to the negotiating table.

138. Mr. Celik has said that we are not psychologically ready to accept the realities of the situation.
What are the realities of the situation? The fact that
200,000 people have been evicted from their homes by
the Turkish Army. I state positively and categorically
that we are not now prepared to accept that these
200,000 people should remain permanent refugees and
will never be prepared to accept such a dreadful
reality. If negotiations in the Turkish mind mean the
acceptance of this fait accompli at the expense of
one third of the Greek Cypriot population, if it means
the usurpation of their property,
if it means the
restriction of their freedom of movement in their own
country, then we might wait a thousand years but we
shall never accept this as a reality we shall have to
live with-not
because we are unrealistic, but because
we are against unjust solutions.

141. I feel sorry, and I was the first to state that
mistakes .have been committed
in the past by both
sides. But those mistakes cannot and will not be
rectified by accepting the so-called realities of the new
situation. The acceptance of such realities is impossible. If it were possible for the negotiators to accept
them-which
it is not-it
would be the beginning of
a final and bitter war between the Greek Cypriots
and the Turkish Cypriots, which would lead to the
destruction of both communities.
142. What are the present realities that we have to
look at? One of the present realities is that Cyprus is
a country where two different national communities
exist. One of these communities constitutes 80 per cent
of the population
of the Republic,
and the other
constitutes 18 per cent. Both communities
can live
peacefully and amicably in friendly partnership in a
federated bi-communal
State. They can work together
and prosper in the context of a federal bi-communal
State. What is important is to define the extent of the
area or areas to be administered
by the Turkish
Cypriots and the extent of the areas to be administered
by the Greek Cypriots, and, finally to decide what the
powers and functions of the federal central government would be. Those are the realities? and not the
fact that by sheer force 40 per cent of the territory
of the Republic, representing 70 per cent of its total
production,
has been grabbed by the Turkish army
and reserved for the 18 per cent minority community.

139. Mr. Celik reported a debate on the Cyprus radio
in which all the leaders stated clearly what our policy
should be in the future towards our Turkish Cypriot
compatriots. I regret that I cannot say that a similar
debate has taken place on the Turkish Cypriot radio,
but what we have said was not an accusation, that in
the past we have suppressed the Turkish community,
but merely a demonstration
of what our policy should
be in the future, and the fact that the Turkish Cypriots
live in the south and receive the same treatment as
the Greek Cypriots who live in the south is clearly
borne out by the report of the Secretary-General.
The Turkish Cypriots are not restricted in their freedom of movement, and this is stated in the report of’
the Secretary-General.
They receive the same social
benefits from ,the Greek Cypriot taxpayers as the
14

.

:

-143. What is also important is for the Turkish side to
realize another reality, namely, that subjugation. by
force by virtue of the presence of the Turkish army
in Cyprus is not a solution but a call for war.
144. I said that I did not wish to have an acrimonious
discussion. I repeat that we shall attend the Vienna
talks on 25 July ready to discuss every aspect. But I
express the warning that we cannot go on appearing
at the talks when the Turkish side is not prepared to
disclose its case with regard to all the issues which I
have enumerated and, in particular, with regard to the
extent of the area that it thinks it should administer.
We cannot go on pretending to be negotiating while
200,000 refugees remain homeIess, prevented from
returning to their homes, deprived of their businesses

_

‘.

and, in ‘particular,
their existence.

deprived

of the’ very means of

145. If the Turkish side comes prepared for talks in
Vienna, it will find that we are ready to talk. But if
the Turkish side comes with the theory of accepting
realities, which means accepting faits accomplis, then
obviously the Turkish side would not be ready to
negotiate.
The m@eting r&e at 5.45 p.m.
Notes
’ United Nations, Trmty Series,
2 Documents
of the Parliamentary
Eurape,
Twenty-seventh
Ordinary
dot. 3600, p. 9.

382, p. 3.
Assembly
of the Council
Session
(First
Part),
vol.

vol.

Of

II,

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United Nations
world. Consult
COMMENT

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

publications
may bc obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
thr
your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICXHONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
dcs Nations Units sent en ventc darts les librairies et les agcnces dCpositaircs du
mondc entier. Informrz-vous
aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
?I : Nations Units, Section
des ventes. New York ou GC&e.

Elananna
Oprnnnsauum
06aenntrenabrx
HaumR
MOXHO KynnTb
B KXHmXblX
Maraamtax
H areurcraax
no acex pafkonax
“ripa.
Hnrtonu~r
cnpaexn
06 msnannnx
sauleM XXH~~OM
Mara3wa
H,TH ntimtvre
no flnpecy : OpraHHJRuHa
O6%eLlHtieHHbI%
HaiwR.
CeKum
no npoAame
nanantin,
HMO-Mopx
unit
XrHeIia.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

a

UNIDAS

Las publicucioncs
de las Naciones Unidas eatin en venta en librerlas y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partcs dcl mundo. Cons&e
a su librcro o dmjasc a: Nacioncs Unidas. Seccibn de Ventas.
Nucva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations.

New York

00400

82-61202-November

1983-2,200
