General Assembly-Twenty-fourth Session

74

(a) To create a favourable climate for the referendum to be conducted on an entirely free, democratic
and impartial basis by permitting, inter alia, the retum
of exiles to the Territory;
( b) To take all the necessary steps to ensure that
only the indigenous people of the Territory participate
in the referendum;
(e) To comply with the resolutions of the General
Assembly on the activities of foreign economic and
other interests operating in colonial countries and
Territories and to refrain from any action likely to
delay the process of the decolonization of the so-called
Spanish Sabara;
(d) To provide all the necessary facilities to a
United Nations mission so that it may be able to participate actively in the organization and holding of the
referendum;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the administering Power and the Special Committee, to appoint immediately the special mission
provided for in paragraph 5 of General Assembly
resolution 2229 (XXI) and to expedite its dispatch
to the so-called Spanish Sabara for the purpose of
recommending practica! steps for the full implementation of the relevant General Assembly resolutions, and
in particular for determining the extent of United
Nations participation in the preparation and supervision
of the referendum and submitting a report to the Secretary-General for transmission to the General Assembly
at its twenty-fifth session;
6. Requests the Special Committee to continue its
consideration of the situation in the Territory of the
so-called Spanish Sabara and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session.

1835 th plenary meeting,
16 December 1969.
2592 (XXIV). Question of American Samoa, Antigua, Bahamas, Bermuda, British Virgin
Islands, Brunei, Cayman Islands, Cocos
(Keeling) lslands, Dominica, Gilbert and
Ellice Islands, Grenada, Guam, Montserrat,
New Hebrides, Niue, Pitcairn, St. Helena,
St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia, St. Vincent, Seychelles, Solomon lslands, Tokelau
Islands, Turks and Caicos Islands and the
United States Virgin Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of American Samoa,
Antigua, Bahamas, Bermuda, British Virgin Islands,
Brunei, Cayman Islands, Cocos (Keeling) Islands,
Dominica, Gilbert and Ellice Islands, Grenada, Guam,
Montserrat, New Hebrides, Niue, Pitcairn, St. Helena,
St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia, St. Vincent, Seychelles, Solomon Islands, Tokelau lslands, Turks and
Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin Islands,
Having examined the chapters of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to these Territories, 27
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of
21 /bid., chaptcrs IX, XV to X.VIII, XX, XXI and XXIII to
XXX.

Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
other relevant resolutions,
Deeply concerned at the policy of sorne of the adrninistering Powers in establishing and maintaining
military bases in sorne of the Territories under their
administration, in contravention of the relevant General Assembly resolutions,
Deploring the attitude of those administering Powers
which continue to refuse to allow United Nations visiting missions to visit the Territories under their administration,
Reaffirming the vital importance of visiting missions
as a means of securing adequate and first-hand information regarding political, economic and social conditions in the Territories and the views, wishes and
aspirations of the people in those Territories,
Conscious that these Territories require the continued
attention and assistance of the United Nations in the
achievement by thcir peoples of the objectives embodied in the Charter of the United N ations and in
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples,
A ware of the special circumstances of the geographical location and economic conditions of these Territories,
I. Approves the chapters of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to these Territories;
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
these Territories to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV);
3. Calls u pon the administering Powers to implement without delay the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembl y;
4. Expresses its conviction that the questions of
territorial size, geographical isolation and limited resources should in no way delay the implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples with respect to these
Territories;
5. Reiterates its declaration that any attempt aimed
at the partial or total disruption of the national unity
and the territorial integrity of colonial Territories and
the establishment of military bases and installations in
these Territories is incompatible with the purposes and
principies of the Charter of the United Nations and of
resolution 1514 (XV);
6. Strongly urges the administering Powers to reconsider their attitude towards the receiving of visiting
missions to the above-mentioned Territories and to permit access by such visiting missions to Territories under
their administration;
7. Decides that the United Nations should render
all help to the peoples of these Territories in their
efforts freely to decide their future status;
8. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
pay special attention to these Territories and to report
to the General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session on
the implementation of the present resolution.
1835th plenary meeting,
16 December 1969.
