General A1111embly-Eishteenth Session

------------------------Noting with satisfaction that the Economic and Social
Council, in its resolution 939 (XXXV) of 11 April
1963, has already drawn the attention of the Prepz.ratory
Committee of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development to , · •.f' paragraphs of the report of the
ad hoe Working Grl>1,p15 concerning problems of international trade, specifically paragraphs 58 to 64,
1. Expresses the hope that the examination of those
problems in the Preparatory Committee of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development and
at the Conference will contribute to the speeding-up
of the final elaboration and adoption of the principles
of international economic co--operation;
2. Invites the Economic and Social Council and,
through it, the ad hoe Working Group, to expedite the
work on the question of a draft declaration reforred to
in Council resolution 939 ( XXXV).
1276th plenary meeting,
11 December 1963.
1943 (XVIII). World campaign against hunger,
disease and ignorance

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1710 (XVI) of 19 December
1961, establishing the United Nations Development
Decade,
Convinced that the achievement of the objectives of
the Decade requires investment in human resources
by a world-wide effort against hunger, disease and
ignorance,
Recalling that 1965 has been designated as International Co-operation Year by the General Assembly in
its resolution 1907 (XVIII) of 21 November 1963,
Recognizing the great contribution made by nongovernmental organizations to international co-operation
and to furthering the objectives of the United Nations,
Believing that widespread support can be engendered
for a concerted effort to combat hunger, disease and
ignorance, which would mark the second half of the
Decade,
l. Appeals to all non-governmental organizations to
put their increased enthusiasm, energy and other resources into a world campaign in the basic human fields
of food, health and education, including training, to
start in 1965 and to continue for the remainder of the
United Nations Development Decade;
2. Urges States to facilitate in all appropriate ways
the efforts of their non-governmental organizations
taking part in such a campaign in the fields of food,
health and education and contributing to the achievement of the objectives of the Decade ;
3. Requests the Secretary-GePeral to consult with
the Governments of Member States and the specialized
agencies, as well as wi_th_ non-governmental organizations in consultative status, and to report to the Economic and Social Council at its thirty-seventh session
on the feasibility and the methods of stimulating such
a campaign of non-governmental organizations under
the auspices of the United Nations, bearing in mind
the following considerations:
(a) The value of closer contact between peoples and
non-governmental organizations in the developed and
the developing countries in order to improve understanding between them ;
111 Official

Records of the Economic and Social C01tncil,
Thirty-fifth Session, Annexes, agenda item 3, document E/3725.

( b) The desirability of developing more active methods of co-operation between the United Nati.ons-including the specialized agencies-and non-governmental
organiz8.tions. designed to extend non-governmental
particip;:ition in the progress of the Decade, particularly
in the fie1ds of food, health and education;
( c) The need to ensure that such a campaign is conducted under conditions which are acceptable to, and
receive the approval and support of, the Governments
of the countries concerned; ·
4. Invites the Economic and Social Council to consider the Secretary-General's report af its thirty-seventh
session. and to t::ike s1 1ch action as it may deem
appropriate.
1276th plenary meeting,
11 December 1963.

1944 (XVIll). International co-operation in the
application of science and technology to
economic and social development

The General Assembly,
Having noted the sustained efforts the Governments
of the developing countries are making in their en?eavour to raise the standards of living of their peoples,
m accordance with the purposes and objectives of the
United Nations Development Decade as set forth in
Economic and Social Council res(\llution 916 (XXXIV)
of 3 August 1962,
Recalling with appreciation the assistance provided
for economic and social development by the United
Nations, the specialized agencies, the International
Atomic Energy Agency, the Special Fund, the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance and the
United Nations Children's Fund,
Considering that science and technology, when suitably adapted and applied to the specific conditions of
the developing countries, can make an outstanding contribution to the achievement of the aims of the Decade
and the aspirations of the people,
1. Expresses its appreciation for the efforts and
achievements of the United Nations Conference on the
Application of Science and Technology for the Benefit
of the Less Developed Areas;
2. Welcomes the statements on the subject by the
Secretary-General in his report18 and his address to the
Economic and Social Council on the follow-up to th~
Conference,17 as well as the action taken by the Ad!11-inistrative Committee_ on Co-ordination in creating an
inter-agency _s?b-comm1ttee on science and technology,
and the dec1s1on taken by the Council in resolution
980 A (XXXVI) of 1 August 1963 to seek to intensify
practical efforts in this field by establishing an Advisory
Committee on the Application of Science and Technology to Development ;
3. Requests the Advisory Committee on the Application of Science and Technology to Development
to examine, in keeping with its terms of reference
the possibility of establishing a programme on intern.a~
tional co-operation in science and technology for economic and social development, in which scientists and
technicians of the highly developed countries would
as a matter of priority, help to study the problems of
the developing countries and explore suitable solutions
having regard to limitations upon the material resource~
HI Ibid., Thirty-sixth Session, Annexes, agenda item 15,
document E/3772.
17 Ibid., Thirty-sixth Session, 1271st meeting.

33

Resolution, adopted on the report, of the Second Committee

and trained personnel currently available to the developing countries ;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to consult
States Members of the United Nations and members
of the specialized agencies and of the International
Atomic Energy Agency, in particular those which have
achieved a high level of scientific and technological development, concerning their views on the nature and
scope of such a programme and on the measures they
envisage undertaking in this regard, and to communicate
these views to the Advisory Committee;
5. Invites the Administrative Committee on Coordination to present .to the Advisory Committee,
through the Secretary-General, the comments of its
Sub-Committee on Science and Technology on the
assistance which the participating organizations, including the regional Pconomic commissions, might render
within the fr::imework of such a programme:
6. Recommends that the Advisory Committee should
envisage, in connexion with such a programme, the
possibilities of:
(a) Mobilizing the efforts of universities and scientific and technological institutions of the developed
countries for active participation in such a programme;
( b) Creating and strengthening, with the aid of the
highly developed countries, national and regional institutes for scientific and technological research and training in the developing areas of the world;
( c) Obtaining the human, technical and financial
resources required for the execution of such a programme;
7. Requests the Advisory Committee to report to the
Economic and Social Council at its summer session
in 1%5.
1276th plenary meeting,
11 December 1963.
1945 (XVIIl). Enlargement of the Governing
Council of the Special Fund
The General Assembly,
Considering the provisions of part B, paragraphs 11,
13, 14 and 15, of its resolution 1240 (XIII) of 14
October 1958 on the membership of the Governing
Council of the Special Fund,
Taking into consideration the increase in the membership of the United Nations,
Noting the increase in the activities of the Special
Fund,
Noting further that the number of Governments
making voluntary contributions to the Special Fund
has steadily increased since 1959,
Desirous of ensuring equitable geographical distribution among the developing countries in accordance with
part B, paragraph 14, of its resolution 1240 (XIII),
1. Decides to amend part B, paragraphs 11 and 15,
of its resolution 1240 (XIII), to provide that the Governing Council of the Special Fund shall consist of
representatives of twenty-four States;
2. Requests the Economic and Social Council, at its
resumed thirty-sixth session, to elect six additional
members from among States Members of the United
Nations or members of the specialized agencies or of
the International Atomic Energy Agency, on the under-

standing that, at this first election, the countries initially
called upon to serve for one, two or three years,
respectivelv, shall be drawn by lot.
·
1276th plenary meeting,
11 December 1963.
1946 (XVUI). Provision of operational personnel
under the Expanded Programme of Tech•
nical Assistance
The General Assembly,
Havi•ig considered Economic and Social Council resolution 951 (XXXVI) of 5 July 1963 concerning the
provision of operational personnel under the Expanded
Programme of Technical Assistance,
·
1. Approves the proposals set out in Economic and
Social Council resolution 951 (XXXVI) and authorizes
the use of funds from the Special Account of the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance for the
provision of operational personnel by all the participating organizations, at the request of Governments,
on an experimental basis for the years 1964-1966;
2. Agrees that implementation of these proposals
shall not prejudge the issues before the Ad Hoe Committee on Co-ordination of Technical Assistance Activities concerning co-ordination between the different
programmes of technical co-operation ;
3. Invites the Economic and Social Council to review
in due course the results of the experimental pro-\tisions
approved in paragraph 1 above and to report thereon
to the General Assembly at its twenty-first session.
1276th plenary meeting,
11 December 1963.

1947 (XVUI). Confirmation of the allocation of
funds for the Expanded Programme of
Technical Assistance in 1964
The General Assembly,
Noting that the Technical Assistance Committee has
reviewed and approvPd the Expanded Programme of
Technical Assistance for the biennium 1963-1964,
1. Confirms the allocation of funds authorized by
the Technical Assistance Committee to each of the
organizations participating in the Expanded Programme
of Technical Assistance from contributions, general
resources and local costs assessments, as follows :
Total allocations
requested for 1964
(equivalent of
US dollars)

Participating organization

United Nations ..... .
International Labour Organisation
Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations
United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization ..
International Civil Aviation Organization
World Health Organization
Universal Postal Union
International Telecommunication Union
World Meteorological Organization
International Atomic Energy Agency ..
TOTAL

9,464,119
4,749,187
11,535,277
7,589,363
2,034,424
7,988,760
83,841
929,823
1,028,020
944,824
46,347,638
