SECURITY COLTNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
SECOND YEAR

PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS .
DEUXIE"1E ANNEE
..

'

No.U
j

• . .,

[03rd and l04th meetings

•. I

I03eme et 104eme seances
12 fevrier 1947

February 1947

Lake Success
New York

........

g

<

MS!

. TABLE DES MATIERES

TABLE OF CONTENTS.

Cent~troisieme ~ance

Hundred and third meeting
Page

Pages

- 41. PI:ovisiC!nal ar;enda
::
213
214
48. Adoptie>n of ,he agenda
49. Continuati07 I of the discussion on the
general regulation and reduction of armaments and information on armed forces.. 214

47. Ordre du jour provisoire
" 213
48. Adoption de l'ordre du jour
.' " 214
49. Suite de la discussion sur la reglementation et la reduction generales des arme.
ments, «<t sur les informations concernant
les forces armees
" 214
Cent-quatri~me

Hundred and fourth meeting

seance

50. Continuation of the discussion on the
general regulation and reduction of arma- .
ments and information on armed forces.. 221

50. Suite de la discussion sur la reglementation et la reduction generales des armements, et sur les informations concernant
les forces armees .. ,
" 2~7

Documents

DC!cume~ts

Af3Jle~

The documents relevant to the hundred and
third and hundred and fourth meetings
appear as-folIr.ws:
Supplement No~ 2~ Second Year
Letter from -the representative of the Union
of 'Soviet Socialist Republics OIl the Security Council to the Secretary-General,
dated 21 ~December 1946 (document
S/229)
Resolution of the General Assembly concerning "information on armed forces of
the United Nations" (document 8/230)

3
4

Resolutio~ of the General ~\ssembly on' the

"prinr.iples governing the general regulation and reduction of armaments" (document S/231)
Draft resolution. submitted by the representative of France at the ninetieth meeting
of the Security Council (document
S/243)
,
;
Supplement No. 5~ Second rear
Letter from the Chairman of the Atomic
Energy-CommisSion to the President of
the Security Council dated 31 December
1946, transmitting the "First. Report of
the Atomic Energy Commission to the
Security Council" (document S/239) ..

Official Records of the Security Council,
Second Year, No. 4
Draft resolution submitted by the representative of Australia at the ninety-second·
meeting of the Security Council .(document S/249)
Draft resolution submitted by the representativeof Colombia at the ninety-third
meeting of the Security Council (documentS/251)
Official Records of the Security Council,
Second Year~ No. 11
Draft resolution resulting from the consultanqn of the President of the Security
Council with the representatives of
Australia, Colombia, France, United
States of America, and the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics (document
S/268)

5

7

14

Annexes

Les documents se rapportant aux centtroisieme et cent-quatrieme seances figurent
dans les pu~lic~tions suivantes:
Supplement No 2, Deuxieme Annee
Lettre adressee au Secretaire general par le
representant de rUmon des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques au Conseil de securite, en date du 27 decembre 1946 (document S/229) .... ,.................. 3
Resolution de l'AssembIee' generale concernant les "informations relatives aux
forceS armees des Nations Unies" (document S/230)
4
Resolution de l'AssembIee generale sur les
"principes regissant la xeglementation et
la reduction generales des armements"
(documentS/231)
5
Projet pe resolution presente par le representant de la France a la quatre-vingtdixieme seance du ConseH de securite
(document 8/243)
7
Supplement No 5, Deuxieme Annee
Lettre en date du 31 decembre 1946 adressee par le President de la Commission de
l'energie atomique au - President du
Conseil de sec~te pour accompagner
le "Premier rapport de la Commission de
l'energie atomique au Conseil de securite"
(document S/239)
14
Proces~verbaux ofJiciels du Conseil de
securite~ Deuxieme Annee, No 4
Projet de resolution soumis. par le representantde l'Australie a la quatre-vingtdouzieme seance du Conseil de securite
(document S/249)
Projet de resolution soumis par le representant de la Colombie a la quatre-vingttreizieme seance du Conseil de securite
(document S/251)
Proces-verbaux officiels duCcnseil de securite~ Deuxieme Annee~ No 11
Projet de resolution etabli a la suite de la
consultation du President du Conseil de
securite avec les representants de
l'AuiStralie, de la Colombie, de la France,
des Etats-Unis d'Amerique et de rUnion
des Republiques socialistes sovietiques
(document S/268)

NATIONS UNIES

UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
COUNCIL

CONSEIL
DE SECURITE

OFf~CIAL lECORDS

PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS

SECOND YEAR

No. 12

DEUXIEME ANNEE

No 12

HUNDRED AND THIRD MEETING

CENT-TROISIEME SEANCE

H eid at Lake Success,New York,
on Wednesday, 12 February 1947, at 11 a.m.

Tenue aLake Success, New-York,
le mercredi 12 fevrier 1947 , a 11 heures.

President: Mr. F. VAN LANGENHOVE
(Belgium).

President: M. F. VAN LANGENHOVE
(Belgique) .

Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, Poland, Syria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom,
United States of America.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
Australie, Belgique, Bresil, Chine, Colombie,
France, Pologne, Syrie, Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis
d'Amerique.

47. Provisional agenda

47. Ordre d~ iour provisoire

[document S / 275]

[document S / 275]

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Resolution of the General A...c:sembly on the
"principles governipg .the general regulation and reduction of armaments" (docu~
ment S/ 231) 1 and the proposals regarding
its implementation:
(a) Letter from the representative of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on the
8ecurity CQuncil to the Secretary-General,
'dated 27 December 1946 (document
8/229).2
(b) Draft resolution submitted by the representative of France at the ninetieth meeting of the Security Council (document
8/243).3
,
(c) Draft resolution submitted by the representative of Australia at the ninety-second
meeting of the Security Council (document
8/249).·
(d) Draft resolution submitted by the representative of Colombia at the ninety-third

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.
.
2. Resolution de l'AssembIee generale sur les
"principes regissant 'la reglementation .et la
reduction generales des armemellts" (document S/ 231) 1 et propositions concernant
son application:
a) Lettre adressee au Secretaire general
par le representant de I'Umon des Republiques socialistes sovietiques auConseil de
securite, en date du 27 decembre 1946
(document S/ 229) 2.
b) Projetde resolution soumis par le
representant de la France it. la quatre-vingtdixieme seance, du Conseil de securite
(document S/243)3.
c) Projet de resolution soumis par le
representant de l'Australie it. laquatre-vingtdouzieme seance du Conseil de securite
.
(document S/249)\
d) Projet de resolution soumis par le
representant de la Colombie it. ·la quatre-

Y I See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
e.ar, Supplement No. 2, Annex 5.
,Ibid., Annex 3.
Ibid., Annex 7.
• See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Y car, No. 4.
.

1 Voir Proces-verbaux officielsdu Conseil de securite,
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 2, Annexe 5.
2 Ibid., Annexe 3.
'Ibid., Annexe 7.
• Voir Proces-verbaux officiels .du Conseil de securite,
Deuxieme Annee, No 4.

I

,'~.',-2I4.

-'4

c

meeting of the Security Council (docu-"
vingt-ireizieme ~eance du Conseil de securite
(documeni..S/251 )1.
ment 8/251).1
.
(e) Draft resolution submitted by'the repe)' Projet de, resolution soumis par le
resentative of the United States of America. '
representant des Etats-Unis d'Amerique a.
at the ninety-eighth meeting of the Security"
la quatre-vingt-dix-huitieme seance du
Council (document S/264). 2
Conseil de securite (document S/264)2.
(f) Draft resolution resulting from the
f) Projet de .resolution etabli a la suite de la
consultation of the President with the repreconsultation du President avec les repre.
sentatives of Australia, Colombia, France,
sentants de l'Australie, de la Colombie, des
United States of America and the Union
,Etats-Unis d'Amerique, de la France et de
of Soyiet Socialist RepUblics (document
I'Union des, Republiques socialistes sovie8/268).8 .
' " tiques (docuinentS/26U)8.
3. Resolution of the General Assembly con3. Resolution de I'Assem.bIee generale cancer.
. cerning. "infonnation on anned forces of
nant les "infonnations relatjves aux forces
the United Nations" (document 8/230).4
armees des Nations Unies;' (document
S/230)'. '
4. Letter from the Chainnan of the Atomic
4. Lettre en date du 31 decembre 1946, adres.
~~ergy CoInIIli--,ionto the President of
see. par le President de la Commission de
the Security C' ,uncil dated 31 December
l'energie atomique au .President du Comeil
1946, transmiiting the First Report of the
de securite, pOUf accompagner le Premier
Atomic Energy Commission to the Security
Rapport'de la CommiQSion de l'energie ato·
Council (docume:lt 8/239).5
mique .an Coriseil de securite (document
S/239)5.

48. Adoption 'of the agenda
,The agenda was adopted.

48. Adopiionde I'ordre du. iour
L'or4re du jour est adopte.

49.' Continuation of the discussion Oil the
general regulation and reduction of
armaments and information on
armed forces

49. Suite de la di$cussion sur la regiementation et la reduction generales
des armements, et sur les informations concernant les forces armees'

The PRESIDENT (translated from French) ':
W" will now resume the discussion of the two
items of.the agenda dealt with in documents
S/230 and S/231. You will rememberthat the
Council decidld at its meeting yesterday6 to link
item 2 with item 3.

Le PRESIDENT: La clis.cussion generale reprend
sur les deux points de l'ordre du jour traites
dans les documents S/230 et S/231. On se sou·
viendra qu'a sa seance d'hier6 , le Conseil de
securite a decide de lier le point 2 au point 3-

Mr. DE LA TOURNELLE (France) (translated
{tDm French): The drafting ·committee adopted
as the basis of its work the French resolution,
which was aimed at finding grounds for compromise between the resolutions submi,tted by the
United States of America and the. Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics.
That, resolution, 7 based on the texts voted by
the General Assembly on 14 December 1946,
has unfortunately not yet succeeded .in reconciling the opposing points of view.
The French delegation, however, in the hope
of reaching an agreement, went as far as it could
in the way of concessions. At the request of the
delegation of the Vnion of Soviet Socialist Republics,- it consented to drop article 4 sub-paragraph (b) of its proposed text, which provided
that the Military Staff Committee should report

M; DE LA TOURNELLE (France): Le comite '
de redaction a adopte comme base de travail la
resolution fran~aise, qui tendait a trouver un ter·
rain de compromis entre la resolution des EtatsUnis d'Amerique et ceUede l'Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques.

.

1 See Official Records 0/ the Security Council, Second
Year. No. 4.
.
2 See Official Records 0/ the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 9.
, See Official Records cd the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 11.
• See Official Records 0/ the Security' Council, Second
Year, Supplement No. 2, Annex 4.
I Ibid., Supplement No. 5, Annex 14.
• See Official Records 0/ the Security Council, Second
Year. No. 11.
.
7 See Official Records 0/ the Security Council, Second
Year, Supplement No. 2, Annex 7.

Cette resolution'1, fondee sur les textes votes
par I'AssembIee generale le 14 decembre 1946,
n'a malheureusement pasreussi, jusqu'a present,
a concilier les points de vue opposes.
La delegation fran~aise, ,dans l'espoir d'arriver
a un accord, est allee cependant aussi loin que
possible dans la voie des concessions. A la demande' de, la delegation de I'Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques eUe a consenti, en
effet, a la suppression du sous-paragraphe b) de
I'article 4 de sa proposition, artic1eprevoyant
1 Voir Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite,
Deuxieme Ann~e, No 4.
'"
.
: Voir Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite,
Deuxieme Annee, No 9.
a Voir Proces-verbaux officielsdu Conseil de securitc,
Deuxieme Annee, No 11.
• Voir Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite,
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 2, Annexe 4.
5 Ibid., Supplement No 5, Annexe 14.
6 Voir Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite1
Deuxieme Annee, No 11.
• Voir Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite,
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 2, Annexe 7.
,

uP

215
,

.

que le Comire d'etat-major devrait rendl'e
compte au Conseil de l'execution du paragraphe 7 die la resolution de l'Assemblee generale mentionnant le retrait des forces des Etats
Membres stationnees en dehors du territoire national. Illui est apparu, en effet, que l'execution de cette disposition pouvait etre controlee
sans inconvenient par la future commission du
desarmement.
The French delegation went still farther in
La delegation fran~aise. est alIee encore plus
the way of concessions. Again at the request of loin dans la voie des concessions. Toujoursa
the delegation of the Union of Soviet Socialist la demande de la delegation de l'Union des
Republics, it agreed not to stipulate a time-limit Republiques socialistes sovietiques, eUe a. confor the fulfilment by the Military Staff COffi..'Uit- senn a ne pas stipuler de delai pour l'executicin,
tee of the task entrusted to it by the Security par ..le Comite d'etat-major, de la tache qui
CoUncil on 15 February 19461 regarding the lui a ete confiee par le Conseil de securite, le
15 fevrier 19461, fO.n ce qui cohcerne l'organisaorganization of an international force.
tion d'une force internationale.
From 15 February 1946 to the present date,
En eft'et, depuis le 15 {emer 1946, jusqjl'~
the Military Staff Committee has not provided ce jour, le C01;nite d'etat-major n'a fourni au
the' Council with any information as to the per- . C<>nseil. aucun element d'appreciation sur l'exeformance of its task. That omission is all the cution du mandat' qui lui a ete confie. Cette
more regrettable since the Military Staff Com- carence est d'autant plus regrettable que la
mittee's task is an essential one, and no general tache du Comite'd'etat-major est essentielle, et
reduction of armaments is conceivable unless qu'onne peut concevoir de reduction generale
m:temational assistance is organized; otherwise desarmements sans l'organisation d'une assisthere would be a risk that the security of States tanceinternationale; smon, la securite des Etats
qui . auraient desanne risquerait de ne plua etre
which disarmed would nO longer be assured.
assuree.
The delegation of the United States of AtnerLa' delegation des Etats-Unis d'Amerique,
ica, for its part, agreed that the establishment of pour sa part, a consenti a ce que la creation de
the disarmament commission should not be sub- la commission du desarmement ne fUt pas suordinated to the establishment of a committee to bordonnee a la creation d'un comite charge
determine its terms 'of reference; in the view of de determiner son mandat, procedure qui, dans
the majority of the members of the drafting' l'esprit de la majorite des membres du comite
committee, such a procedure might lead to a de redaction, etait susceptible de differer les
postponement of the disarmament commission's activites de la commission.du desarmement;
activities.
Si, en efIet, l'AssembIee generale a c1airernent
Whilst the General Assembly. clearly intended
that the study of atomic disarmament should not manifeste l'intention de ne .pas subordonner
be subordinated to that of general disarmament, I'etude du desarmement atomique al'etude du
the reverse is equally true, and the study of desarmement general, la reciproque est egalegen-cral disarmament should not depend on merit vraie: l'etude du desarmement general ne
that of atomic disarmament, but be conducted doit pas dependre de l'etude du desarmement
parallel with the latter, and independent of it. atomique, mais etre menee parallelement a cette
demiere, et independamment d'elle.
The French delegation, therefore, perfectly
La delegation fran~aiSe a done parfaitement
understood and accepted the reservation. of the compris .et admis la reserve des Etats-U nis tenUnited. States that the study of atomic disarma- dant a ceque l'etude du desarmement atomique
ment should not be merged in the study of dis- ne £Ut pas confondue avec I'etude du desarmearmament, and thus be subject to delays, but ment et ne subit, de ce fait, des retards, mais,
that, on the ~ontrary, the prinCiple that the qu'au contraire, le principe de l'intangibilite de
Atomic Energy Commission should be left alone la Commission de l' energie atomique ffti: assure.
should be observed.

to the Council on the·implementation' of paragraph 7 of the General Assembly's resolution
mentioning the withdrawal of the forces of
Member States which were outside thdr territory. Our delegation fd,t that the carrying out of
the provision might properly be. supervised by
the future commiss~on on disarmament.

Mr. Parodi, in his numerous statements on
disarmament, and in particular on 9 January in
the Security Council, always strongly affirmed
that principle.2 On 5 December last, when he
was presiding over a meeting of the Atomic
Energy Commission,' he said, among other
things, ". . . it would be regrettable if discus-

M. Parodi, dans ses nombreuses interventions
sur le desarmement, et notamment -le 9 janvier
devant le Conseil de securiM, a toujours affirme
ce prlncipe avec beaucoup de force 2. Le
5 decembre dernier, alors qu'il presidait une
seance de la Commission de l'energie atomique,
il a declare notamment: "... il me paraitrait

I See Official Records of the Security Council, First
Year, First "Senes, Twenty-third meeting,
• See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 2, page 35.

I Voir Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securitl,
Premiere Annee, Premiere Sene, vingt-troisieme seance.
• Voir Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de sec.uritl.
Deuxieme Annee, No 2, page 35.

-Ib...b •.••
__
"

-... ' ,=,.,~_.~. ~_. _,,_.Oc· __ ".'.'.._. __

-

_._

_.•_- ,

.

q

216
sions held without any knowledge of the special
studies which had been made of this question
were in any way to, interfere with the normal
progI:ess of our workm.. That statement was not
contradicted by any member present.
'

regrettable que des deliberations ayantlieu en
dehors des etudes speciales qui ont ete faites de
cette question-pussent, d'une maniere quelconque
gener la marche nonnale de nos etudesI. Cett~
declaration n'a ete contredite par aucun des
membres presents.
The Atomic Energy Commission has done
La Commission de l'energie atomique a
travail tres important d'ou. il resvery important work which has' shown that accompli
atomic production can be used as well for peace- sort que la' production atomique peut etre aussi
des fine; pacifiques qu'a des
ful as for -destructive purposes. Now, whereas bien exploitelweapons. of the classic type must be controlled fins de destruction. Or, alors que les armes
and restriCted, atomic armament, which threatens de type classique doivent etre reglementees et
the very future of the human species, must be limitees, l'armement atomique, qui menace
totally eliminated. . There is thus an immense l'avenir meme, de· l'espece humaine, doit etre
difference b~tween the measures which must be elimine totalement. Il y a donc une immense
taken with regard to these two types of arma- difference entre les mesures ,qui doivent etre
prises concernant ces armements.
ment.
une industrie
L'immense domaine ouvert
The immense field open to an industry which
can bring to humanity the Illost beneficial ~ dont l'activite peut entrainer pour l'humanite les
well as the most dire results, is enough both to consequences les plus bienfaisantes comme les plus
justifier et la specialisation de
justify specialization by the Atomic Energy Com- nefastes suffit
mission and to lay an obligation on the Council la Commission de I'energie atomique et l'obligation pour le Couseil de lui faciliter ses travaux
to facilitate its work to the utmost.
, dans toute la mesure du possible.
In order to', carry ont the General Assembly's
En vue de realiser les recommandations de
recommendation, it is the Security Council's l'AssembIee generale, le Conseil de securite se
duty to define a method of work which will trouve devant l'obligation ,de definir une meenable the Atomic Energy Commission to carry thode de travail qui permette a la Commission
on a task th_at has had a very encouraging be- de l'energie atomique de poul'suivre un travail
ginning; which will provide for the establish- dont les premices sont tres encourageantes, qui
ment of a disarmament commission that should prevoie la creation d'une commission du dein no case encroach on the sphere of the Atomic sarmement ne devant empieter en aucun cas sur
Energy Commission; and which will most ur- les attributions de la Commission de l'energie
gently remind the Military Staff Committee of atomique et qui rappelle de la fa~on la plus
the task entrusted to it on 15 February 1946, pressante au Comite d'etat-major le mandat qui
which, as far as the Council is aware, it has not lui a ete confie le 15 fevrier 1946 et qui, la
begun to carry out.
conmiissance du Conseil, n'a pas X'e~u de COMmencement d'execution.

un

a

a

a

a

Mr. ZULETA ANGEL (Colombia) (translated
from French): I do not often speak in the
Security Council; when I have done so in discussions in other organs of the United Nations,
I have always tried to keep my remarks to a
minimum. That is why I feel entitled to ask
you today, Mr. President, for permi8sion to speak
in my own language. In the subject with which
we are dealing at the moment, clarity and precision are very important factors; so, if you have
no objection, I shall speak in Spanish.

M. ZULETA ANGEL (Colombie): Il ne m'arrive pas souvent de prend~e la parole au Conseil
de securite; lorsque je l'ai fait au cours des dis.
cussions qui ont eu lieu dans lcs autres organes
des Nations Unies, je me suis toujours efforce de
reduire mes interventions au minimum. C'est
pour cette raison que je me crois autorise' a vons
demander, aujourd'hui, Monsieur le President,
la permission de parler dans ma- propre langue.
Dans le sujet que nous traitons en ce moment,
la clarte et hi precision sont des facteurs tres
importants; si vOt',s n'y voyez aucune objection,
jeparlerai done en espagnol.

The repres.entative of Colombia continued
his speech in Spanish, of which the following is
a translation.
.

Le representant de la Colombie continue son
intervention en espagnol; le texte suivant en est
la traduction.

The fact that the General Assembly voted
.unanimously in favour of the resolution of 14
December on the principles governing the general regulation and reduction of armaments, and
that this resolution was also unanimously _accepted by the Council, clearly indicates that
complete agreement exists on the following
fundamental points of disannament policy:

Que l'AssembIee generale ait adopte, a
l'unanimite, la resolution du .14 decembre 1946
sur les principes regissant la reglementation et la
reduction· generales des armements, et que cette
meme resolution ait ete acceptee, l'unanimite
egalement, par le Conseil de securite, ces deux
faits indiquent clairement que l'accord est parfait
sur les questions suivantes, qui sont les questions
fondamentales en matiere de desarmement:

1 See Official Records of the Atomic Energy Com,mission, No. 7.

1 Voir Proces-verbaux officiels de la Commission de
l'energie atomiq,ue. No 7.

a

pR4

217

1. To reduce and control armaments and I 1. Reduire et reglementer les armements et
armed forces by practical and effective meas- les forces armees en adoptant des mesures de
utes which will ensure that such reduction and garantie pratiques et efficaces qui assureront
regulation. will be generally observed by all the le respect universe!, par la totalite deS Etats participants, de la reduction et de la reglementation.
participants.
2. Eliminer des armements nationaux l'arme
2. To eliminate the atomic bomb and all
other weapons of mass destruction from national atomique et les autres engins ~ de destruction
armaments and to ensure the use of atomic en- massive, et assurer l'emploi de I'energie atomique
ergy and other discoveries of modem science for et des autres decouvertes ue la science moderne
a des fins purement pacifiques.
peaceful purposes only.
3. Creel', pour arriver a ces fins, un systeme
3. To create, for this purpose, an international
system of control, inspection and penalties to international de controle, d'inspection et de
protect States complying with their obligations sanctions pour proteger, contre les riques de viofrom the hazards of violations and evasions.
lation ouverte ou detoumee, les Etatsrespectueux de leurs obligations.
It is understandable that when the Security
Il est comprehensible qu'au sein du Conseil
Council began to study how the above-mentioned de securite, au moment ou il commence a etuGeneral Assembly resolution should be put into dier la fa~on de mettre en reuvre la resolution de
practice in order to achieve its proposed objec- l'AssembIee geneta]e pour atteindre les buts in~
'tives: differences of opinion should have arisen, dique.s, il se presente, comme il s'en est, en fait,
as in fact they did, regardinl~ the methodh and presente, des differences d'opinions quant aux
priorities to be adopted.
methodes a employer et a I'ordre clans lequel il
faut les employer pour realiser cette mise en
reuvre.
.
Jl n'est pas etrange que les grandes PuisIt is not surprising that the great Powers, which
bear the main responsibility in everything relat·· sances, qui ont la r ~ponsabilite la plus grande
ing to the maintenance of peace and are liable en tout ce qui concerne le maintien de la paix
to be confronted with difficult and serious prob-, et i 'i sont susceptibles de se trouver en face de
1ems regarding their own armaments and armed serieux et gra,ves problemes a propos de leurs
forces, should at the outset encounter difficulties ' armements et de leurs forces armees, renconin putting the Assembly res!Jlution into effect.
trent, des le debut, des difficultes po~ mettre
parfaitement en reuvre la resolution de l'Assemblee.
This difference of opinion as to the nature and
Cette divergence de conceptions quant a la
order of the measures to be taken, and the time methode a suivre, 'a l'ordre dans lequel il fanrequired to elaborate them, was manifest in,the drait prendre
mesures, et au temps qu'il
initial proposals submitted to the Council by the faudrait. u:.ett!'e a les elaborer, s'est reveIee de
Soviet Union and the United States of America. fa~on manifeste par ks propositions soumises au
Conseil de- securite par l'Union sovietique et
par les Etats-Unis d'Amerique.
L'Union sovietique, sans mentionner expresseThe Soviet Union, Without expressly referring
to the report of the Atomic Energy Commission ment le rapport de la Commission de l'energie
and the latter's general work, simply proposed atomique ni l'ensemble de son travail, a simplethe creation of a commission ;onsisting of rep- ment propose la constitution d'une commission
resentatives of the members of the Council with composee des representants des pays membr<;s
instructions to submit within one or two months, du Conseil, commission qui aurait pour tache de
or at most three months, proposals as to the presenter, dans un deIai d'un a deux mois, trois
practical measures to be taken. concerning the mois au maximum, des propositions sur les megeneral regulation and reduction of armaments sures pratiques qU'il conviendrait de prendre
and armed forces, and the establishment of L."1- pour la reglementation et ,la reduction generales
des armements et des forces armees, ainsi que
ternational control to ensure their reduction.
pour l'etablissement d'un controle international
en vue d'assurer cette reduction.
De son cote, la delegation des Etats-Unis, enThe United States, viewing the matter from
a different angle, proposed that the report of the visageant la question d'lme autre maniere, a
Atomic Energy Commission should be examined propose au Conseil de securite d'examiner immeimmediately and decisions taken upon it, and diatement le rapport de la Commission de I'enerthat only subsequently should the Council con- gie atomique, de prendre des decisions a son
sider pr~ctical measures to implement the sujet, et de n'exalr.iner qu'ensuite lesmesures
General Assembly's resolution on the general pratiques qu'il convient de prendre pour exeregulation and reduction of armaments.
cuter la resolution de l'AssembIee generale quant
a la reductJon et la reglementation generales des
armements.
Faced with these two proposals, which seemed
En presence de ces deux propositions" qui
to raise a problem of serious magnitude between pal'aissaient creel' entre les deux grandes Puist~e two major Powers, the other delegations very sances un probleme tre.'l serieux, les autres deleW1Se~y intervened to suggest that these two DOints gations, faisant pretive d'une grande comprehennues
J
int:r::
fake remarquer que

les

....;::~=:~~:=~~:~:~~e;r~~~!I:i:~: :~~t

p~:

•

:::us
it might be possible to reconcile and combine
them, and that there was no objection, on the
one hand, to proceeding with the study of the
report of the Atomic Energy Commission and
so facilitating its work, and on the other hand,
to setting up a commission to considp.r and elaborate practical measures for the reduction and
regulation of armaments in general.

It seems to me that this question has four different aspects, and that an explanation of these

<;es deux points de vue n.'etaient pas absolument
inconciliables, qu'on pouvait les harmoniser
qu'ils se compIetaient et qu'il n'y avait auc~
inconvenient it. proceder d'un cote, a. l'etude du
rapport de la Commission de I'energie atomique
pour faciliter son travail, et a. constituer, d'un
autre cote, une commission qui entreprendrait
I'etude et l'elaboration de mesures pratiques
pour la reduction et la reglementation des arme.
ments en general.
En fait, trois delegations, celies de la France,
de l'Australie et de la Colombie, ont presente, a
cet egard, des propositions tendant a. conciIier
les points de vue opposes et it. assurer une execution totale,· complete et efficace de la "esolution
de l'AssembIee generale. A la suite de tout cela,
la delegation des Etats-Unis, facilitant aimi
grandement le travail nu Conseil, a presentc, le
4 fevrier, une nouvelle proposition qui admettait
l'idee essentieIle de constituer la nouvelle commission du desarmement, sans prejudice de
I'etude immediate du rapport de la Commission
de I'energie atomique.
Au cours d'une reunion officieuse des auteurs
de ces diverses propositions, il n'a pas ete difficile
d'a.boutir a un accord sur les points suivants qui
pourtant, au debut, semblaient loin d'etre clairs:
1. Il faut proceder sans retard it. I'etude du
rapport de la Commission de I'energie atomique,
et faciliter ses travaux.
2. La nouvelle commission se composera de
representants des Etats membres du Consell
de securite.
3. La nouvelle commission aura pour tache
de preparer et de soumettre au Conseil de securite, dans un deIai de trois mois, des propositions
visant la reglementation et la reduction des
armements et des forces armees, ainsi que les
mesur~s efficaces et pratiques de garantie rela·
tives it. cette reduction eta cette regleme' "tion.
4. La nouvelle commission aura egalement a
s~occuper des renseignements que les Etats Membres doivent fournir sur leurs forces armees, ainsi
que de la cooperation que le Comite d'etatmajor dait apporter au Conseil de securite en
tout ce qui concerne le desarmement. Il faut enfin demander au Comite d'etat-major de presenter ~ plus tot possible les recommandations
qu'on lui a demandeesle 15 fevrier 1946.
Le desaccord s'est donc trouve circonscrit a
une question relative aux attributions et a la
competence de la nouvelle commission, a la
qllestion formulee dans les phrases en italique de
la proposition double qui figure au document
que les membres du Conseil ont sous les yeux1•
Doit-on ou ne doit-on pas circonscrire et limiter le mandat de la nouvelle commission, en stipulant expressement qu'il ne commence que Ht
ou finit celui de la Commission de l'energie atomique, tant en ce qui concerne les mesures
memes de desarmement qu'en ce qui a trait a
la nature des nouvelles armes sur lesquelles il
faudra demander des renseignements?
11 me semble que cette question presente
quatre aspects que. 1'0n peut et que 1'0n doit

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 11.

I Voir Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de s~cuTit~,
Deuxieme Annee, No 11.

Three delegations, the French, Australian and
Colombian delegations, therefore presented pro~
posals in this sense, attempting to reconcile the
two opposing points of view and provide for a
comprehensive, complete and effective implementation of the General Assembly's resolution.
As an outcome of this, the United States _delegation greatly facilitated the Council's work by
submitting a new proposal on-4 February which
accep~ed in principle the idea of setting up a new
disarmament commission, without prejudice to
immediate consideration of the Atomic Energy
Commission's Report.
At an informal meeting, the authors of all
these proposals had no great difficulty in reaching agreement on the following points, in spite
of some preliminary misWlderstandings:
1.- The Atomic Energy Commission's Repott
should be studied wit.hout delay,' in order to
facilitate the Commission's work.
2. The new commission should -be composed
of representa~ves of the States members of the
Security Council.
3. The new commission's task should be to
prepare and submit to the Security Council
within three months proposals for the regulation
and reduction of armaments and arnied forces,
and for the provision of practical and effective
safeguards with regard to ,such reduction c1nd
regulation. ,
.
4. The new commission should also deal with
the information to be submitted by Member
States on armed forces, and the assistance to be
given to the Security Council by the Military
Staff Committee in all matters relating to disarmament; and finally, should ask the Military
Staff Committee to present within the shortest
possible time the recomplendations for which it
had been asked on 15 February 1946.
The disagreement is therefore now limited to
a question of -the new commission's jurisdiction
and competence, to the question expressed in the
italicized passages of the altemative proposal
of the document which Council members have
before them.1
Should or should not the new commission's
terms'of reference be determined and limited by
the express stipulation that its work should begin
only where the Atomic Energy Commission
leaves off, both as regards actual disarmament
measures and the nature of the new arms concerning which information is reques~ed?

1

p

219

distinguer,. et que les enoncer peut contribuer a
rendre le sujet plus clair et meme a faciliter,
l'Iinsi que le desire la delegation de la Colombie,
un accord final entre les deux grandes PUissances, accord sans lequel on ne voit pas comment il sera possible d'elaborer efficacement le
plan complet de desarmement que le monde aesire etdont il a besoin.
Le premier aspect de la question est le suiThe first aspect of the question i8 this: is it
really essential to retain the italicized passages vant: est-il reellement indispensahle de conwithout any modification or change, or, on the server, sans aucune modification, la redaction du
contrary, would it be possible and advisable to texte en italique ou, au contraire, serait-il posshorten and sirl1plify the text in order to avoid sible ·~t conviendrait-il de l'abreger et meme de
the objections made against it by Mr. Gromyko la simplifier pour eviter les objections que.
when he says that this version shifts the empha- M. Gromyko a elevees contre eIle, a savoir qu'en
sis, paying main attention to the.prob:em of jur-. employant ces termes et cette forme, on deplace
isdiction and competence and relegating to the le centre de gravite de la question et on accorde
background that which is really vital: namely, l'importance d'un probleme de fond a une questhe disarmament plan itself? It appears from all tion d'attributions et de competence, detournant
that Mr. Gromyko has said' on this matter that ainsi l'attention du sujet reellement vital, le plan
he fears that the new commission, instead of meme de desarmement? A en JUG.;:r par tout ce
being able to devote all its time to essential mat- qu'il a dit a ce sujet, M. Grcmyko craint que
ters of substance, will have to spend quite a con- la nouvel1e commission, au lieu de pouvoir considerable time on the preliminary work of de- sacrer tout son temps aux questions essentielles
limitation of responsibilities, in order to solve et aux probU:mes de fond, ne doive se livrer,
problems which may remain merely theoretical pendant un temps plus ou moins long, a un traand never arise in practice.
.
vail prealable de d'elimL"'1aticn des responsabilites
pour resoudre des problemes qui peuvent n'etre
que theoriques et ne jamais se presenter dans
la pratique.
.
Pour frayer la voic a un accord entre !es deux
In order to help towards an agreement between the two great Powers, the Colombian dele- grandes Puissances, la delegation de la Colomgation, at the meetings held in the Empire. Stat~ bie, au cours des reunions officieuses qui se sont
, Building, taking note on the one hand of Mr. tennes a l'Empire State Building, considerant,
Gromyko's remarks in so far as they might be ac- d'une part, les observations de M. Gromyko
ceptable, and on the other hand of the reason- dans le mesure ou eUes paraissent acceptables,
able desire of the United States delegation to et tenant compte, d'autre part, du desir legitime
prevent the new commission and the Atomic qu\~prouve la delegation des Etats-Unis de pre~
Energy Commission from interfering ",Jith each venir toute interference de la nouvelle commisother, proposed various formulas for agreement, sion dans le domaine de la Commission de l'enerwhich at onc time brought the representatives of gie atomique, a propose diverses formules d'acthe Soviet Union and the United States so close cord qui, a un moment donne, ont contribu~ a
together that agreement seemed possible and rapprocher a tel point les representants de
even, likely.
l'Union sovietique et des Etats-Unis, que l'on a
cru un accord possible et meme probable.
The Colombian delegation still considers that,
Cependant, la delegation de la Colombie conin the interests of achieving the desired and nec- sidere que, dans l'interet de l'harmonie entre les
essary harmony between the great Powers, it grandes Puissances, harmonie souhaitable et
would be preferable to simplify the whole of necessaire, il vaudrait mieux simplifier tout le
paragraph 3 of the draft resolution, replacing the paragraphe 3 du projet de resolution, en rempresent text by one reading more Of less as fol- pla~ant le texte actuel par une redaction qui
lows:
aurait a peu pres la teneur suivante:
"Constituer une commission composee de
"To set up a commission consisting of reprepresentants des pays membres du Conseil de
resentatives of the members of ·the Security
securite, chargee de prepareI' et de presenter,
Council, instructed to prepare and present to
dans un delai de trois mois, au Conseil de
the Security Council, within the space of three
securite, en ce qui concerne les ~.:cmes qui ne
months; such proposals concerning arms not
sont pas de la competence de la Commission
covered by the terms of reference of the Atomde l'energie atomique, les propositions qu'e1le
ic Energy Commission as it ml'!y be in a posisera en mesure de formuler pour assurer l'aption to formtilate in order to ensure the implementation of the above-men.tioned resolutions
plication des resolutions precitees,prlses par
of the General Assembly of 14 December
l'AssembIee generale le 14 decembre 1946."
1946."
This would go some way toward dissipating
De cette maniere~ on dissiperait, au moins en
~r. Gromyko's fears, as the question of jurisdic- part'le, les craintes de M. Gromyko, puisque la
tion and competence would not appear as the quelltion des attributions et de la conpetence
main point and there would be no danger of the n'apparaltrait pas comme le centre de gravire,
different aspects might help to clarify the matter
and even, as the Colombian delegation earnestly
desires, facilitate a find agreement between the
two "~eat Powers, withDut which it is difficult to
see N the complete disarmament plan, which
the world so eagerly desires and needs, can be
effectively2.chieved.

hP _

220
et 1'on ne courrait pas le risque de voir la nouvelle commission, au lieu de concentrer son
effort sur sa t~che cssentie1le, obligee de consacrer un temps mal defini a debattre le probleme de sa competence avec la Commission de
1'energie atomique. D'autre part, la delegation
des Etats-Unis obteindrait ce qu'elle desire
legitimement et justement, que la nouvelle commission ne s'occupe, ni a propos des mesures de
desarmement, ni apropos. des renseignements,
des armes dont fait mention la resolution. de
l'Assemblee generale qui a cree la Commission
de 1'energie atomique.
The second aspect of the question ie tllli!; in
Le deuxieme aspect de la question est le suiorder to fulfil the requirements of'the United vant: pour atteindre les buts de la delegation
States delegation to which I h.ave just referred, is des Etats-Unis, buts que je viens de rappeler,
it essential to include in the new remlution a est-il indispensable d'introduire dans la nouvelle
specific clause regarding the s€ope of the new resolution une disposition precise sur 1'etendue
commission's terms of reference, or, in view of des attributions de la nouvelle commission ou,
the contents of the General Assembly's resolu- au contraire, etant donne la teneur des resolutions of 24 January and 14 December 1946, is tions de l'Assemblee generale du 24 janvier et
it understood, even in the absence of a specific du 14 decembre 1946, doit-on considerer comme
statement to that effect, that the new commission sous-entendu, meme en l'absence d'une stipulais not entitled to concern itseH with matters en- tion expresse, que la nouvelle commission ne
trusted to the Atomic Energy Commission? .
peut pas s'occuper des questions qui sont
confiee:; a la Commission de l'energie atomique?
Bearing in mind, on the one hand, the insistSi l'on tient compte, d'une part, de l'insistance
ence of the United States delegation that such que met la delegation des Etats-Unis a faire inspecific clauses be included, and, on the other troduire de te1les dispositions expresses et, d'autre
hand, what Mr. Gromyko said on this matter in part, de ce que nous a dit M. Gromyko, en
his very interesting speech yesterday, l it appears particulier dans son tres interessant discours
that there is no difference of opinion between the d'hier! il semble bien qu'en ce qui concerne ce
two delegations upon this second aspect. Both deu~eme aspect, il n'existe aucune divergence
are agreed that in the absence of an express, clear entre le'! conceptions des deux delegations. L'une
and precise clause concerning the limits of the et l'autre se rencontrent sur le point suivant: en
new commission's terms of reference, very serious 1'absence d'une disposition expresse, claire et
doubts, which might prove difficult to dispel, precise sur les limites du mandat de la nouvelle
might arise at an early date concerning the new commission, on pourrait avoir pour le moins des
commission's right to concem,itseH with matters doutes tres serieux et difficiles a dissiper sur le
which have been submitted to the Atomic Ener- droit de la nouvelle commission de s'occuper
gy Conimission.
des questions soumises a l'examen de la Commission de l'energie atomique.
De cette consideration decoule la reponse au
This leads us to the answer to the third aspect
of our problem: is it or is it not desirable to in- troisieme aspect du probleme qui est de savoir
clude a specific clause relating to the new com- s'il convient ou non d'introduire une disposition
mission's terms of reference, in order to prevent expresse relative au mandat de la nouvelle comit from interfering in the work of the Atomic mission et interdisant a cette derniere d'interEnergy Commission? The Colombian delegation venir dans le travail de la Commission de 1'eneris convinced that this is desirable for two reasons: gie atomique. De 1'avis de la delegation colomfirst, because, if the absence of such a clause is bienne, il convient sans aucun doute de le faire,
going to give rise to the doubts and problems I et cela pour deux raisons: en premier lieu,
have mentioned, it is better to prevent this by parce que si l'absence d'une telle disposition
inserting one simple clause; second, because the peut susciter les doutes et les problemes auxquels
new commission will naturally do much more je viens de faire allusion, il vaut mieux emeffective and useful work if it devotes all its time pecher, au moyen d'une simple clause, de tels
to disarmament problems which have not yet doutes et de tels problemes de se presenter; et
been studied, than if it devotes all or part of its en second lieu, parce que le travail de la noutime to work already entrusted to another com- velle commission sera naturellement beaucoup
mission, the Atomic Energy Commission, which plus efficace et utile si c~tte commission conhas done very praiseworG;.y work and is making sacre la totalite de son temps aux problemes du.
solid progress towards the completion of its task. desarmement que 1'on n'apas etudies jusqu'ici,
plutot que de se consacrer totalement ou partiellement a un' travail qui incombe deja a une
autre commission, .la Commission de l'energie
atonnque, qui a accompli une reuvre digne
new commission's having to spend a more or less
indefinite period of time discussing the problem
of delimitation of powers in consultation with the
Atomic -Energy Commission, instead of devoting
itself to its essential work. In addition, the United
States delegation would have. the assurance it
legitimately and rightly desires; namely, that the
new commission would not concern itself, either
as regards disarmament measures or as regards
information, with the weapons referred to in
the General Assembly resolution setting up the
Atomic Energy Commission.

1 See Official Records 0/ the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 11.

1 Voir Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de s6curite,
Deuxieme Annee, No 11.
.~~

_IIIIII'JI------

IIJS

c

.~ _ _ •

···_·

As it is our desire that the disannament plan
should progress as well and as quickly as possible,
the proper distribution of work would seem to
. be for one commission, the Atomic Energy Commission, to continue to deal exclusively with
atomic weapons and other weapons of mass
destruction, and for the new commission to deal
only with the rest of the work.
There seems no reason why two commissions,
composed of representatives of the same countries (if we exclude the presence of Canada on
the Atomic Energy Commission), should set to
work upon the same question, neglecting, at least
partially, the other aspect of the problem, or
rather, begrudging time for the consideration of
disarmament measures concerning weapons
other than those mentioned in the resolution setting up the Atomic Energy Commission.
The fourth aspect was raised by Mr. Gromyko
in his speech yesterday: can the Security Coun, cil, without in any way interfering with the
rights of the General Assembly, without directly
or indirectly contravening its resolutions, without
even going so far as to interpret them, legitimately limit the new commission's terms of reference
by ruling that it shall begin its work only where
the Atomic Energy Commission leaves off?

In the Colombian delegation's opinion, there
is no doubt whatever that the Security Council is
not obliged to choose between one or other interpretation of the General Assembly's resolutions
in order to define and determine as it thinks fit
the terms of reference of the commission which
it is going to set up in accordance with the
authority conferred upon it by the Charter.
The General A~embly set up the Atomic
Energy Commission and gave it its terms of reference. The Council, in deciding to set up a commission to deal exclusively with disannament
questions not within the terms of reference of the
Atomic Energy Commission, is neither altering
these. terms, nor limiting, extending or interfering with them. While there might be serious
doubt as to the Council's right, by appointing a
new commission, to invade the sphere of activity
assigned by the" Assembly to the Commission
which it set up, there is not the slightest doubt of
the Council's right to define the terms of reference of a commission wh':::h it alone sets up, and
to limit those terms specifically in order to avoid
interference with the Commission set up by the
Assembly.
The above reflections lead the Colombian
delegation to the following conclusions:
If we cannot avoid the choice between voting
for the draft resolution with the inclusion of

.........

_ _• • • •

· _ · _ · · · · _ _• • • • •

•••••• - ' •••••••••••••••••••• ' . ' "

221
d'eIoges et qui poursuit actuellement, sur des
bases tres solides, l'accompl3sement de sa
mission.
Comme ce que nous desirons est de faire
avancer, le mieux et le plus vite possible, le plan
de desarmement, il semble naturel que, suivant
une regie elementaire de la division du travail,
une commission, la Commission de l'energie
atomique, continue a s'occuper exdusivement
de l'anne atomique et desautres engins de destruction ma.ssive, et que la nouvelle commission
se charge uniquement du reste de la tache.
On ne voit pas pourquoi deux commissions
composees des representants des memes pays (si
1'0n fait exception de la presence du Canada a·
la Commission de l'energie atomique) consacreraient leurs efforts a l'etude d'une meme question, en negligeant, tout an moins en partie,
l'autre aspect du probleme, ou plus exactement
en consacrant un temps insuffisant a l'etude des
moyens de desarmement relatifs a des armes
differentes de celles que mentionne la resolution
. qui a cree la Commission de l'energie atomique.
M. Gromyko, dans son discours d'hier, a
signale le quatrieme aspect de la, question: le
Conseil de securite peut-il legitimement, sans
attenter en rien aux droits de l'Assemblee generale, sans violer directement ou indirectement
les resolutions de cette Assemblee, sans meme
qu'il sDit necessaire de se mettre a' interpreter
ces resolutions, limiter le mandat de la nouvelle
commission en pasant en principe que ce mandat ne commence que la ou finit le mandat de
la Commission de l'energie atomique?
De l'avis de 'la delegation colombienne, il ne
fait pas de doute que le Conseil de securite n'a
pasbesoin de se prononcer en faveur de rune ou
l'autre des interpretations des resolutions de
l'Assemblee generale, pour delimiter et determiner de la fa~on qui lui paraltrait la plus
indiquee le mandat d'une commission qu'il va
creer conformement aux pouvoirs que lui confere
la Charte elle-meme.
L'Assemblee generale a cree la Commission
de l'energie atomique et lui a fixe son mandat.
Le Conseil ne va pas modifier ce mandat, 11i le
limiter, ni l'elargir; il n'interviendra en aucune
mamere clans ce mandat en decidant de ereer
un commission chargee de s'occuper exclusivement des questions du desannement qui n'entrent pas dans le cadre du mandat de la Comffi1ssion de l'energie atomique. S'il peut yavoir
un doute serieux quant a la faculte qu'aurait le
Conseil d'empieter, en designant u...'1e nouve11e
commission, sur le domaine que l'Assemblee
aurait fixe a la Co~sion creee par elle, il ne
fait aucun doute que le Conseil est indiscutablement autorise a limiter le mandat d'une commission ereee par lui, et a le limiter precisement
en vue d'eviter toute interference avec la Commission constituee par l'Assemblee.
Les reflexions qui precedent conduisent la delegation' colombienne aux conclusions suivantes:
Dans le cas ou nous nous trouverions devant
un dilemme, ou l'alternative ineluctable serait de

-the italicized passages and voting for it without
them, we shall choose the first alternative; because, as we have indicated, we consider it
necessary to limit and define the new commission's terms of reference in some way or other.

voter le projet de resolution avec les phrases en
italique ou de le voter sans eUes, nous opterions
pour le premier terme de cette alternative, parce
que nous estimons, d'apres les considerations qui
precedent, qu'il est necessaire de limiter et de
determiner le mandat'de la nouveUe commission
sous une forme ou sous une autre.
But that does not relieve us of our obligation
Mais cette declaration ne nous releve pas de
to do everything in our power to bring about l'obligation, que nous c;:stimons etre la notre,
agreement between the great Powers. We con- de faire tout ce qui sera en notre pouvoir
sider that one of the essential tasks of the non- pour realiser l'harmonie entre les grandes
permanent members of the Council is to work Puissances. Nous considerons que l'une des mis, unceasingly for the achievement of such agree- sions essentieUes incombant aux membres
ment, which is essential for the effective realiza- non permanents du Conseil consiste a travailler
tion of the purposes' and principles of the inlassablement a rechercher et a garantir cette
Charter. We consider that any time spent to harmonie, indispensable a la realisation effective
that end is time weU spent, and that every des buts et principes de la Charte. Nous coneffort in that direction is in the best interests siderons que tout le temps consacre a ces efforts
of the purposes of the United Nations. Time est un temps bien employe, et que tous les efforts
spent in achieving harmony between the great accomplis dans ce sens conduiront a la realisaPowers is not time wasted. It is better that tion des buts des Nations Unies. Le temps passe
decisions should be unanimous than that they a rechercher l'harmonie entre les grandes Puisshould be speedy. We understand that the great sances n'est pas du temps perdu. Il vaut mieux
Powers, which have the main responsibility for prendre des decisions unanimes que des decisions
the maintenance of peace, and which possess ,. rapides. Nous entendons bien que les grandes
large armies and powerful armaments, are Puissances, qui sont les principales responsables
facing problems which we do not have to face du maintien de la paix et qui disposent de
where questions of disarmament are concerned. grandes armees et d'armements puissants, se
We understand, also, that for that reason they trouvent en face de problemes qui ne se posent
need more time than we do to define their pas pour nous en matiere de desarmement. Nous
position in matters of detail, procedure, method comprenons aussi que, pour la meme. raison, les
and organization. But our experience since San grandes Puissances aient besoin de plus de temps
Francisco has shown that, even in very difficult que nous pour definir leur position dans les
and controversial matters, it has often been pos- questions de detail, de procedure, de methode et
sible to reach final unanimous agreement' cl'organisation. Mais l'experience acquise clepuis
through good will, good faith and a spirit of San-Francisco montre que, meme sur des questions tres discutees et difficiles, il a ete frequemco-operation and careful thought.
ment possible d'aboutir a un accord final et
unanime reposant sur la bonne volonte et la
bonne foi, l'esprit de comprehension et de reflexion.
The Colombian delegation would not like to
La delegation colombienne ne desire pas voir
see this tradition broken in so far as disarmament cette tradition rompue apropos du desarmeis concerned. Without direct national interests, ment. Sans interets nationaux directs, sans opiwithout prejudices, without mental reservations, nions precon~ues, sans restric+ions mentales, sans
without anything which ties it down to anyone rien qui la lie a telle ou telle methode, a tel ou
method, anyone system or any ope procedure, tel systeme, a teUe ou teUe procedure, la deleit has tried to serve and co-operate in the effort gation colombienne s'est efforcee de servir et de
to achieve harmony between the great Powers. cooperer a la recherche de l'harmonie entre les
This was the intention behind its draft resolution; grandes Puissances. C'est dans cet esprit qu'elle
this also was the reason for its attitude in the a presente son projet de resolution; c'est aans
unofficial meetings held in the Empire State cet esprit qu'elle a agi au cours des seances de
Building. This is its purpose in the present l'Empire State Building; c'est dans cet esprit
statement. The Colombian delegation pursues qu'elle a formule la presente declaration. La
but one aim: the achievement of the purposes delegation colombienne ne vise qu'un but: metand principles of the Charter. Convinced that tre en application les principes de la Charte.
harmony between the great Powers is essential Considerant que l'harmonie entre les grandes
for that purpose, it would be sorry to omit a Puissances est necessaire a cette realisation, eIle
final appeal to those Powers to overcome the ne veut pas terminer son intervention sans
aux grandes Puissances un dernier appe1 pour
last obstacle in the way of disarmament.
leur demander de franchir le derrner obstacle
qui barre le chemin du desarmement.
Sir Alexander CADOGAN (United Kingdom) :
As I did not take part in the informal discussions
ot the last few days, I have to rely largely on
hearsay as to the proceedings. From what I did
'Iillnlltillllillli:l!illlll'!illi''lIIlfliiilr'1iiiI''flle_lilIInllillililii!fj'.",iilltiillli·_

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (Royaume-Uni) (traduit de l'anglais): Comme je n'ai pas pris part
aux reunions officieuses de ces jours derniers, je
suis oblige de m'en rapporter dans une grande

··:.iii~:·.c....~.=~:.oI""'·~f'\.l>..,-.D"==...:;..-:,,·:J":..;,-~~.:~=~="·

..
···d""'·-n_
.....
-rnlliol.·.......
X...
, ...
·,·· ...
· ....
ec
...
' lilil
...
·.-...
· ·...
--...
5 ...·...
· $. .- ...""$-·.00..","'
.""
.....
, ........
<r-_...

......

1

jlilS
hear it seemed to :me that the chief difficulty
was 'due to the proposal of the representative
of the United States to make certain additions
to the text designed to safeguard the autonomy
of the Atomic Energy Commission, which was
clearly desired by the General Assembly, and
which I think, has not yet been explicitly
challe~ged by the representative of the Soviet
Union. It seemed to me, at first, that this might
be an argument about nothing, as I believed
that the resolution of the General Assembly of
14 December last fully safeguarded the autonomy of the Atomic Energy Commission. Therefore though I liked the United States texts,
I w~s not convinced of the nece.ssity of including them in the draft resolution.

Since listening to yesterday's discussion, lam
not quite so sure about that. The representative
of the United States, Mr. Austin, pointed out
forcibly and clearly that in the General Assembly
resolution, there was certain ground reserved,
and rightly reserved, for the Atomic Energy
Commission, whereas the draft resolution submitted to the Council, without those additions
which he has proposed, would give the new
commission the full task of implementing, the
whole of the General'Assembly resolution. Ar.td
that was not, I am convinced, the intention of
the General Assembly.
From what I had been told, I had thought
that the representative of the Soviet Union opposed these United States additions simply on
the ground that they were superfluous. If that
were so, I should appeal to him to admit them
and accept them, because there cannot be any
harm in repeating what has already been said,
except, perhaps, in so far as you may say that
it is a waste of time. Yet that is nothing in
comparison with the waste of time caus~d by
opposing their inclusion.
These long discussions do not contribute to
the e..'!:peditious discharge of our task. We spend
a great deal of time in discussing them.
I have been wondering lately whether the
time has not come for the Council to consider
the possibility and desirability of installing the
system of simultaneous interpretation. We might
perhaps, in any case, request the SecretaryGener~l to exatni.r}.e the materi~ possibilities of
this suggestion. But that is a digression, anu I
must come back to my argument.
Since hearing Mr. Gromyko'sspeech of yesterday, I am not so sure that his objection to
these additions proposed by the United States
representative is simply on the grounds of superfl~ty. For instanc.e, he is reported as having
SaId that the resolutions adopted by the General
~sembly do not speak separately of the proviSlons governing atomic weaF1ns on the one hand

mesure, en ce qui concerne les debats, a ce. qui
m'en est revenu par oui-dire..D'a.pres les declarations que j'ai recueillies, il semble que la principale difficulte vienne de la proposition du representant des Etats-Unis, qui desire voir ajouter
au texte certaines dispositions destinees a sauvegarder l'autonomie de la Commission de l'energie atomique, autonomie que l'P:LSsembIee generale a nettement declare desirer,ct. que,
autant que je sache, le representant de I'Union
sovietique n'a pas encore explicitement mise en
cause. Je me demandais tout d'abord si je n'allais
pas engager une discussion inutile, car il me
semblait que la resolution adoptee par l'Assemblee generale le 14 decembre dernier assurait
pleinement l'autonomie de la Commission de
I'energie atomique. C'est pourquoi, tout en aimant assez les textes que le representant .des
Etats-Unis propose d'ajouter au projet de resolution, je n'etais pas convaincu de la necessite de
les inserer.
Toutefois la discussion d'hier m'a fait quelque
peu changer d'avis. Le representant des EtatsUnis, M. Austin, a montre nettement, et d'une
maniere convaincante, que la resolution de l'Assemblee generale reserve, et a juste titre, un
certain domaine a la Comiillssion de renergie
atomique, tandis que si I'on n'ajoutait pas au
projet de resolution soumis au Conseil les dispositions qu'il propose, c'est la nouvelle commission
qui se trouverait chargee de 'la mise en reuvre
complete de la resolution de l'AssembIee generale. Telle n'etait pas, j'en suis persuade, I'intention de celle-ci.
D'apres ce que j'avais entendu dire, je croyais
que le representant de I'Union sovietique etait
oppose aux dispositions que le representant
des Etats-Unis propose d'inserer dans le projet
de resolution, simplement parce qu'il les trouvait snperflues. S'il en est bien ainsi, je lui demande instamment de les accepter, etant donne
que I'on ne court aucun risque a repeter ce qui
a deja ete dit, sauf peut-etre celui de perdre un
peu de temps; mais cette perte de temps n'est
rien au regard de celle qui resulte de I'oppositio:l
a laquelle a donne lieu l'insertion de ces dispositions.
Ces longues discussions ne contribuent pas a
hater I'accomplissement de notre tache. Nous
perdons beaucoup de temps en discussions.
Je me demandais recemment si I'heure n'etait
pas venue pour le Conseil d'examiner la possibilite et I'opportunite d'adopter le systeme de
l'interpretation simultanee. Nous pourrions peutetre, en tout cas, demander au Secretaire general
cl'examiner s'il est materiellement possible de
mettre cette idee a execution; mais je viens de
me livrer a une digression; je m'lirrete done et
reviens a man argumentation.
Depuis que j'ai entendu M. Gromyko, hier, je
ne ,is plus tres sur que, s'il s'eleve contre les
dispositions proposees par le representant des
Etats-Unis, ce soit simplement parce qu'il les
juge superflues. M. Gromyko aurait declare,
par exemple, que les resolutions adoptees par
l'Assembl~e generale ne separent pas les dispositions regissant les armes atomiques de celles qui

1IIt._lIII!llIIOII'' ' '- -.=~~.~._----_ ".._~.,,_.~. __.__._-_ _~-_. ~~~-_._~~~.~. '-"-'..

_ _ _ _ _ _ _. _ .

IIII!I'I

l!lII!Z!Zll'4

tttII

,lIIIi• •

a.nd other, conventional ,weapons on ,the otb,er; 'regissent les ar.mes de type classique; que les
and that atomic arms'are mentioned within the armesatomiques sont mentionnees dans le cadre
general framework of arms and armaments,.and general des armes etarmements, et que ces resothere is no opposition in these rf'..501utions of the luti9ns de l'AssembIee generale n'opposent pas,
General AsselIlbly, as there is in: the United States comme le font lespropositions du representant
proposals, between atomic arms on the one hand, des. Etats-Unis, ,les armes atomiques aux autres
and armaments of other kinds on the other. formes d'armemerits.
Well, of course, it is quite true that the GenCertes, i1 est parfaitement vrai que la resolueral, Assembly resolution of DeceI,llber last does tion ,votee par l'Asse1I1blee generale an mois de
cover atomic arms as well as other arms. But decembre dernier englobe aussi bien les armes
there is this distinction to which I will draw atomiques que lesautres. On y trouve cependant
Mr. Gromyko;s attention: namely, that when cette distinction, sur laquelle j'attire l'attention
atonuc arms are mentioned" I think you will de M. Gromyko: ~ savoir que, chaque fois qu'il
find there is always direct reference to the y est question des armes atomiques, il est touAtomic Energy Commission. I think that the jours fait directement mention de la Commission
intention of the Assembly. resolution certainly de I'energie atomique. Je crois qu'en adoptant
was that the discussions and planning in regard cette resolution, r AssembIee entendait certaineto atomic weapons or other weapons would be ment mettre a part la question de I'examen et
~ept separate. That is the only way I can de l'elaboration d'un plan touchant les armes
explain to myself paragraph 8 of the Assembly atomiques et autres engins. C'est la seule expliresolution, which is 'as follows: "Nothing herein cation que je pirisse trouver au paragraphe 8 de
contained shall alter or limit the resolution of the la resolution, dont le texteest le suivant: "Au, General Assembly passed on 24 January 1946, cune des dispositions contenues dans la presente'
cre;:lting the Atomic Energy Commission.'"
, resolution ne modifiera la resolution de l'Assemblee generale adoptee le 24 janvier 1946 instituant la Commission de l'energie atomique, ou
n'en limitera la portee."
.--.,
Even after all that ,has been said, I must
Meme apres tout ce qui a ete dit, je dois
confess I am still not quite clear as to the real avouCl' que je ne saisis pas encore en quoi connature of the difference which seems to persist. siste reellement la divergence de vues qui semble
I should like to put one or two definite ques- persister. Je desirerais poser une ou deux questions'to my colleague of the Soviet lJnion. Does tions precises au representant de l'Union soviehe oppose the United States additions simply tique: est-il oppose a I'insertion des dispositions
becal,lSe they are implied in the resolution, and proposees par le representant des Etats-Unis
he thinks it unnecessary to repeat what has parcequ~il estime que le sens de la resolution va
already been said? If :his answer is in the affirma- de soi, et qu'il serait superflu de repeter ce qui
tive, I would appeal to him to drop his for- a ete Cleja dit? S'il en est bien ainsi, je lui demanmalistic objection. If he would do that, we could derai de renoncer a son objection qui porte sur
appoint the commission today and they could tIne question de forme. Nous pourrions, s'il y
get to work, if necessary, tomorrow.
consentait, constituer aujourd'hui la commission
envisageeet celle-cl pouqait, s'il etait necessaire,
se mettre au travail des demain.
On the other hand, does he oppose these
Au contraire, M. Gromyko est-il oppose a
additions because he does not agree with them? I'insertion de ces disppsition parce qu'il n~ les
Does he, for instance, think that the, p.ew com- approuve pas? Pense-t-il, parexemple,quelacommission;s jurisdiction may extend to those matters petence de la nouvelle commission puisse s'eten- .
which fall within the competence of the Atomic dre aux questions relevant de celle de la ComEnergy Commission as determined by the Gen- mission de l'energie aton;nque, telle qu'elle a ete
eral Assembly resolutions of 24 January 1946 definie par les resolutions que l'AssembIee geneand 14'December 1946? If there is to be any rale a adoptees le 24 janvier 1946 et le 14 de~
doubt about the functions of the new commis- cembre 1946? S'il existe un doute que1conque
sion, I think we had better clear up that doubt touchant les fonctions de la nouvelle commisnow in order to avoidconsfant wrangles in the sion, j'estime qu'il vaudrait mieux le dissiper
commission itself and perhaps between the two. maintenant, afin d'eviter, au sein de la commiscommissions; and consequent delay and confp- sion elle-meme, voire entre les deux commissions, des contestations sans fin qui entraineraient
sion.
des retards et de la confusion.
Demander que cette question soit tranchee
To ,ask that this qUf'..5tion be resolved now is .
not to put what Mr. Gromykocalls an obstacle in maintenant, n'est point, contrairement a ce que,
pense M. Gromyko, faire obstacle au desarmethe way of disarmament.'
.
ment.
Therefore, as at present advised,' I favour the
En consequence,etant donne ce que je sais
first and the t~d' of the proposed United actuellement de la question, je me declare favoStates additions, in that they appear to be a rable aux premiere et troisieme additions dont le
restatement of the position established by the representant des Etats-Unis propose l'inserti0l!-',
General Assembly. The delegation ofthe Soviet parce qu'elles me paraissent coiIfirmer la pOSl- ....

.J

...

'225

Union may think them superfluous, but I do
not understand how they can be thought to be
harmful.

As regards the second addition, to the effect
that "the commission shall submit a plan of
work to the Council for approval", as I said
before, I think it is a formal matter that the
terms of reference of the new commission should
issue from the Council, and I think that they
should have the Council's authority.
As regards the fourth addition, which is that
"the title of the commission shall be the Commission for Conventional Armaments", the question of title is least important. I, for my part,
should be prepared to accept any title that commended itself to the majority of the Council,
provided it did not give a false impression of
the nature and functions of the commission.
Now I should just like to say a few words in
regard to paragraph 4 of the -resolution which
is before the Council, which deals with the. implementation of .Article 43 of the Charter.
The representative of France has already
spoken on this subject, and I should like to say
that I entirely endorse everything he has said.
I would remind the Security Council of certain
words which appear in the General Assembly
resolution. They are these: "The General Assembly, regarding the problem of security as
closely connected with that of disarmament ..."
I think all ,experience teaches us that. The
long history of the former discussions on disarmament at Geneva showed that security and
disarmament must go hand in hand. aut I am
afraid, and it seems to me that, with our concentration on the regulation of armaments, we
have relegated, or risked relegating, the consideration of security to the background. My
Government would wish me to resist very
strongly any tendency of that kind, as it is extremely anxious to see progress made with this
side of the question. It is not the least important
side. Without going so far as to say, as some do,
that if you could achieve security, disarmament
would automatically follow, I will venture to say
that you will have very little disarmament if
you do not do something at the same time for
security.
What Mr. Austin referred to yesterday as the
"grand objective of the prevention of war"
cannot be achieved by disarmament alone. It
must be accompanied by security.
Now, it is true that there is this short reference
t? security in the last paragraph of the resolution, but I think it needs strengthening a little..
What has happened in the Military Staff Committee'since it was first convened? Today is
very nearly the anniversary of the day on which
the Security Council asked the Military Staff

hz

'"

tion prise par l'Assemblee generale. Il est possible que la delegation de rUnion sovietique
trouve ces dispositions superflues, mais je ne vois
pas comment elle peut les considerer conune
dangereuses.
En ce qui concerne la deuxiem.e disposition
a introduire, selon laquelle "la comriJission presentera un programme de travail a l'approbation du Conseil de secmite", j'estime, comme je
l'ai deja dit,qu'i! conviendrait pour la bonne
forme que le manflat de la.' nouvelle commission
emanat du Conseil, et que la commission tint ses
pouvoirs de celui-ci.
Pour ce qui est dela quatrieme disposition a
inserer, a savoir que "la commission s'appellera la
Commission des armements de type classique",
il ~'agit la, a mon avis, d'une question de peu
d'importance. Pour ma part, je suis pret a· accepter n'importe quel titre susceptible de recevoir l'approbation de la majorite du Conseil,
pourvu qu'il ne donn~ pas une idee fausse de la
nature et des fonctions de la commission.
Je voudrais maintenant dire quelques mots
au sujet du paragraphe 4 de la resolution dont le
Conseil est saisi, et qui traite de la mise en application de l'Article 43 de la Charte.
Le representant de la France a deja. pris la
parole a ce sujet, et je tiens a dire que je me
r;:l.llie entierement a sa maniere de voir. Jevoudrais rappe1er aQ Conseil de securite certains
des termes de la resolution de l'Assemblee generale. Ces termes sont les suivants: "L'AssembIee
generale, considerant le probleme de la securite
comme etroitement lie a celui du desarmement ..."
Cette etroite liaison a toujours ete confirmee
par les evenements. Tout au long des discussions qui ont eu lieu autrefois a Geneve sur le
desarmement, les faits ont montre que la securite
et le desarmement doivent marcher de pair.
Mais je crains qu'en nous concentrant sur le
probleme de la reglementation des armements,
nous n'ayons relegue ou risque de releguer a
l'arriere-plan l'examen du probleme de la securite. Mon Gouvernement voudrait que je m'oppose de la maniere la plus energique a toute
tendance de ce genre, car il est extremement desireux que des progres soient realises dans ce
domaine particulier. La securite n'est pas l'aspect le moins important du probleme. Sans aller
jusqu'a dire, comme certains, que si la securite
pouvait etre realisee, le desarmement s'ensuivrait
automatiquement, j'oserai declarer que le desarmement se reduira a bien peu de chose 'si .1' on
ne fait ';en en meme temps pour la securite.
Cet' objectif grandiose d'empecher la guerre",
dont a pade hier M. Austin, le desarmement
seul ne permettra pas de l'atteindre. Il faut que
la securite aille de pair avec le desarmement.
Certes, le dernier paragraphe de la resolution
mentionne brievement la securite; mais j'estime
qu'il faudrait insister un peu plus sur cette idee.
Que s'est-il passe au Comite d'etat-major depuis
qu'il est entre en fonctions? n va bientot y avoir
un an que le Conseil de securite a demande au
Comite d'etat-m~.jor de formuler des recomman-

_.«~

Committee to make recommendations for \the
implementation of Article 43 of the Charter.
That Committee decided that its first task
was to attempt to draw up basic principles
which should govern the organization of the
United Nations armed force. That, I think, was
in April of last year. So far as I know, no
progress at all was made until September. Since
then, I believe, it can be said that progress has
been made, but it is hardly perceptible, and until
agreement is reached on the basic principles,
even a start cannot be made on the real work
that has to be done in connexion with this
important Article 43 of the Charter.
I feel that some stimulation should be given
to the work of the Military Staff Committee,
and I would therefore propose to add to paragraph 4, at the. end of the resolution, the following words:
". . . and, as a first step, to submit to the
Security Council, not later than 30 April
1947, its recommendations with regard to the
basic principles which should govern the organization of the United Nations armed
forces."
I am told that two and a half months for
the completion of this preliminary task should be
quite sufficient.
We have had a lot of exhortation, from the
delegation of the Soviet Union in particular, tQ
make all speed with disarmament, and I am sure
that we all wish to do that. But let us bring the
other aspect of the question into line. Let us
have no more obstacles put in the way of the
study of security. The United States, Chinese,
French, and United Kingdom delegations on
the Military Staff Committee were prepared to
begin this in April last. They failed at that time
to secure the co-operation, of the delegation of
the Soviet Union until September, when the
General Assembly was looming on the horizon.
There was a complete and impassable obstacle,
which has only partly been removed. Work on
this aspect, which has been so long obstructed,
, must now be stimulated. Therefore, I hope that
the Security Council will accept the amendment
which I have just submitted to it, and which
seems to me to be reasonable.

dations pour la mise en application de l'Article
43 de la Charte. Ce Comite a decide que sa
premiere tache etait de s'efforcer d'elaborer les
principes directeurs qui regiraient l'organisation
de la force armee des Nations Unies. Cela se
passait, je crois, en avril 1946. A ma connais.
sance, aucun progres n'a ete fait jusqu'au tnoiS
de septembre. Je crois que, depuis lors, on
a avance un. peu, mais le progres est a peine
perceptible; et tant que l'accord ne se sera pas
realise sur les principes directeurs, il ne sera pas
meme possible d'entamer le travail veritable
qu'imposent les dispositions de l'Article 43 de la
Charte, qui est si important.
J'estime qu'il y a lieu de donner une certaine
impulsion aux travaux du Comite d'etat-majorj
aussi proposerai-je d'ajouter au paragraphe 4,
tout a fait a la fin de la resolution, le texte
suivant:
". . . et a titre de premiere mesure, a soumettre au Conseil de securite le 30 avril1947
au plus tard, des recommandations quant aux
principes directeurs qui devraient regir l'organisation de la force armee des Nations
Unies."
On me dit, en effet, que deux mois et demi
suffiraient largement pour achever ce travail preliminaire.
Des exhortations nous cnt ete prodiguees, notamment par la delegation de l'Union sovietique1
afin que nous hations le plus possible les travaux relatifs au desarmement, et je suis sur que
tel est notre desir a tous. Mais nous devons tenir
compte aussi de l'autre aspect de la question.
Veilions a ce que l'on ne fasse plus obstacle aux
etudes sur la securite. Les delegations des EtatsUnis, de la Chine, de la France et du RoyaumeUni au Comite d'etat-major etaient pretes, des
avril dernier, a entreprendre ces etudes. Le concours de la delegation de l'Union sovietique leur
a fait defaut jusqu'en septembre, c'est-a-dire
jusqu'a l'approche de la reunion de l'~embIee
generale. Il y avait un obstacle absolu et insurmontable, qui n'a ete ecarte qu'en partle.
Il faut maintenant pousser l'etude de ce probleme, qui a ete entravee si longtemps. Dans ces
conditions, j'espere que le Conseil de securite
acceptera l'amendement que je viens de lui
soumettre et qui me parait raisonnable.

The PRESIDENT: I propose that our meeting
now adjourn, and that the discussion be resumed
this afternoon.
There are still two speakers on my list. The
next meeting will be held at 2.30 p.m.

Le PRESIDENT: Je propose d'ajourner notre
reunion et de reprendre la discussion cet apresmidi.
.
Deux orateurs sont encore inscrits. La prochaine seance est fixee a 14 h. 30.

The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.

La seance est levee a 13 h. 20.

HUNDRED AND FOURTH MEETING

CENT-QUATRIEME SEANCE

Held at Lake Success, New York,
on Wednesday, 12 February 1947, at 2.30 p.m.

Tenue a Lake Success, New-York,
le mercredi 12 Nvrier 1947, a 14 h. 30.

President: Mr. F. VAN LANGENHOVE
(Belgium) .

President: M. F. VAN LANGENHOVE
(BeIgique ) .

Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Au3tralia, Belgium, Brazil, China,

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
Australie, Belgique, Bresil, Chine, Colombie,
