UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

2246”

RECORDS

UN LlSMray

I

MEETING:

4 SEPTEMBER

1980

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2246) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President .*..........................

1

Expression of welcome to the representative of China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Letter dated 1 September 1980 from the Permanent Representative of Malta
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/14140) . . ..*......................................................

1

1

SlPV.2246

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Slrpplments
of the Oflciul Records of the Scxxrity Counril. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
und
Decisions
c~f the Smtrity
Council.
The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

,

.

2246th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 4 September 1980, at 5.45 p.m.
Mr. Taieb SLIM (Tunisia).

President:

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2246)

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. Letter dafed 1 September 1980 from the Permanent Representative of Malta to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/14 140)
The meeting

was called to order at 5.55 p.m.

Expression of thanks to the retiring

President

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from French):
Since this is the first meeting of the Security Council
this month, I should like, on behalf of the Council,
to pay a well-deserved tribute to Ambassador Futscher .
Pereira of Portugal, who presided over the Council
last month with such skill and diligence that our
admiration for him even increased. Thanks to his
vast experience, his outstanding talents as an accomplished diplomat and his objectivity, the work of the
Council during his presidency was brought to a successful conclusion.
Expression of welcome to the representative
of China

2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I should like to take this opportunity to wish a very
warm welcome on behalf of the Council to the new
Permanent Representative of China to the United
Nations, Mr. Ling Qing. I am convinced that with
his wisdom and his great diplomatic talent he will
make a valuable contribution to the progress of our
work.
Adoption
The agenda

was adopted.

Letter dated 1 September
Representative

of the agenda

of Malta

1980 from the Permanent
to the United Nations ad-

dressed to the President
(S/14140)

of the Security

Council

3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I should like to inform the members of the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives
of Malta and the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda. In accordance
with the usual practice I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote,
in conformity with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gauci (Malta)
and Mr. Burwin (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) took places
at the Council table.

4. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
The Council is meeting today in response to a request
made in a letter dated 1 September from the representative of Malta to the President of the Council, circulated under the symbol S114140.
5. I should also like to draw the attention of members
of the Council to the following documents: document S/14145, containing the text of a letter dated
3 September from the representative of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya to the President of the Council; and
document S/ 14147,containing the text of a letter dated
4 September from the representative of Malta to the
President of the Council.
6. The first speaker is the representative of Malta,
on whom I now call.
7. Mr. GAUCI (Malta): Mr. President, as I welcome
you to New York and compliment you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month, I greatly regret that on the very first day on
which you take up your duties 1 have had no option
but to solicit your immediate attention to a tense and
dangerous situation. I am at least consoled by the
fact that the excellent relations between our two countries permit me to trespass on your patience, and to
express the hope that, under your wise guidance, a
serious effort by all concerned will result in a positive
outcome to defuse the dangerous situation which the
Libyan Government has, unfortunately and unpredictably , recently provoked.

8. I wish also to thank the retiring President, Ambassador Futscher Pereira of Portugal, for his co-operation
during the last few days of August, when events took
an ominous course, and to pay him a well-deserved
tribute for the able way in which he presided over the
Council during that hot and exacting month.

unless a telex was received from the captain of Saipem
stating that they would stop operations and remove the
rig, the Libyans would take it by force. This situation
could easily have deteriorated at any given moment,
thus endangering regional peace and security.
15. Two days ago, in the evening, the situation
became even more tense. The Libyan warship had
moored itself to buoy number 5 of the oil rig, uncovered its guns and manned them, with sailors
standing by. The captain of the rig had no other option
but to solicit the protection of the Italian Navy.
I
.:
16. The current assessment by the concessionaires,
in a letter prepared on 3 September, reads as follows:

9. My thanks and apologies go equally to all the
members of the Council and to the Secretary-General.
10. I come before the Security Council with a heavy
heart, and with great regret. This feeling is generated
not only by the fact that the Security Council is
already overburdened with serious international
problems, but also by the fact that my country’s
national policy has strenuously been directed towards
the lessening of tension and not towards its creation
--especially where it never previously existed,

“The events which commenced on 20 August
1980 and were caused by the Government of the
Socialist People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, involving actual threats and continual shows of
military force by that Government against Texaco
and its drilling contractor, Saipem SPA, directly
exposed the drilling rig, Saipem Due; and all personnel thereon, to serious and imminent danger of
actual physical and bodily harm and further threats
of acts of reprisal by the Libyan Government
against Saipem SPA. The Saipem Due was on
location and drilling an exploration well within the
boundaries of and under the terms and conditions
of the deed of production licence, as amended,
granted to Texaco on 31May 1974.As you have been
previously notified, Saipem SPA has given us notice
that they are suspending drilling operations.”

11. And yet, despite the consistent pursuit of this
policy, we have been faced over the past few days,
and still are today, with a serious situation. Malta had
authorized an American company, Texaco, to commence peaceful and legitimate off-shore exploration
activities well within our half of the dividing line
between Malta and Libya. An Italian oil rig, Saipem
Due by ‘name, had under a subcontract commenced
drilling activities.
12. To this day the Maltese Government has received
no official word of explanation from the Libyan
Government over the incidents I am about to describe.
However, the concessionaires, Texaco, informed us
that they had received a telex, dated 20 August, from
the Libyan Secretary of Oil, Mr. Abdussalaam
M. Zagar, which states, inter alia:

17. This attitude, this forceful action we find not only
dangerous but inexplicable, when viewed against the
background of our foreign policy objectives; because,
for many years, ever since Malta’s independence,
successive Governments have tried to foster good
relations with all countries, and to strive for economic
self-sufficiency. Since the present Gove~mment was
returned by popular mandate in 1971, we had even
succeeded, at enormous economic sacrifice, in freeing
ourselves completely from all military attachments,
thus managing to reverse in less than a decade nearly
two centuries of our previous history. It is our intention to continue this policy.

“We hereby warn you that your company should
immediately refrain from performing any drilling
operations, withdraw the rig and leave the area;
otherwise, the Jamahiriya is obliged to prevent your
company from operating by all means including
force, on the ground that what is being done by your
company is a hostile action against a sovereign
State.”
13. That message was immediately followed by the
sudden appearance on the same day of a Libyan
warship of the Suva class, normally equipped with
missiles, together with a submarine, which circled the
oil rig and ordered the Italian master of the rig to stop
drilling operations, threatening him with the use of
force if he did not. Since then, Libyan warships have
regularly sailed very close to the rig, in a continuing
and escalating show’ of force to intimidate the master
of the rig. Naval units of other countries were also
in the area, and unidentified planes frequently overflew
the confrontation zone.

19. To pursue its new policy and to develop further
its natural role of a bridge between the Arab nations
and Europe, Malta had discussed with its immediate
neighbours guarantees for Malta’s new political status
‘in-order to fill the void after the complete dismantling
of the military bases in 1979.

14. On the following day, 21 August, Libyan soldiers
broke into the residence of Saipem’s representative in
Libya. He was given an ultimatum to the effect that

20. Foremost among the countries with which we
had forged new relationships was the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, because of our proximity, our shared

18. In fact, during this period we have greatly
improved our relations with all countries, particularly
our neighbours in Europe and Africa.

2

history, our common features and our economic
complementarity. The Jamahiriya itself was in complete accord with Malta’s proposals, and on 29 May
1977, a protocol was signed in Tripoli committing the
Jamahiriya to sign a treaty guaranteeing the neutrality,
independence and territorial integrity of the Republic of Malta.

ment, in good faith and in accordance with our most
recent compromise offer to the Libyan Government,
instructed the concessionaires to refrain at present
from drilling in a band 15 miles north of the median
line between the two countries.
25. The end result of the cumulative Libyan action
is simply disastrous for our fledgling national economy,
which depends entirely on oil imports. To them it is
perhaps a minor matter; to us it is of vital importance.
We feel it is unethical that a rich and powerful country, well endowed with energy resources, should
inhibit, rather than help, a small and poor country in its
search for its own potential indigenous resources.
It is provocative that there should be deliberate delay
in submitting an outstanding question to the appropriate legal tribunal in accordance with a negotiated,
agreed procedure. And it is highly dangerous, and
completely unacceptable, that legitimate activities
should be threatened by the use of force, with consequent danger to life and costly equipment and to the
prospects of regional security.

21. From the very beginning, however, the Govemment of Malta had recognized that there was one
element of potential discord between Libya and Malta.
With advancing technology, dwindling supplies and
escalating prices, the resources of the sea-bed separating the two countries were bound to receive attention. In Malta’s case, not having any natural resources
on land, beyond sun and stone, we could not but look
hopefully at the potential of off-shore exploration to
help our search for economic self-sufficiency. Accordingly, with patient persistence and attention to detail,
on Malta’s initiative the two sides negotiated over a
protracted four-year period an agreement to refer to
the International Court of Justice for adjudication any
competing claims for national jurisdiction over the
continental shelf and to determine the proper location
of the boundary tine.

26. We are firmly convinced that the principles and
practices of international law are on our side. But, in
order to resolve any lingering doubt, we state publicly
here that we are still willing and ready to go to the
International Court of Justice right now, in accordance
with the agreement already signed between the two
Governments, and that we will, as in duty bound,
faithfully follow the Court’s pronouncements when the
dispute is finally adjudicated, not only on this particular
issue but on the whole question of the dividing line
between the two countries.

22. That agreement was finally signed in 1976, but it
has nevertheless so far remained a dead letter as the
Libyan Government, despite constant representations
on our part; despite time-consuming negotiations and
frequent ministerial assurances, has not yet ratified the
agreement. Malta, for its part, lost no time in com‘plying with the necessary legal and constitutional
processes.
23. Moreover, even when relations were at their best,
all efforts to find a solution to the dispute on the
demarcation line dividing the continental shelf between
the two countries failed. Nevertheless, we persisted
in our efforts and were recently extremely disappointed when, even against the great hopes raised by
a solemn promise given by Major Jalloud to the Maltese
Prime Minister in Tripoli on 23 April 1980to the effect
that the agreement would be ratified before the end of
June, that promise, the latest in a series of similar
promises, also remained unfulfilled.

27. Let me repeat the gist of my last remarks in the
words of an official letter by my Prime Minister issued
in Valletta on 2 September. It states:
“We have to convince Libya that it is in her
own interests and in the interests of the Arab nation
to allow Malta to drill up to the middle line, and that,
should Libya really decide to go to arbitration on
the agreed terms, Malta would immediately agree to
do likewise and would be prepared to hand over,
during or after drilling, any area which the Intemational Court of Justice decides does not belong to
Malta.”

24. We could not understand the reasons given for
that procrastination, but recognized the disastrous
repercussions on our economic development. It is
somewhat difficult to resist the suspicion that this
procrastination, extraordinary as it is, cannot but be
motivated by the desire of the Libyan authorities to
deny the inherent right of the Government of Malta to
exploit its resources in the interests of its own people.
Consequently, having exhausted all possible means of
dialogue, the Government of Malta asked the companies which had previously been given a production
licence in 1974, to start drilling. The area currently
under exploration was not contested by Libya when
the details of the licences were first made ,public in
1974. Nevertheless, prudently, the Maltese Govem-

28. Furthermore, as already explained, the area
currently undergoing exploration activities, which we
allowed to take place after having waited for six years,
is strictly limited to a previously uncontested area.
If we were meekly to accept Libya’s constantly
escalating and seemingly insatiable appetite in making
unfounded claims to jurisdiction over what it contends
is its continental shelf, we would be unfairly precluded
from exercising our legitimate right to off-shore exploration. We trust that what is not permissible under
international law will not be sanctioned by the threat
or the use of force.
3

29. What we cannot accept is that our efforts towards
the attainment of economic viability should be severely
impeded through such illegal action by a foreign Power.
All members are aware of the tremendous burden
that oil prices have inflicted on developing countries.
We are at present 100per cent dependent on imported
oil, and all our industrial enterprises, including electricity generation, are oil-dependent. Hence the concentrated attention that my Government gives to
energy questions, including the use of alternative
sources of energy. It is for us an enormously costly
process, and we can neither afford nor allow any disruption of our ongoing legitimate activities.

that the Libyan warships have every right to be there
and do not constitute a threat. Unfortunately, that
does not exactly tally with the message conveyed to
the captain of the rig and the arrest of the Italian
national, which I have already mentioned. In fact, the
Libyan Government has not even deigned to offer
any explanation of its action, nor has it made any
positive contribution towards an amicable settlement.
On the contrary, despite all our efforts, the threat has
so far not been withdrawn. My Government has also
sought explanations from the Libyan Government
for its action, but none has been forthcoming beyond
the bland assurance that Malta and Libya still have
excellent relations. Yet it continues to threaten the
safety of our drilling operations and is insisting that we
abandon them.

30. Naturally, we do not expect the Council to adjudicate the legal merits of our case. That is for the Court
to do, if and when the Libyan Government will condescend to honour its obligations. But I believe that
the members of the Council might wish to have some
elucidation on the legal merits of our position.

35. The time-limit imposed by Libya for the rig to
cease its operations and to leave the area under duress
has almost expired. We cannot order the rig to leave,
since it is acting in conformity with a valid licence
granted under our national legislation and in compliance with accepted international law and practice.

31. For that purpose we have sought the advice of
legal experts of world renown, including, among
others, Professor Lauterpacht, Dr. Jan Evensen and
Attorney Richard Young. All are in agreement that
since Libya, unlike Malta, is not a party to the 1958
Convention on the Continental Shelf,’ the merits of
the case rest on the relevant principles of customary
law. Primarily these derive from the decisions of international tribunals and from the practice of States.
Apart from State practice, at least 16 decisions have
already been taken on similar disputes between other
States in various regions of the world.

36. The Libyan Government will have to assume
responsibility before the whole world for any dangerous consequences of its threatened action.
37. I repeat that the threat remains. Not only has it
not been withdrawn but it is constantly reasserted,
despite intensive efforts on our part and on the part
of friendly countries. That is the only reason for our
urgent presence before the Council today-in fact we
had requested a meeting three days ago. If unarmed
exploration activities are considered acts of hostility
by the Libyan Government, we may be permitted to
take an even more serious view of the intrusion of
armed warships threatening our citizens and the
citizens of other countries engaged in legitimate peaceful activities in Malta’s area of sole jurisdiction.

32. From those decisions and from constant State
practice, there is convergent legal opinion that enough
caseevidence exists to support a presumption in favour
of the median line as prima facie the proper boundary
between opposite States fronting on the same continental shelf.

38. We are not seeking any reprimands nor are we
askingforany censure. All we ask is that we be allowed,
without harassment, to carry out our legitimate activities in accordance with international law. Our present
efforts can brook no disruption or delay. Hence our
request is urgent, because the exploration activities
that we finally authorized are being impeded to
this very day, and have been since 20 August, under
the pressure of a time-limit that will shortly expire.

33. The conclusion inevitably follows that in the
Malta-Libya situation a boundary based on the median
line would afford the most equitable solution and
would best accord with the applicable principles of
customary law. For our part, in our lengthy negotiations we have not even contested-so far, at any ratethe questionable way in which Libya drew straight
baselines across the Gulf of Sirte, a method which
clearly is to Libya’s advantage. The considered opinion
of all the experts we have contacted is that Libya
is claiming much more than it is entitled to, while
Malta is.seeking no more than the minimum which it
can reasonably claim.

39. As befits the policy of a small, peaceful country
dedicated to the cause of peace, except for the taking
of measures to protect our internal security, we have
not answered threat by counter-threat. We have asked
for a Council meeting and we have given a brief but
honest account of the events that climaxed with Libya’s
illegal action, We are prepared to answer any additional questions.

34. In the days since 20 August, when the threat was
actually made, my Government has not been idle.
We have exerted maximum efforts and have asked
several friendly countries to use their good offices to
persuade the Libyans to allow the peaceful activities
we are currently conducting to continue. We have been
advised informally that those countries have been told

40. We have, of course, other options open to us but
we do not wish to resort to them unless we have to
4

since our interest and our consistent policy is to
preserve peace rather than to provoke international
incidents. But we simply cannot accept that peaceful,
vital activities of our nation should be disrupted in
such a provocative, heavy-handed and illegal manner.
We will not submit to economic strangulation, abetted
by the use of force and cloaked in the guise of a “special
relationship”.
41. The members of the Security Council may wish to
keep in mind that this case may not be an isolated
one. Since the off-shore activities of States are bound
to increase in the years ahead, a code of responsible
conduct should be encouraged and any illegal
approach should not pass unchallenged. Countries of
roughly equivalent strength can resort to their own
methods, but small, unarmed countries pursuing legitimate peaceful activities look to the United Nations for
protection as a first resort.
42. We therefore earnestly and urgently request the
Council to ask Libya to desist from making further
provocative threats and from taking any menacing
action and so allow us to pursue our legitimate rights
in peace. It is the least that a small nation can ask
from the Council, as the guardian of international
peace. We rely on the collective wisdom of the Council and we appreciate the efforts that have already
been taken under the direction of its President.
43. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
The nejrt speaker is the representative of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, on whom I now call.
44. Mr. BURWIN (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya): Allow
me first of all, Mr. President, to welcome you to
New York and to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for this month.
We are confident that with your wisdom and ability
you will guide the deliberations towards progress.
I should also like, through you, to extend my thanks
to the Secretary-General, and to the members of the

Council for allowing me to participate in the deliberations of the Security Council.
45. I should also like, on behalf of my delegation,
to avail myself of this opportunity to thank your
predecessor, Ambassador Futscher Pereira of Portugal, for the excellent manner in which he conducted
the proceedings of the Council during the month of
August.
46. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya anxiously desires to
maintain a good, friendly relationship with Malta and
with its Government and people and it expresses best
wishes to the Maltese people for their prosperity.
Indeed, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya is extremely
concerned with the maintenance of peace and security
in the region and in the world.
47; I have heard the statement of my friend the
representative of Malta. However, I should like at this
time to request the postponement of consideration
of this matter so that my delegation will have a chance
to study the Maltese statement carefully and to consult
our Government.
48. -The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
The request of the representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya to have some time to study the statement of
the representative of Malta is entirely acceptable.
I would therefore suggest that, if there is no objection,
the date and time of the next meeting of the Council
should be set after consultation with all the members.
It was so decided.
The meeting

rose at 6.30 p.m.

NOTE
I United Nations, Treaty Series,

vol.

499,

p. 311.

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS UNIES

Les publications des Nations Unies sont en ventc darts la librairia et its agenecsdepositaires du
monde entier. lnformez-vous aup& de votre libraire ou adresset-vous ti : Nations Unies. Section
des ventes. New York ou GenCve.
KAK
%iwla~?nn

IIO;IYVMTh

HBAAHHR

OprBHN3BulIH

asmax n arenrcruax
aames
HaumR.

KHII~HOM

CeKuUR

OP~AHH~AIfHH

O6nenKKeHHbrx

80 scex panonax

*araz.me.
no nponaxe

OG’bEP[UHEHHhlX

HaunR

YOxXO

srnpa. Hauoanre

KynKTb

HAIIHH
B

YWP-

cnpaistcn 06 H3ataxnnx

m* nmnme
no anpecy:
OpranH3aum
u3AaHHR. HbK)-HOpK
Hnn X&HeBa.

COMO CONSECUIR PUBLICACIONES

KHHXXbIX

B

06mennneit~brx

DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS

Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas est&n en venta en ltbrerias y easasdiitriiuidoras en
todas panes del mundo. Consttlte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas. Seccibn de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

00300

83-614624eptember 1986-2.050
