S/PV.7408

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7408th meeting

Wednesday, 18 March 2015, 10.35 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Delattre/Mr. Bertoux . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Wang Min
Mrs. Kawar
Mr. Baublys
Mrs. Adnin
Mrs. Schwalger
Mr. Laro
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Shearman
Ms. Power
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (S/2015/157)

15-07456 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1507456*

S/PV.7408

The question concerning Haiti

The meeting was called to order at 10.35 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (S/2015/157)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Belize, Brazil, Canada, Colombia,
Guatemala, Haiti, Japan, Mexico, Peru and Uruguay to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Sandra
Honoré, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2015/157, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti.
I now give the floor to Ms. Honoré.
Ms. Honoré (spoke in French): I would like to
express my sincere gratitude to France, in its capacity
as President of the Security Council, and to all Council
members for organizing this meeting called to consider
the report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Mission Stabilization in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
(S/2015/157), dated 4 March 2015. I also take this
opportunity to welcome the presence of the Permanent
Representative of the Republic of Haiti.
(spoke in Spanish)
I would especially like to thank all the countries
contributing troops and police elements to MINUSTAH,
as well as all the Member States that have participated

2/38

18/03/2015

in the stabilization process, for their valuable support
to the consolidation of peace and democracy in Haiti.
(spoke in English)
Since the Security Council’s visit to Haiti from
23 to 25 January, the country has made measurable
gains towards the holding of long-overdue elections by
the end of 2015. Despite the uncertainty created by the
absence of a functioning Parliament since 12 January
2015, the political consensus reached in the 11 January
accord between the executive and a number of political
parties has opened a path towards inclusive and
transparent elections this year.
Following the establishment of a new Government
and of a new provisional Electoral Council, provided
for in the accord, the Council engaged in a series of
consultations with political parties, the presidency
and the remaining senators on the electoral law and
the electoral calendar. On 2 March, President Martelly
promulgated the electoral law, and after receiving
a proposed electoral calendar from the Electoral
Council, he followed through on 13 March by issuing a
presidential order convening a first round of legislative
elections on 9 August 2015, and a second round of
legislative elections, combined with the first round
presidential and the local elections, on 25 October.
If required, a presidential run-off is to be held on
27 December.
With that, the prerequisites for the holding of
elections this year have been established. Some political
parties have voiced discontent over the electoral
calendar. Nonetheless, most of them have signalled their
intent to take part in the planned elections. I call on all
political actors to continue a genuine dialogue and a
transparent and consultative approach that contributes
to building confidence among all stakeholders.
It is imperative that the Government provide
the necessary resources for the Electoral Council to
implement the ambitious calendar for what will be a
highly complex electoral operation, in a timely and
independent manner. That will allow, as provided for
in the Constitution, for the fiftieth legislature to be
installed on 11 January 2016, and for the transfer of
power to a new President on 7 February.
In that context, I am encouraged by the provisional
Electoral Council’s swift resumption of its operational
activities following the installation of the new
counsellors on 23 January, including by reactivating

15-07456

18/03/2015

The question concerning Haiti

its technical commissions. When I was last before the
Security Council (see S/PV.7262), on 11 September
2014, I spoke about the need for Haitian institutions to
eventually assume full responsibility over the conduct
of elections. It is time for Haitian authorities, including
the Electoral Council, to demonstrate their capacity and
assume even greater ownership of the electoral process.
Within our means and capabilities, the Mission, together
with the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) and other partners, is supporting the relevant
Haitian authorities.
That support notwithstanding, the continuing
generous assistance of the international community is
still indispensable, including with respect to filling the
funding gap that is being ascertained by the Electoral
Council and UNDP. Equally, international observation
of the elections will be crucial to strengthening the
confidence of political parties, candidates and voters in
the process and to enhance transparency and fairness.
I encourage all partners to contribute to election
observation missions upon invitation by the Haitian
Government.
Beyond the developments on the electoral front, the
political situation has been marked by a rise in tensions
between Haiti and its neighbour. The skilful handling
of the situation by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
the two countries led to a mutual reinforcement of their
diplomatic ties with the full resumption of consular and
embassy activities last Friday. I am encouraged that,
as evidenced in the Jimaní declaration of 13 March,
the Foreign Ministers have undertaken to address the
question of the status of persons of Haitian origin in
the Dominican Republic. In that context, the United
Nations country team and I have advocated for the
resumption of a high-level dialogue between both
countries to de-escalate tensions.
Over the past six months, the security situation in
Haiti has remained relatively stable. As the SecretaryGeneral’s report outlines, however, we have witnessed a
recent increase in certain crimes, gang-related violence
and public unrest. Particularly troubling is a spike in
violence between rival gangs in the fragile commune
of Cité Soleil and other parts of the metropolitan area
of Port-au-Prince since the beginning of the year.
The radical opposition has continued to criticize the
recent political breakthrough and has not desisted
from organizing anti-Government demonstrations,
calling for the resignation of President Martelly and
capitalizing on socioeconomic grievances, such as the

S/PV.7408

recent general strikes over fuel prices and teachers’
salaries.
As per the Secretary-General’s report, most public
protests have been small in size and have taken place
without major incidents. Those that involved some
degree of violence were for the most part handled by
the Haitian National Police (HNP) without operational
support from MINUSTAH. The Mission supported
the National Police primarily by providing planning
and technical advice for crowd control operations.
However, in some case, formed police and the military
were still called upon to actively engage in crowd
control, together with the National Police, and crowd
control by the military was mostly needed outside of
Port-au-Prince. The Mission’s police and military
components further supported the National Police in
addressing specific threats to security and safety in the
metropolitan area of Port-au-Prince.
The further development of the Haitian National
Police is vital for enduring stability in Haiti. In line with
its commitment to the implementation of the Haitian
National Police 2012-2016 development plan, the HNP
has, with the support of the international community,
achieved tangible results in the reconstruction of
police infrastructure, recruitment, training, crime
investigation, public order management and in the
overall professionalization of police officers. Over
the past year, the National Police has demonstrated
significant improvements in operational readiness
and in the performance of its crowd control units.
Notwithstanding this progress towards the buildup of a professional and accountable police force
and the important contributions made by bilateral
partners, resources are still insufficient to achieve all
the targets of the 2012-2016 development plan. The
sustained commitment of the Haitian Government
and the continuous generous assistance of the
international community will remain critical, not only
to enable the National Police to progressively assume
full responsibility for internal security, but also to
strengthen the management and administrative capacity
and oversight mechanisms required.
Recent developments in the area of the rule of
law are reassuring. Following years of consultations
and repeated reviews, the presentation, on 13 March,
of a draft penal code to the President of the Republic
by the Commission for Judicial Reform brings Haiti
one step closer to renewing its 179-year-old criminal
law framework. The appointment of a highly regarded

15-074563/38

S/PV.7408

The question concerning Haiti

judge as the new President of the Supreme Court and
the Superior Council of the Judiciary and the launch by
the Ministry of Justice of an initiative to expedite the
processing of cases so as to decrease prolonged pretrial
detention are also positive steps taken in early March
towards addressing deficiencies in the rule of law and
the continued challenges of overcrowding and detention
conditions in Haitian prisons.
With regard to the humanitarian situation,
while concerted efforts by national authorities and
international partners have succeeded in drastically
reducing the number of reported cholera cases — down
from a peak of over 350,000 in 2011 to 27,753 reported
cases in 2014, there was a spike in the last quarter of
2014. The newly appointed Government has set up
an interministerial task force to coordinate response
activities at the technical level. However, the lingering
epidemic and high levels of other waterborne and vectorborne diseases will persist until gaps in infrastructure
and services are definitively closed.
Haiti has continued to make progress on the
relocation of persons displaced by the 2010 earthquake,
with 79,397 persons still remaining in camps as of end
2014. Due to a drought in some areas of the country
and a reduced production in crops in 2014, of an
estimated 600,000 people suffering from severe food
insecurity, the number of persons experiencing acute
food insecurity in the country increased during the
first three months of 2015, from 65,000 in 2014 to
roughly 165,000. The United Nations country team’s
response entails a mix of instruments ranging from
direct food aid and life-saving support for children
suffering acute malnutrition to structural programmes
aimed at improving access to social safety nets and
income-generating activities.
In order to strengthen the continuum from recovery
to development and to address remaining humanitarian
shortcomings, the United Nations and partners, together
with the Haitian Government, launched a transitional
appeal in Port-au-Prince, on 11 March, and in Geneva,
on 13 March, to replace the humanitarian action plan of
2014. The cost associated with the transitional appeal
is $401 million, and I would like to encourage Haiti’s
partners and friends to consider making financial
contributions.
With regard to the consolidation of the Mission, in
accordance with resolution 2180 (2014), the military
component has planned the reduction of its personnel

4/38

18/03/2015

from the authorized 5,021 to 2,370 troops. As Haiti
enters a complex electoral period, and while the military
component will reduce its presence, it is vital that the
Mission’s police component be fully staffed to support
the Haitian National Police in all the departments
during the electoral process and to enable the Mission’s
uniformed presence to be as effective, mobile and
visible as possible. I therefore wish to invite all partners
of Haiti to make an additional effort to assist us in
reaching the authorized number of 2,601 police.
MINUSTAH and the United Nations country team
have also initiated the transition planning to underpin
the gradual reconfiguration of the United Nations
presence in Haiti beyond 2016. To support that process,
we aim at developing a transition plan that will draw on
the consolidation benchmarks and the revised integrated
strategic framework to ensure effective harmonization
with existing planning frameworks. Close coordination
and partnership with the Haitian Government will be
critical as part of that process.
In conclusion, the continued good will of the
Government and of all the political actors is essential
to build confidence in the electoral process and create
the necessary conditions for the upcoming elections to
take place in as peaceful and serene an environment as
possible.
(spoke in French)
It is in that context that I would like to welcome
the Haitian political actors’ acceptance of the principles
of dialogue and compromise, which allowed them
to embark upon the path towards holding the longdelayed elections in 2015. Holding a fair, transparent
and inclusive electoral process in a peaceful climate is
the sine qua non for Haiti to continue to make progress
towards stabilization, democratic governance, the
strengthening of the rule of law and socioeconomic
development. I urge all political actors to do their part
to ensure that these elections, which are so important,
are held in an atmosphere of peace and trust, thus
enabling the broadest possible participation.
(spoke in English)
I call on all members of the international community
to continue to lend their support to Haiti’s electoral
process.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Honor
for her briefing.

15-07456

18/03/2015

The question concerning Haiti

I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Honoré for her briefing and leadership. I also thank all
the dedicated men and women serving in the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
who are working with her to build a more secure and
stable Haiti.
The United States welcomes the recent progress
Haiti has made towards holding elections this year,
including the promulgation of an electoral decree on
2 March 2015, drafted by a new Electoral Council,
drawn from civil society, and that Council’s subsequent
announcement of voting dates.
While we commend President Martelly’s efforts
to promote an inclusive political process, including
by forming a multi-party Government, the health of
Haiti’s democracy depends on restoring a functioning
legislature without further delay. That is why it is
so important that elections take place this year as
planned, and that the Government continue to use
its extraordinary decree powers solely to administer
elections and keep the State running. We also call upon
all of Haiti’s political leaders and parties to participate
in elections and to ensure an atmosphere of peace so
that all eligible Haitians who wish to vote can do so
without fear for their safety.
With the electoral decree in place and election dates
set, urgent attention to preparing for and organizing
the polls is required to ensure elections that are free,
fair, credible and inclusive. Continued inclusive
political dialogue and preparations for elections that
are transparent and ensure a level playing field will
be required to sustain the generally stable security
situation that the Secretary-General has reported.
While MINUSTAH and the rest of the international
community, including my Government, stand ready to
support the administration of the elections, ultimately
the responsibility for ensuring their success lies with
Haitians: the Haitian Government, the Electoral
Council, the political parties and the Haitian people
themselves.
The level of support provided by MINUSTAH,
particularly its engineering battalions, for elections in
2010 and 2011 were part of the package of extraordinary
measures that the international community took to help

S/PV.7408

Haiti recover from the devastating 2010 earthquake,
not an enduring precedent for elections this year or
in the future. We join the Secretary-General’s call on
the Government to ensure the Electoral Council and
other States institutions have adequate resources to
administer elections in a manner that reflects Haitians’
increased assumption of a responsibility so central to
the exercise of sovereignty. The United States will do
our part in support of that.
Successful elections will require robust international
support, of course, including from MINUSTAH. The
Mission should, without delay, catalogue the functions
played in the last elections by each of its respective
components, including the funds and programmes. It
should identify any of those critical functions that each
component will not be able to carry out in 2015, and it
should work urgently across the United Nations system
and with the Electoral Council, donors, Haitian and
international civil society actors and the Government
of Haiti to ensure that those functions are carried out
effectively during this year’s elections.
MINUSTAH should also work closely with the
Electoral Council to identify any elements of Haiti’s
election planning, including the number and location
of polling centres, that may make the process more
vulnerable to violence or manipulation and to develop
and implement corrective measures transparently and
in consultation with Haitian political actors. The 2015
elections will not be Haiti’s last. It is important to use
each electoral cycle to improve Haiti’s electoral system
and to make it more sustainable.
We note the generally stable security situation
that the Secretary-General reported. That comes amid
the continued growth and professionalization of the
Haitian National Police (HNP), to which donors and
MINUSTAH should continue to offer maximal support.
The Haitian National Police needs to continue
to grow in size and capability. But while we were in
Haiti, we heard that every trained Haitian National
Policeman or Policewomen was worth 10 international
police. Moreover, even with the reported increase in
crime and gang-related violence, Haiti’s homicide rate
remains well below the regional average. Incidents of
violent unrest during the reporting period totalled only
215 events. In most of those cases, the HNP required
no operational support from any MINUSTAH forces
to manage the situation, and in only 16 per cent of
all incidents of violent unrest nationwide did the

15-074565/38

S/PV.7408

The question concerning Haiti

HNP require some level of operational support for
MINUSTAH’s military forces. Most of those incidents
took place in close proximity to the three locations
where the military component will be based following
MINUSTAH’s reconfiguration. When support from
the military component is required elsewhere in the
country going forward, it will be available thanks to the
mobility that the reconfigured Mission will have. The
overall security situation in the six departments where
MINUSTAH military no longer reside remained stable
in the reporting period.
MINUSTAH continues to be an essential hedge
against the risk of any future deterioration in security
conditions, and the United States strongly supports a
push by the United Nations, backed by Member States,
to ensure the dispatch of an additional 300 international
police forces to Haiti, as authorized but not yet deployed.
We also support adding, without delay, medium-left
helicopters to MINUSTAH’s aviation component,
which will make the Mission’s forces more quickly
deployable in large numbers to any location in the
country in the event of a different scale of unrest than
we have seen thus far.
We also support the Secretary-General’s call,
echoed here today by the Special Representative, to
ensure maximal visibility of MINUSTAH’s forces, an
objective well served by ensuring the Mission’s leaders
retain the flexibility to redistribute their forces as
necessary to respond to evolving security conditions.
The year 2015 poses extraordinary challenges
for Haiti, but also extraordinary opportunities: an
opportunity to break from past electoral cycles marred
by fraud and disenfranchisement and the violence that
both have historically engendered; an opportunity for
Haiti’s political parties to put aside their differences
and cooperate to ensure elections that place Haiti’s
democracy on sounder footing; an opportunity to
adopt more sustainable elections architecture; and an
opportunity for Haitians to take a giant step forward
towards sustained political stability and self-sufficiency.
As they seize those opportunities, the Government and
the people of Haiti can continue to count on the utmost
support of the United States.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like to start
by thanking Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Honoré for her briefing to the Council. I am
glad to see her again after our visit to Haiti, and I
take this opportunity to thank her for the hospitality

6/38

18/03/2015

afforded to the Security Council mission, as well as for
her contribution to its success.
Despite the climate of relative political instability
that still prevailed during our stay in Haiti, we are more
confident about the recent political developments in
the country. We therefore congratulate the Government
and the opposition for being able, through dialogue,
to overcome the then-prevailing political deadlock.
Ms. Honoré has just updated the Council on recent
developments, confirming the improving climate in the
country.
We especially congratulate the members of the
recently established provisional Electoral Council for
the expeditious manner in which it established, even if
preliminarily, the dates for the general elections in July
and October 2015, and January 2016.
We returned from Haiti with a very positive
impression with regard to the important role played
by the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). The Mission has played that role since
its deployment, in June 2004. We therefore support the
decision in resolution 2180 (2014), as recommended
by the Secretary-General, to extend the mandate of
MINUSTAH until 15 October 2015. We are aware
of the challenges and responsibilities undertaken by
the Mission in order to respond appropriately to the
country’s realities. For instance, in the aftermath of the
catastrophic earthquake and, more recently, with the
cholera epidemic, MINUSTAH played, and continues to
play, a determining humanitarian role in addition to the
other duties provided for in its mandate, in particular
in supporting the National Police in the management
of public demonstrations and in guaranteeing security.
There was a recent example of that during the political
impasse in the country.
It is also encouraging to note the support provided
by the military and police components of MINUSTAH
to the National Police in response to security threats,
particularly in the metropolitan area of Port-au-Prince,
where there has been, since the beginning of this year,
an increase in criminality and violent clashes between
gangs vying for territorial control.
In that connection, the configuration of the military
and police components, set at 3,070 troops and 2,601
police, respectively, by resolution 2180 (2014), as well
as their withdrawal from several areas of the country,
have shown that the training and development of
various national institutions, including those involved

15-07456

18/03/2015

The question concerning Haiti

in the enforcement of law and order, are having a
positive impact. That has been further demonstrated
by the strengthening of the operational capacity and
the growth in the ranks of the Haitian National Police,
which comprises almost 12,000 Haitians out of the
established minimum of 15,000, and their deployment
across the country.
That also demonstrates that, despite the many
challenges ahead, including the upcoming electoral
process, Haitians are on their way to assuming
responsibility for managing their own destiny. It remains
crucial, of course, that MINUSTAH remains until
those challenges are fully addressed. The contingency
planning to ensure security during the electoral process
is further evidence of that reality.
On the economic front, we note with satisfaction that
the United Nations country team has been implementing
new initiatives within the framework of the four-pillar
2013-2016 integrated strategic framework aimed at
rebuilding the country institutionally, territorially and
socioeconomically. We commend the private investment
initiatives in the border areas with the Dominican
Republic through the high-level bilateral commission
established for that purpose.
With regard to human rights and gender, we
recognize the greater involvement of women, a number
of whom we met during our visit, in the area of policing,
as well as the involvement of women and civil society in
the area of human rights. In that context, we encourage
the Government of Haiti to diligently pursue the meritbased incorporation of more women in the Cabinet
and posts of high responsibility, as is the case with
the current transitional Government. The extension
of the mandate of MINUSTAH until 15 October 2015
aims at strengthening law enforcement institutions
and consolidating their operationalization, which is
essential to the stabilization of the country and the core
objective of the MINUSTAH mandate.
Angola has consistently supported political,
socioeconomic and security initiatives in Haiti.
We therefore reiterate our support for MINUSTAH
in its pursuit of priority objectives as well as the
implementation of reforms in key sectors in the country’s
life. We urge the maintenance of dialogue among the
various political stakeholders as a contribution to
lasting peace aimed at ensuring the restoration of a
country that has gone through painful periods in the
past decades.

S/PV.7408

Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): First, may
I join colleagues in thanking Ms. Sandra Honoré for
her briefing. We are very pleased to see her here again.
The Security Council meets every six months to
assess the situation in Haiti, a country that has seen
instability and uncertainty with regard to its future.
We must therefore conduct an in-depth assessment of
the changing nature of the situation, so as to respond
appropriately to the situation on the ground and in line
with the needs of the Government and the people of
Haiti.
I first would like to thank Chile and the United
States, as well as the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), for organizing the
Council’s visit to Haiti in the beginning of this year.
The visit proved invaluable in that it provided members
of the Security Council with an opportunity to note the
progress achieved in Haiti along with the challenges
that the Haitian people must face in order to realize
their aspirations.
We note the important work undertaken by
MINUSTAH, as well as the significant initiatives to
build the capacity of the National Police. We welcome
the increase in the capacity of the Haitian National
Police and call on the international community to
ensure sufficient funding to promote police capacity on
the administrative and planning fronts, as well as to
ensure an increased presence, in particular in hard-toreach regions.
We discussed with the Government a number
of topics having to do with health, education and the
economy, and it was clear that Haiti has made significant
strides forward after the destructive earthquake that hit
the country. However, more has to be done to deal with
the difficult situation. One fourth of Haitian children
suffer from hunger and only 35 per cent of the country’s
inhabitants have access to potable water, not to mention
the still imminent threat of cholera as the summer
approaches. We have noted the desire of civil society
leaders to achieve stability and development, as well
as the courageous efforts of women’s organizations
aimed at achieving greater justice and equality. We
must support those efforts, as well as those aimed at
revitalizing the economy and society.
We must work to create an inclusive and constructive
environment that promotes political stability, democratic
governance, development and guaranteed prosperity in
Haiti. We welcome the efforts of President Martelly

15-074567/38

S/PV.7408

The question concerning Haiti

aimed at preserving the continuity of the State and at
strengthening the commitment of the opposition parties
and their leaders to work together with the President in
order to overcome the political crisis, in particular by
strengthening the capacity of the legislative authorities
to carry out their functions appropriately. We thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for her
efforts to promote dialogue among the various national
parties. On many occasions, we have emphasized the
importance of holding legislative and presidential as
well as local elections, following the 2015 time frame.
We call upon all Haitian political parties to better
engage in dialogue and cooperation in order to attain
that objective. We reiterate the importance of a fair,
transparent and comprehensive electoral process.
The Haitian Government faces formidable
challenges on the security and logistical fronts in
its efforts to enable the elections scheduled to be
held. It is essential for the United Nations and the
international community to remain in support of Haiti
and to stand ready to provide assistance in various
areas, including operational assistance through police
services. The United Nations has succeeded, through
various scenarios, in providing electoral assistance in
local contexts, and Haiti should not be an exception.
Efforts to promote the rule of law and the independent
institutions tasked with those efforts are essential
elements for realizing stability.
During the Security Council’s visit, we saw that
there was an urgent need for an increase in services
in general, and particularly for legal assistance. On
the matters of provisional and prolonged detention,
overcrowding and the inhumane conditions in penal
institutions, we call upon the Government to act. I must
stress the situation of women in the prisons that the
Council visited, where some women had been awaiting
trial for as many as eight years. We do not know whether
they are guilty or not. The situation in the prisons was
extremely difficult and should be rectified as swiftly as
possible. We call upon the Government to consolidate
the major institutions for guaranteeing the rule of
law and improving the capacity of the monitoring
mechanism.
Finally, I would like to express our thanks to the
United Nations peacekeepers working in Haiti for all
their efforts and sacrifices.
Mr. Shearman (United Kingdom): I would like
to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-

8/38

18/03/2015

General, Ms. Sandra Honoré, for her briefing today.
The United Kingdom welcomes the Secretary-General’s
latest report (S/2015/157) and appreciates the valuable
contribution that the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) has made to stability
and progress in Haiti, as seen during the Council’s visit
in January. I will focus my statement today on three key
points — the 2015 elections, the security situation and
the future of MINUSTAH.
In January, the Council had the opportunity to
see at first hand the contribution of MINUSTAH. It
was also a chance to see the positive steps that Haiti
is taking to ensure its own development and security.
A further step is the recent confirmation that elections
will be held this year. The failure to hold elections in
2014, together with the dissolution of Haiti’s Parliament
in January, led to uncertainty and insecurity among
Haiti’s people. We therefore welcome the formation of
an Electoral Council, the publication of the electoral
decree and the announcement of an electoral calendar.
We commend the efforts of President Martelly and the
political parties in finding the consensus needed to
agree to that. As the Secretary-General acknowledges,
there will be more challenges to the electoral process
ahead, but that is a positive step. We call on all actors
to play an active role in preparations to ensure the
integrity and credibility of the elections.
We are pleased that the Secretary-General reports
that the security situation remains generally stable,
including in the parts of the country where MINUSTAH
is no longer present. The development and reach
of the justice sector, including through corrections
institutions, will support stability and will ensure
that the rule of law is justly applied in Haiti. As the
Secretary-General reports, that has been undermined
by the recent prison escapes and the resulting
criminality. However, we commend the response of
the Haitian National Police, which led to the recapture
of the escapees, including through collaboration with
law enforcement agencies in the Dominican Republic.
The report also highlights improvements in the rule
of law, which are to be applauded, although there is
clearly more to be done to end impunity and ensure
accountability and transparency.
The role of MINUSTAH is to help Haiti re-assume
responsibility for its security. While MINUSTAH
undoubtedly still has a stabilization role to play in Haiti,
we are encouraged to read in the Secretary-General’s
report of the increasing capacity and professionalism

15-07456

18/03/2015

The question concerning Haiti

of the Haitian National Police. That is illustrated
by the way in which they have dealt with the recent
political demonstrations, mostly without the need for
overt operational support from the military element of
MINUSTAH. We recognize that Haiti faces challenges
in 2015, including the elections, a weak economy
and tensions across its border with the Dominican
Republic. But we believe that a leaner, more flexible
MINUSTAH, working in support of a growing and
more professional Haitian national police force, will
be able to maintain stability and counter any threats
to security. Our support for the drawdown of some of
the military elements of MINUSTAH is evidence of
our confidence in the Haitian National Police and in
a leaner MINUSTAH force to ensure stability while
elections take place.
We are encouraged by the work already done by
MINUSTAH alongside the United Nations country
team to reconfigure and consolidate their resources.
We particularly welcome the decision to develop, with
the Government of Haiti, a road map to guide the
transitional functions from the Mission to other actors.
We look forward to receiving an update on that process
in the Secretary-General’s next report. Together with
political progress, we see development rather than
peacekeeping actors as the key to securing Haiti’s
future, and we hope that Member States will support
the United Nations country team and the Government
of Haiti in their efforts to find the right people and
resources for the crucial work.
Haiti faces a difficult period, not the least as a
result of economic pressures and tensions with its
neighbour. Despite some progress, Haiti still faces
challenges. However, we are confident that, with the
right level of support, Haiti will continue to progress
in taking increasing responsibility for its own security
and development. Maintaining the reform of the justice
sector, the police and the corrections facilities and
ensuring that the elections take place will be vital to
building stability and safeguarding Haiti’s future.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): Malaysia joins other
Council members in thanking the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Sandara Honoré, for her
briefing, which we have listened to with much interest.
I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2015/157) on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), submitted pursuant to
resolution 2180 (2014).

S/PV.7408

Malaysia notes that the political and security
situation in Haiti remains fragile, owing in large
part to the expectations and anticipation among the
people that the long-delayed legislative, municipal
and local elections will be held. We note that, since
the 49 legislators’ mandate ended on 12 January, a
key element of the country’s political and institutional
framework that can check and balance executive power
has been rendered ineffective. We remain concerned
that continued political uncertainty could lead to
possible deterioration in the security situation in the
country. It is imperative for the Government to address
the people’s grievances and allay their fears, including
concerns about the economy and unpaid salaries. In the
light of the recent economic growth currently being
experienced, Malaysia believes that the Government is
in a position to address such concerns.
Since the Council’s recent visit to Haiti, in January,
the Government has taken what Malaysia views as a
number of gradual and important steps towards paving
the way for the elections to be held later this year. We
are encouraged by the steps taken so far, including the
establishment of a transitional Government and the
installation of a new provisional Electoral Council,
the promulgation and subsequent enactment of a new
electoral law, and the Government’s recently proposed
election calendar, among other things. We believe
that those and other steps taken to date demonstrate
the Government’s commitment to ensuring that free,
inclusive and transparent elections can take place this
year. Malaysia joins other Security Council members
in urging Haiti’s political actors to work together
constructively to ensure that the elections take place
according to schedule.
We note that due to various factors, including a
series of natural disasters, coupled with a long period of
political impasse and related violence, the humanitarian
and human rights situation in Haiti remains precarious.
Nevertheless, we remain optimistic and are encouraged
by the resilience of the Haitian people in their efforts
to overcome such challenges. We encourage the
Government to consider further improving respect
in the country for human rights, including women
and children’s rights and the right to health care and
education, and to take the necessary steps to establish
accountability where there has been impunity,
including for human-rights violations committed in the
past. We stress that such processes should be Haitianowned and -led. On a related note, we are encouraged

15-074569/38

S/PV.7408

The question concerning Haiti

by steps that have been taken, including those aimed
at eliminating the still present cholera epidemic, and
the ongoing efforts to resettle, relocate and integrate
internally displaced persons and to include women in
the political process and development of the five-year
national strategy for child protection, among other
things.
With regard to the security situation, Malaysia
notes that the safety and security situation remains
stable overall. The Government should nonetheless
continue to focus its responses, particularly in
addressing violent crime, including murder, rape,
gang violence and abductions, among other things.
We note and commend the continued support of the
police and military components of MINUSTAH to the
Haitian National Police (HNP), including through the
provision of technical advice and operational support
for crowd-control operations and incidents of violent
public unrest in Haiti. We are encouraged by the fact
that the HNP appears increasingly capable of managing
such situations on its own. We further note and support
the Government’s proposed plan to build and improve
the HNP’s capacities and capabilities. We believe
that efforts designed to increase its competency and
professionalism will go a long way to building public
confidence in such a key national institutions.
In addition, the Government’s ongoing efforts
to cooperate with MINUSTAH and other partners
and stakeholders to strengthen the legal and judicial
frameworks are positive and noteworthy steps towards
strengthening the rule of law in Haiti. In the light
of the upcoming elections, Malaysia is of the view
that MINUSTAH’s possible reconfiguration should
take into account the need to retain a rapid-response
capability, among other things. In that regard, we note
the ongoing consultations within the framework of the
joint United Nations-Government steering committee.
We would also like to emphasize that such discussion
should be geared towards facilitating Haiti’s transition
and future development. On the issue of MINUSTAH’s
consolidation, Malaysia notes the progress that has been
achieved in areas that fall under the four stabilization
benchmarks — police development, electoral capacitybuilding, the rule of law and human rights, and key
governance issues — and we look forward to further
updates.
I would like to take this opportunity to once again
express Malaysia’s appreciation for MINUSTAH and
reaffirm our support to its mandate, its leadership and the

10/38

18/03/2015

entire Mission team for their sustained and exemplary
contributions in support of the Government of Haiti,
particularly as it steps up to meet its responsibilities for
the maintenance of stability and security in the country.
In conclusion, Malaysia believes that 2015 will
present Haiti and Haitians with enormous opportunities
for fulfilling their aspirations. Working alongside
Council members, MINUSTAH and the wider United
Nations family, institutional donors and other partners
and stakeholders, Malaysia will continue to support
the ongoing transition and nation-building processes
currently under way in Haiti aimed at achieving its
goals for stability, security and development.
Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): I would first like to thank Ms. Sandra Honoré
for her briefing and her work as Head of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
and of course to welcome our good friend Ambassador
Denis Régis of Haiti.
I would like to subscribe fully to the statement to be
delivered later by the observer of the European Union,
while adding some remarks in my national capacity.
Spain shares the Secretary-General’s vision when he
identifies hopeful signs, such as the drop in the numbers
of displaced persons and cholera cases. However, at the
same time we agree with his description of the situation
as very worrying and his emphasis on the significant
challenges facing the authorities in the election
processes scheduled for this year and announced by the
provisional Electoral Council. Indeed, in the political
area the challenges are major, since when the planned
elections are concluded and a new President takes over
on 7 February 2016, it will be only the third time that
presidential power in Haiti has been transferred through
the holding of elections, and the first democratic
elections since 1989. That is an achievement that must
be preserved. Spain would like to support Haiti on its
road to consolidating its democratic institutions, and
urges all the country’s political actors to be generous
and determined in helping to establish and maintain
a politically and socially stable atmosphere that will
enable the various electoral processes to be conducted
successfully.
I have heard President Martelly say in person more
than once that the old ways of conducting politics in
the country must end. The political classes must act
not to defend their personal privileges and ambitions
but to promote the collective interests of the country

15-07456

18/03/2015

The question concerning Haiti

and, above all, of its citizens, who are beginning to be
profoundly disappointed in their political institutions.
To act as they have done in the past, with a limited, shortterm vision, would betray the future prosperity that we,
the friends of Haiti, desire as much as the Haitians do
themselves, and would squander the enormous efforts
that the international community has made to help them
to normalize their political life and achieve sustainable
development. We hope that the Haitian political classes
will stay on top of the situation during this crucial year.
We continue to call for dialogue between the
political stakeholders as the best way to build democracy
and improve the country’s political consolidation. In
that regard, I would emphasize the efforts undertaken
by various missions of the Club of Madrid, which
were financed by the European Union and aimed at
promoting the dialogue in the discussions on political
reform.
In the area of development, Council members are
well aware of the firm and generous solidarity of Spain
and the Spanish people with Haiti. From 2010 to 2013,
we were the third largest bilateral donor in the world and
the largest in the European Union. Spain has allocated
more than €250 million to the reconstruction work in
Haiti and today is providing essential cooperation in
such sectors as water and sanitation in the amount of
more than $150 million, for the benefit of 2 million
beneficiaries, and is contributing €15.5 million in direct
budgetary support to the education sector. In short, of
all the countries in the world, Haiti is at present the
main recipient of official development assistance from
Spain.
In the area of security, it has been confirmed that
the situation has undergone major changes since the
decision to reconfigure MINUSTAH was adopted,
in October 2014. Such an assertion is justified, for
example, in the publication of an electoral timetable
by the provisional Electoral Council. However, Spain
believes that instability has significantly increased in
the streets and there have been changes in the security
situation. According to the figures provided by
MINUSTAH, during 2014 there were 838 protests, of
which a quarter were violent. Furthermore, the tension
on the streets has acutely increased in recent months.
Since the publication of the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2015/157), there have been some major
strikes, including a general strike lasting two days,
on 9 and 10 March, as well as demonstrations that

S/PV.7408

degenerated into serious incidents, such as the invasion
of the Consulate of the Dominican Republic in Portau-Prince. There has also been a significant increase
in the number of assaults and robberies, in offices and
headquarters of religious orders and non-governmental
organizations.
Spain wishes to draw attention to those facts,
which constitute a substantive modification of the
security situation that existed a few months ago, reflect
the existence of a very delicate balance and ultimately
foreshadow the difficulties that will have to met as the
political activity linked to the elections intensifies.
Let us talk about MINUSTAH itself. Spain has
always maintained in its statements to the Security
Council that the reconfiguration of the military
contingent should take into account the increase in the
number of personnel and the capacity of the Haitian
National Police forces to arrive at Haiti assuming the
functions of maintenance of public order currently
undertaken by the United Nations Mission. However,
from the information available and the facts to which
I referred earlier, I can deduce that the forces of
Haitian law enforcement lack even the tools necessary
to controlling the situation by themselves and in fact
rely regularly on the logistical arrangements and
military infrastructure of MINUSTAH to do their jobs
effectively.
Spain considers that if the security conditions have
not drastically worsened despite the seriousness of the
facts, it is precisely because of the presence of the work
of MINUSTAH. At this point, I wish to mention the
letter sent by President Martelly last 9 March to the
Secretary-General in which he noted the importance
of the security environment for the proper conduct of
the electoral process, calling attention to the disturbing
increase in violence. In this letter, the President of Haiti
requested “that the United Nations observe a pause
in the ongoing withdrawal process of MINUSTAH
contingents.” Spain supports responding positively to
that request of the highest authority in Haiti.
As members of the Council know, we supported
from the beginning the process of reflection on the future
of MINUSTAH. We continue to support the Mission
reconfiguration plan, which should take into account
progress in the formation and consolidation of the
National Police and its ability to progressively assume
the functions that MINUSTAH will give up in the field
of security. In the current circumstances, Spain insists

15-0745611/38

S/PV.7408

The question concerning Haiti

that the Mission reconfiguration calendar be studied in
a flexible manner, on the basis of analyses and forecasts
in the short and medium term and of the evolution of
the political and security situation. We believe that
the role of MINUSTAH is and will be essential for the
electoral process to take place normally, in security
and transparency, and for the international community
to support that process and the establishment of a new
Administration, ensuring a peaceful political transition
that consolidates the achievements of the past few years
in terms of democracy and rule of law. In any case, the
risks cited by the Secretary-General in his report serve
to highlight the need to maintain a rapid reaction force
in addition to the police component, which should,
in our view, be maintained at current levels until the
establishment of the new Government.
I conclude by reiterating our total commitment to
Haiti once again.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I also thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Honoré for her
briefing.
Nigeria commends the transitional Government in
Haiti for the significant progress made in overcoming
the political impasse that had affected its parliamentary
responsibilities. The promulgation of the electoral
law on 2 March demonstrates the firm commitment
of the Haitian authorities to democracy and good
governance. We urge the Government to sustain that
political momentum in good faith in order to foster
the necessary consensus for elections to be held as
scheduled. To complement those gains, it is vital that
the Electoral Council remain impartial, independent
and transparent. Those attributes will be essential in
building trust and confidence in the political process.
They will also be vital to the holding of free and fair
elections later this year.
It is essential to strengthen security and the rule
of law in Haiti. To that end, we recognize ongoing
efforts to strengthen and professionalize the Haitian
National Police (HNP) and other security structures in
the country, which will enable them to meet emerging
challenges. We note the continued increase in the
personnel strength of the HNP, which has placed it on a
trajectory to attain its target of 15,000 officers by 2016.
From a gender perspective, it is significant that 1,022
of the 11,900 police officers in Haiti be women. We
commend MINUSTAH for its close cooperation with
the HNP in addressing threats to security and safety.

12/38

18/03/2015

It is imperative that programmes that promote
socioeconomic alternatives to violence be pursued
vigorously in order to tackle internal security concerns.
In that regard, we take note of MINUSTAH’s initiatives
and welcome the 25 new projects for youth and
vulnerable communities approved for the 2014-2015
fiscal year. The launch of 56 new quick-impact
projects designed to strengthen State authority, address
environmental protection issues and enhance the rule
of law is a welcome initiative that will significantly
boost the reconstruction process.
The situation in Haiti is stabilizing and the country
is on a path to a peaceful, secure and prosperous
future. The current transition plan provides a feasible
and prudent way forward. The role of MINUSTAH
will remain vital as the Haitian authorities take on
more responsibilities during the drawdown phase.
International support will also be crucial, and we urge
donors and development partners to maintain and
indeed strengthen their engagement with Haiti.
We pay tribute to Special Representative Honoré
and the men and women of MINUSTAH for their
commitment to attaining the Mission’s mandate.
Ms. Schwalger (New Zealand): At the time of
its most recent renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
the Security Council emphasized two points: first, that
any reconfiguration of the Mission should be guided
by facts on the ground; and, secondly, that the Security
Council should act at any time to adjust MINUSTAH’s
mandate if compelled by a change of conditions in Haiti
(see S/PV.7262). Both rely on the Council receiving
information that enables it to monitor continuously the
situation on the ground. We welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s recent report (S/2015/157) and the briefing
from Special Representative Honoré, both of which
build on the information gathered during the Council’s
visit to Haiti earlier this year.
MINUSTAH must be fit for purpose. As the
situation on the ground evolves, the Mission must
adjust accordingly. We must ensure clarity of purpose
and have the resolve to consolidate the Mission as
and when the Haitian authorities are ready to assume
responsibility for Haiti’s security. But, as the Council
contemplated last year, any reconfiguration of
MINUSTAH must be based on a rigorous assessment
of the needs on the ground. In that regard, and based on
its assessment, particularly from the January visit, we

15-07456

18/03/2015

The question concerning Haiti

must say that New Zealand is apprehensive about the
planned — and already committed — drawdown in the
Mission’s military component.
That military component presently provides a
back-up if the national police force is unable to address
security concerns, even with the assistance of the
MINUSTAH police component. Until the number and
capacity of local police is increased, the ability of the
Haitian Government and MINUSTAH to ensure the
safety and security of the Haitian people may be tested.
That is particularly so with respect to the electoral
period scheduled to last for several months later this
year. The Security Council must remain open minded,
flexible and ready to respond, if necessary, to changes
in the security environment.
We must also be responsive to the views of countries
on the Council’s agenda. To that end, we acknowledge
President Martelly’s letter to the Secretary-General
including, among other things, a request for a pause in
the recognition of MINUSTAH. We will reflect further
on the letter but do wish today to register that we are
encouraged by the progress made in strengthening
domestic institutions in Haiti, in particular the Haitian
National Police (HNP). We look forward to a time when
the HNP can assume full responsibility for security
and stability in Haiti. But there is much work still to
be done.
As acknowledged in the Secretary-General’s
report, the HNP requires more officers and further
training. Given the ongoing challenges to law and order
and the urgent need to continue developing the HNP’s
capacity, it is imperative that the full complement
of MINUSTAH’s police personnel envisaged in the
Mission mandate be deployed as soon as possible. This
is a priority, particularly given the imminent reduction
in MINUSTAH troop numbers.
MINUSTAH will not be in Haiti forever. Haiti
must increasingly assume responsibility for its own
security and stability. An inclusive and representative
democracy is a precondition to achieving that goal.
It is therefore critical that Haiti should hold free and
fair elections and restore a functioning legislature. As
noted by other Council members, all of Haiti’s political
actors must do everything possible to ensure that those
elections take place promptly, in stable conditions and
without violence. Everything must be done to avoid
further delays in the electoral process. We urge the

S/PV.7408

international community to stand ready to support that
electoral process.
Without a well-managed transition process,
MINUSTAH’s achievements risk coming undone. We
commend the transition planning already under way and
urge that it continue in a spirit of genuine partnership
between MINUSTAH and the Haitian Government.
The needs of Haiti must be well understood, as they
inevitably change during the transition. Flexibility will
be required to ensure that that the people of Haiti can
develop their country in accordance with their own
priorities and, ultimately, that they have full ownership
of their destiny.
Mr. Baublys (Lithuania) (spoke in French): We
express our gratitude to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Ms. Sandra Honoré, and her
team as well as to the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) for its work, which
has made an extraordinary contribution to peace and
stability in Haiti. The important progress made since
since the earthquake inspires hope. We sincerely hope
that the Haitian Government will soon be able to resume
full control and that the United Nations can take on a
different role.
(spoke in English)
Lithuania aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union. For my
part, I would like to address three key issues: inclusive
elections, the rule of law and institution-building.
In February, five years on from the earthquake,
the Council paid a visit to a country that continues
to consolidate gains in stability and democracy. Few
people today are without shelter, water or access to
social services. More children go to school. Significant
steps have been taken to improve governance and
strengthen the rule of law. The launching of the Haiti
transitional appeal for 2015-2016, aimed at addressing
social and economic inequalities, will hopefully lead to
further normalization.
An inclusive and transparent political process is a
prerequisite for sustainable peace and stability on the
island. We welcome the appointment of the provisional
Electoral Council and the decision, albeit a late one,
to hold elections this year. We appreciate the strong
commitment by President Martelly to ensure that the
elections are credible, independent, transparent and
inclusive. It is essential to stick to the proposed electoral

15-0745613/38

S/PV.7408

The question concerning Haiti

18/03/2015

calendar and for all the stakeholders, including the
opposition, to overcome their differences. The future of
Haiti depends on the inclusivity of the electoral process.

and Haiti’s Government need to focus on addressing
the proliferation and smuggling of small arms and
countering drug trafficking.

When the Council met in Port-au-Prince with at the
newly appointed ministers, we were inspired by their
ambitious plans and their appreciation of the immense
challenges ahead. Among the challenges, pre-eminent
remains that of strengthening the rule of law, which is at
the core of further progress in unlocking the country’s
economic and social potential.

The upcoming elections, stronger rule of law
institutions and a committed Government portend a new
chapter in the history of Haiti. The United Nations will
continue to render indispensable support during this
crucial year. But Haiti must assume responsibility for
its own stability. The consolidation of the MINUSTAH
mandate and its forthcoming reconfiguration, including
enhancing quick-reaction capabilities, should aim at
enabling the United Nations to continue assisting the
Haitian people in targeted areas. International efforts
should now focus on addressing social, economic and,
increasingly, developmental issues. The States of the
region should play a more vocal role. The European
Union, as one of the largest donors, will continue to
support institutional reforms, enhance the State’s
financial capacity and promote tax reform, among
other goals.

Strengthening of the Superior Council of the
Judiciary, including the certification of judges, has been
one of the steps towards the much-needed reform of
the judicial system. The independence of the judiciary
should be further strengthened. More needs to be done,
including to address pre-trial detention, overcrowded
corrections institutions and the protection of human
rights.
There is a need to further improve the operational
capacity of the Office of the Ombudsman. The
engagement of stakeholders on human rights reporting
is a welcome step. Human rights must be the focus of
the new Government. Accountability for human rights
abuses must be ensured. We encourage Haiti to continue
reviewing the penal code in order to adequately address
gender-based violence.
In April, the Haiti National Police (HNP) will be over
13,000 strong. It will be less dependent on MINUSTAH,
with greater authority and more confidence. The
capacity and performance of the HNP has improved
significantly. We look forward to increased police
deployment outside the Port-au-Prince metropolis
and continued efforts to increase accountability and
build trust with the population. Strengthening of the
Inspectorate General, the vetting of police officers, and
community outreach programmes are welcome steps in
that regard. Increased capacity of the Haitian National
Police and making full use of the level of MINUSTAH
troops, as authorized by resolution 2180 (2014), should
enable the Haitian authorities to maintain law and order
during the upcoming elections.
As armed violence continues to plague the country,
the MINUSTAH community violence reduction
programme has been key to dismantling criminal
gangs and allowing development actors to reach what
were previously “no go” areas. Offering economic
alternatives is an essential element of preventing gang
recruitment. At the same time, the United Nations

14/38

In conclusion, let me again express our gratitude
to the Special Representative, MINUSTAH troop- and
police-contributing countries and the United Nations
country office in Haiti.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening today’s debate. I also
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Honoré for her briefing. So far this year, Haiti’s
political process has registered positive progress. Haiti
has formed a new Government and established the
provisional Electoral Council. It has announced the
election calendar and thereby officially initiated the
formal election preparations. Haiti’s overall security
situation has remained stable, with a gradual restoration
of economic development, which has led to conditions
favourable for accelerating the advancement of the
country’s political process.
On the other hand, it should also be noted that
the country’s political situation remains complex and
fragile. Cholera prevention, appropriate settlement of
internally displaced persons and other humanitarian aid
tasks continue to face challenges, and peace rebuilding
remains arduous and has a long way to go.
In January the Security Council carried out a
successful visit to Haiti, where it engaged extensively
with the country’s leaders and various stakeholders,
thus demonstrating the great importance it attaches to
the question of Haiti, as well as determination to find

15-07456

18/03/2015

The question concerning Haiti

a solution. Currently, there is an important opportunity
in Haiti’s peace process. It is China’s hope that the
international community will offer support mainly in
the following three areas.
First, it is neces to advance steadfastly in the
electoral process. The prompt and smooth completion
of the relevant elections is critical to achieving
sustainable peace, stability and development in the
country. China hopes that the Haitian parties will focus
on the country’s future and its people’s well-being,
seize the opportunity, meet each other half way and
work together to create favourable conditions for the
holding of the elections. The international community
and concerned regional organizations, based on
respect for the country’s ownership, can actively play a
monitoring and coordinating role and provide support
for the elections.
Secondly, it is important to concentrate efforts
on accelerated national development, given that
underdevelopment is one of the root causes triggering
the country’s political and social problems. The
country’s current external environment has been stable.
Positive achievements registered during the postearthquake reconstruction prepared a good foundation
for accelerated development. The Government should
promptly establish a development strategy adapted
to its own national context, strengthen infrastructure
development, and enhance its capacities in disease
prevention and disaster reduction and promote
comprehensive economic and social development. The
international community should effectively honour
its aid pledges to Haiti, actively engage in Haiti’s
State-building, and assist Haiti in attaining its goals of
reduced poverty and self-led development as soon as
possible.
Thirdly, it is necessary to adjust the peacekeeping
deployment in an orderly manner. Under the leadership
of Ms. Honoré, the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) has played an important role
in such areas as supporting the political process and
maintaining social order and security, which China
welcomes. We hope that MINUSTAH, in starting its
gradual downsizing, will take situation on the ground
into account and implement this work steadily and
surely, while strengthening communication with the
Government. We also hope that MINUSTAH will
continue strengthening the training of the Haitian
National Police with a view to their early assumption
of comprehensive responsibility for national security.

S/PV.7408

Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I wish
to thank Ms. Sandra Honoré, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
for her briefing. I also congratulate and thank the
representatives of Chile and the United States of
America for their efforts in leading the Security
Council’s visit to Haiti in January, which allowed us
to have a direct look at the situation on the ground. I
welcome the presence of the Permanent Representative
of Haiti at this meeting.
Chad notes with satisfaction that Haiti’s political
situation is progressively and rapidly reconfiguring.
After a long period of political tension and a relative
institutional vacuum, intensive consultations and
the restoration of trust between the President and the
opposition parties have led to consensus and renewed
institutional activities. In that regard, the nomination,
on 25 December 2014, of a new Prime Minister, the
signing of a tripartite agreement among the heads of
the three branches of power, as well as the signing,
on 11 January, of a political accord among 16 political
parties, the constitutional amendment on extending
the terms of the parliamentarians, the establishment
of the provisional Electoral Council and the electoral
calendar for the forthcoming municipal, parliamentary
and presidential elections between July and December,
all demonstrate the remarkable achievements made in
only four months.
Chad welcomes and encourages all actors and
thanks them for their good offices, as well as the
facilitators and mediators for their tireless efforts to
stabilize and thereby normalize the political situation
in Haiti.
We welcome the Haitian Government’s significant
participation and investment of $13.5 million in
preparations for the elections, which will be decisive in
reinstating democracy. We therefore encourage partners
and the international community to scale up efforts in
providing the technical, logistical and financial support
necessary to ensure transparency and credibility in the
long-awaited free and democratic elections.
Moreover, we believe that the normalization of the
political situation will allow political, economic and
social stakeholders to concentrate on the major social
and economic challenges facing the country. Poverty,
the earthquake and other natural disasters have left

15-0745615/38

S/PV.7408

The question concerning Haiti

deep scars, thus requiring consistent efforts to relaunch
the country’s economy.
About 3 million people suffer food insecurity,
while 600,000 others, including 100,000 children
under-five years of age, are severely impacted. The
report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/157) also
notes that at the end of December 2014, about 80,000
internally displaced persons remained in 105 camps
across the country. We therefore call upon the national
authorities, humanitarian agencies and the international
community to find sustainable solutions to relocating
and reintegrating those vulnerable people.
With respect to public health, the report notes
a substantial increase in 2015 of cholera cases. Chad
encourages the national authorities and specialized
agencies to develop and implement strategies,
particularly in the area of public health, to help families
and the impacted communities.
We take due note of the fact that United Nations
agencies have made progress in the financing of more
than 80 projects in the areas of economic integration
and human rights. We also call on the Government to
scale up its efforts to bring about economic and social
stability for the people in need.
Regarding human rights, we are concerned
about the situation of those in prison, in particular
women. We welcome the steps taken and the technical
support provided in the drafting of the penal code.
Nevertheless, as we await an appropriate solution to the
problem of prison overpopulation, we would encourage
MINUSTAH to continue to support the improvement
of detention-centre infrastructure, with respect for the
rights of women ensured through the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).
On the security front, Chad notes that the situation
remains relatively stable, although the street protests
organized by opposition parties that did not sign the
agreement, as well as those against the increase in petrol
prices, exacerbate anti-Government sentiment. Public
order is also threatened by crime, including killings
and kidnappings perpetrated by gangs and criminal
groups. Other public issues include road blockades,
the destruction of property and attacks against police
officers.
Given this situation, we are pleased with the
ongoing improvement in the response and capacity of
the Haitian National Police, whose operations usually

16/38

18/03/2015

are carried out without MINUSTAH’s operational
contribution. We encourage MINUSTAH and the
national authorities to continue their efforts to train
15,000 personnel by 2016. We welcome the positive
cooperation between MINUSTAH, the United Nations
police and other United Nations agencies, and the
Haitian authorities aimed at attaining that objective.
Regarding the reconfiguration of the Mission, we
support the two-phase drawdown plan proposed by the
Secretary-General, as set out by resolution 2180 (2014).
According to the rotation arrangements for certain
contingents, troop levels were already adjusted to 4,615
at 18 February 2015, and should be declining gradually
to just above 2,370 in 2016. We take due note of the
appeal for the strengthening of the police component
so as to handle follow-up and provide support for the
electoral process. We hope that MINUSTAH will have
the staffing levels and the training and effectiveness
necessary to provide the technical and logistical
assistance necessary for the holding of the elections. We
would like here to reiterate our support to Ms. Sandra
Honoré, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of MINUSTAH, and we thank her
and all of her team for their commitment.
In conclusion, Chad reiterates that overcoming
the political stalemate represents a crossroads on the
road to stabilization for the country. Right now, it is
important for all stakeholders to take this opportunity
for peace and development.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Venezuela welcomes
the convening of this open debate on the political
situation in Haiti and highly value the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2015/157), as presented by
his Special Representative and Head of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
Ms. Sandra Honoré. On behalf of my delegation,
I should like to congratulate Ms. Honoré for the
constructive and very important work that she has been
carrying out together with her team to ensure stability
and reconstruction in Haiti.
During their recent visit to Haiti, in January,
the members of the Council reiterated the Council’s
commitment to support the people and the Government
of Haiti in their efforts to strengthen peace, democracy
and stability. The mission enabled Council members
to learn about the important role of MINUSTAH in
support of the efforts made by the Haitian Government

15-07456

18/03/2015

The question concerning Haiti

to strengthen its institutional capacity, which in turn
will contribute to the economic and social recovery
of this sisterly nation, in the framework of sustainable
development.
We warmly welcome the efforts made by
Haiti — efforts that must be expanded — to combat
poverty and rebuild the country. We call on the
international community to provide resolute support
to such humanitarian and development efforts. The
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela will maintain and
strengthen its assistance to and cooperation with the
brotherly people of Haiti, especially in the area of
social development, humanitarian assistance and the
reconstruction of the country’s infrastructure done
through our Petrocaribe programme.
Our cooperation is based on the historical solidarity
and friendship between our peoples. Despite all of
the efforts made by the international community and
the Government of Haiti, as well as the advances that
have made in several important areas, such as the fight
against cholera, enormous challenges remain in terms
of promoting recovery and sustainable development,
which would make it possible to overcome the serious
economic, social and structural problems in the country
stemming from colonialism, foreign interventions, the
despotic dictatorships that have ruled Haiti and the
continued political instability.
Haiti requires political stability and the strengthening
of its institutions in order to successfully fight poverty.
In that regard, we would like to reiterate what is stated
in the report of the Secretary-General with regard to
minimizing tensions and the normalization of consular
relations between the Dominican Republic and Haiti,
two brotherly countries that share the same territory.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela welcomes
the fact that the provisional Electoral Council is fully
operational, and we welcome the agreement reached
among the Haitian parties to re-establish an atmosphere
of political trust in the lead-up to the legislative,
municipal and presidential elections this year. We
believe that the successful and peaceful conduct of the
elections will be key for the future stabilization and
development of Haiti.
While there have been encouraging developments,
we believe that an ongoing dialogue between political
stakeholders and the Government of Haiti is necessary to
overcome all of the obstacles ahead. Once the elections
have been held, it is politically imperative that there be

S/PV.7408

respect for the results and the necessary commitment
to the stability of the people of Haiti. In that regard, the
international community must support this brotherly
country in this very important event, bearing in mind
that the Haitian people and the country’s institutions are
responsible for the successful conduct of the elections.
After 10 years of work by MINUSTAH, we have
witnessed the increased stability of Haiti. We would like
to acknowledge and commend the contribution made
by the troop-contributing countries to MINUSTAH and
that made by all countries that have contributed to the
strengthening of the Haitian National Police. However,
efforts to consolidate the rule of law in the country
and its institutions must continue. The drafting of the
penal code, the strengthening of the principal oversight
institutions in the country, such as the Superior Council
of the Judiciary, progress in the legislative reform
process and the progress made in the training of the
Haitian National Police, as well as the convening of
eletions, inter alia, are positive indicators with respect
to the preservation of the political and social integrity
of Haiti.
Venezuela attaches particular importance to ensuring
improvements in the capacity and professionalization
of the Haitian National Police, in keeping with the
strategic plan for 2012-2016, as it will be one of the
institutions that will take over public-security tasks
once MINUSTAH’s mandate has been completed.
Venezuela wishes to highlight the work carried
out by MINUSTAH in helping to stabilize the
country. We therefore believe that the MINUSTAH
drawdown strategy should be closely coordinated
with the Government of Haiti, and that this will be a
year of critical importance to the country’s efforts to
consolidate its institutions through the smooth conduct
of elections. In that regard, MINUSTAH’s presensce
should be maintained.
We support the request, made by President Martelly
in the letter he sent to the Secretary-General and that has
been was distributed to Council members (S/2015/191),
that MINUSTAH be drawn down in a gradual and
orderly fashion, beginning in 2016 once a President
has been elected. Any decision on the drawdown of the
MIssion should be adopted on the basis of a prudent
approach and in accordance with security conditions
on the ground and and taking into account the capacity
of Haitian national institutions to run the country’s
political, economic and social affairs.

15-0745617/38

S/PV.7408

The question concerning Haiti

Finally, Venezuela continues to encourage democratic
development and political and social stability in a free
and sovereignty Haiti, and reaffirms its resolve to
continue supporting that brotherly Caribbean country
so as to ensure that it enjoys full sovereignty and social
justice and eradicates poverty, which are the main
challenge it will face in the future.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Sandra Honoré for introducing
the Secretary-General’s report on the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (S/2015/157) and offering
her assessment of the situation in the country.
Over the reporting period, the general situation in
Haiti continued to be marked by political ambiguity
against the backdrop of an interruption in the electoral
process and the expiration on 12 January of the mandate
of the previous membership of the Parliament. In that
regard, we welcome the key step taken by the President
of Haiti and the leading political parties, including
the opposition, to resolve that protracted problem by
establishing a time frame for the conduct of elections.
We hope that it will be upheld.
The conduct of fair and transparent elections is of
the utmost importance in solidifying the foundations of
the Haitian State. After all, in spite of the formidable
tribulations endured by many Haitians in recent years,
the key political players have succeeded, with the
help of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti, in improving a difficult situation. The number
of internal internally displaced persons following
the 2010 earthquake continues to fall. There are
signs of economic growth and a slight downturn in
demonstrations. The situation of organized crime,
while remaining tense, is stable. Work on the penal
code has been concluded. The Haitian National Police
is improving both in numbers and in performance. The
situation with respect to the spread of cholera is under
control, while the rise in the number of cases of the
disease is necessarily of concern. Port-au-Prince will
need to demonstrate particular caution in that respect.
The establishment of enduring national dialogue
will be critical to stabilizing the overall situation in the
country. The Secretary-General’s report clearly notes
that, for the first time in many years, key political actors
were able to reach a number of important compromises
aimed at broadening and democratizing the political
space and at strengthening national accountability

18/38

18/03/2015

for the state of affairs. We hope that the Government
and all primary political parties will not rest on their
laurels, especially since there will be a particularly
pressing need throughout the electoral period to resolve
many vital issues.
Against the backdrop of the planned drawdown of
the military component of MINUSTAH, we welcome the
Haitian National Police’s demonstration of its capacity
to address the rising security challenges. Nevertheless,
this hardly mitigates the imperative for painstaking and
maximally effective use, based on needs on the ground,
of the Mission’s capacities and resources so as to fulfil
its mandate to provide stabilization assistance in Haiti
and overcome the backlog of many years of problems
in Haiti.
If the Haitian Government is to achieve full
political normalization, it will require the appropriate
and respectful support of the United Nations-led
international community. However, if that process
is to be effective and successful, a lead role will
undoubtedly have to be played by the Government of
Haiti, which has primary responsibility for the situation
in the country, its development and the sound use of
international assistance.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Chile wishes to express its gratitude to the presidency
for convening this meeting on the situation in Haiti
and the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH). This is a priority situation for
Latin America and the Caribbean. We thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Honoré
for introducing the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2015/157).
In January, Council members had an opportunity
to visit Haiti, where we witnessed the progress that
had been achieved and took note of the remaining
challenges, of which political dialogue remains the key.
The Council was able to send a strong, unified message
on the need for all stakeholders to work together to
establish democratic and institutional processes in the
country. Only a few days after the presentation of the
electoral calendar by the provisional Electoral Council,
we stress the need for the political stakeholders to
assume their responsibility towards the Haitian people
and strive together to ensure that all the elections are
conducted successfully.
It is very difficult to put into context the process
by which MINUSTAH will be strengthened and

15-07456

18/03/2015

The question concerning Haiti

reconfigured. In that regard, we note the message in
the Secretary-General’s report that
“the lingering political crisis ... diverted attention
from the focused pursuit of initiatives underpinning
the consolidation process” (S/2015/157, para. 53).
Those initiatives are outlined in the annex to the
report. The elections are thus a priority of fundamental
importance, and we must act to ensure that they are
conducted smoothly. The Mission must maintain its
capacity to provide logistical support for the elections
and to contribute to creating a stable and secure
environment throughout Haiti.
The Secretary-General recognizes that the
Government of Haiti must confront and assess those
challenges on the basis of a gradual political context
and the complexity of the elections. In his report, the
Secretary-General also recognizes that, despite the
fact that the Haitian National Police has improved
its capacity to address crime and public disorder, the
elections threaten to exacerbate the political climate
in the country. In our view, this presages a period of
uncertainty and a prolonged electoral process, which
will likely involved several rounds of voting and
possible run-off elections and may be exacerbated by a
complex economic context that could impact Haiti this
year.
As we reiterate the importance of ongoing support
for Haiti, we must listen to the Haitian authorities,
who have reaffirmed the importance of the military
component of MINUSTAH in strengythening security
throughout the electoral cycle, and have requested a
sufficient and robust Mission presence. This and other
requests are clearly reflected in the letter sent by the
President of Haiti to the Secretary-General, which has
been circulated as a document of the Security Council
under the symbol S/2015/191.
Although the report of the Secretary-General
indicates that the security situation has remained
stable overall, we must not forget that the fact that,
as of 18 February, the number of troops stood at
4,615 contributed to that. The real challenge will
therefore begin after 1 July when, in accordance with
the provisions of resolution 2180 (2014) — barring a
revision — we will have to face a prolonged cycle of
elections with practically half as many troops, and that
at a time when there will still be a long way to go before
the Haitian National Police can reach the appropriate
minimum numbers to be able to face that challenge.

S/PV.7408

Chile reiterates its support for a gradual reduction of
the force that takes into account the electoral calendar,
with a view to ensuring a process that guarantees
transparency and democratic governance in a way that
does not undermine the achievements of the past years.
We welcome the announcement of the intention to make
full use of the police levels that have been authorized.
Honestly, however, we wonder whether it will be
possible to reach those numbers in an opportune time
to fully carry out the preventive functions performed
by the military component.
I would not want to conclude my statement without
reiterating that Haiti continues to face challenges
on the humanitarian and development fronts. It is
crucial that the international community continue to
support initiatives aimed both at funding immediate
needs — including with regard to the recent increase in
cholera cases, the ongoing situation with the remaining
internally displaced persons and the prospects for
increasing food security — and at supporting Haiti’s
national capacities in the long term.
In conclusion, I want to reiterate Chile’s commitment
to the Haitian people, its authorities and MINUSTAH.
Chile will continue to support the consolidation of the
rule of law, democracy and the development of Haiti’s
capacities, as that contributes to building a political
culture that is committed to the stability of the country
and the progress of the Haitian people. We must do our
work well in order to succeed.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
France.
I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti for her briefing. I also welcome the
presence here today of His Excellency Ambassador
Denis Régis, Permanent Representative of Haiti.
I associate myself with the statements to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union and the
Group of Friends of Haiti.
It is always a pleasure to have Ms. Honoré with
us to discuss the situation in Haiti. We commend
her outstanding work as Head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), and we
reiterate our full support to her and her team.
We have carefully considered the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2015/157) on the work of

15-0745619/38

S/PV.7408

The question concerning Haiti

18/03/2015

MINUSTAH six months after the renewal of its mandate
under resolution 2180 (2014). The report confirms the
pattern for MINUSTAH’s evolution decided at the time.
We agree with the analysis of the security situation and
with the means to respond to it.

MINUSTAH, the country team and the Government
on how to conduct the transition of the international
presence in Haiti after 2016. That is a positive message
both for the Haitian authorities and the international
community: we can finally look to the horizon.

We believe that MINUSTAH’s evolution is moving
in a direction in line with choosing a response and
mobilizing all available means on the basis of an overall
assessment of the situation. That decision was endorsed
by the Security Council, which also included a provision
to revisit its position. We have given ourselves time
to consider the issue, and the Council has visited the
country. We understand the concern of some. We take
particular note of the request by President Martelly to
the Council. It is clear that the situation in Haiti includes
risk factors. We continue to follow with the greatest
interest the evolution of the situation in Haiti. That is
our responsibility as a member of the Council and as
a friend of Haiti. But we have not heard any argument
to support maintaining the current arrangement, or for
scaling back at a different proportion or according to
some other schedule.

This horizon is emerging now. An electoral calendar
has been approved and published. Haitian voters have
been called to the polls. The electoral machinery has
been set into motion.

We believe it is now important to implement
what we decided in October. This is a matter of the
authority and credibility of the Council, which, let us
recall, voted unanimously on how MINUSTAH would
evolve. This is also about the confidence we have
in the vitality of Haiti’s democracy as an element of
stability and development in the country. As we enter a
major chapter in Haitian history, replete with so much
promise, it is essential that MINUSTAH act without
fear or paralysis. Furthermore, the Council does not
overlook the security uncertainties. It is wrong to speak
about a reduction of MINUSTAH; we are talking about
a reconfiguration of its posture in accordance with the
evolution of the situation.
In the run-up to the upcoming elections, the police
force will be called upon to take a leading role, relying
as a last resort on a military component with increased
mobility.
It is also a matter of great conviction for France
that the country’s future problems must be met with
solutions aimed at maintaing public order. As such, we
welcome the decision of MINUSTAH to increase the
number of its police component and make full use of
troops up to the ceiling authorized by the Council.
Moreover, as a vision for the future of MINUSTAH
finally emerges, we note the start of a reflection among

20/38

We welcome the establishment of the essential
framework for holding the long-delayed elections and
the renewal of democratic institutions. All stakeholders
must continue to work together to strengthen mutual
trust to allow for the holding of fair, transparent and
inclusive elections. We call on all stakeholders to
engage resolutely in defining a better future for Haiti
and all Haitians.
Much remains to be done. There must be more
efficiency, transparency and accessibility with regard
to the rule of law and institutions. In terms of human
rights, the determination of Haitian authorities has
been clearly demonstrated. But human rights violations
continue, and it is the responsibility of the State to turn
words into deeds in this area. In that regard, we have in
mind in particular the situation of prisoners, many of
whom are still awaiting a court decision.
Finally, humanitarian challenges remain. The news
looks good with regard to the cholera epidemic, but
some prevalence remains. We fully support the work
and commitment of the United Nations for the total
eradication of the disease.
On those remaining challenges, it is imperative
that the Haitian authorities take full ownership for the
assistance provided to them. The United Nations should
complement and support the work of the Haitian State,
but it cannot substitute for it.
In conclusion, I would like to recall that MINUSTAH
was deployed in 2004 in the context of acute crisis.
That crisis was compounded a few years later by a
tragic earthquake. Eleven years later, the situation has,
fortunately, changed considerably. MINUSTAH must
adapt to that favourable evolution, which is proof of its
success. We expect the Secretary-General to present
again in his next report recommendations for the next
phase of the reconfiguration of MINUSTAH launched
last October. We must go further, in the context of
seeking greater efficiency in peacekeeping. We must

15-07456

18/03/2015

The question concerning Haiti

start thinking today of a Haiti after MINUSTAH.
As such, we are eager to engage with our partners to
consider the role that the Peacebuilding Commission
could play to prepare for the future United Nations
presence in Haiti.
For France, Haiti continues to be a dear friend. We
will continue to stand resolutely by its side.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Haiti.
Mr. Régis (Haiti) (spoke in French): At the outset,
allow me to congratulate the Secretary-General for the
quality of his report (S/2015/157) on the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
The Haitian Government has considered with
great interest the contents of the report, which follows
the Secretary-General’s field mission in Haiti last
summer and that of the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations some weeks before, as
well as the visit by members of the Security Council
in January. The report contains a very fair and lucid
analysis of the crisis that has shaken Haiti over the
past year and which, fortunately, is now passed. It also
paints a balanced and objective picture of the overall
situation in Haiti in terms of stabilization and security
and the new opportunities emerging with the launch of
the electoral process, which, as everyone recognizes, is
a major test not only for MINUSTAH and the Haitian
institutions, but also and especially for the future of
democracy in Haiti.
In the first part of my statement I will provide
some complementary information and assessments to
those provided in the report of the Secretary-General.
In the second part I will share with the Council some
observations of the Haitian Government on the security
situation on the eve of the elections and challenges
that could be brought about by the upcoming electoral
consultations, given their particular complexity, as
mentioned by the Secretary-General.
The long political crisis in which Haiti has been
mired, is over. Fortunately, reason has finally prevailed.
Supporters of the republican order overwhelmingly
chose to go to the ballots. The Secretary-General’s
report highlights that development. The President
of the Republic, His Excellency Mr. Michel Joseph
Martelly, has spared no sacrifice and no concession
in establishing conditions conducive to the proper

S/PV.7408

holding of the elections. That was demonstrated by
the long series of consultations that he held with all
political actors, the establishment of the presidential
advisory commission and the full implementation
of the recommendations issued by that body aimed
at breaking the stalemate. The appointment of a
new Prime Minister, the formation of a consensus
Government, the reform carried out in the judiciary and
the establishment of a provisional Electoral Council,
in accordance with the requirements of article 289 of
the Constitution, have all won over the most reticent
and have convinced everyone of the unwavering will
of Haiti’s Head of State and Government to hold free,
honest, democratic, transparent and inclusive elections
in 2015. I am pleased to recall that that commitment was
also solemnly reiterated to the members of the Security
Council during their important visit to Haiti in January.
In the meantime, a new electoral decree, widely
discussed by all of the stakeholders, was adopted on
2 March. Similarly, a realistic timetable has been
presented by the Electoral Council for the holding of
presidential, legislative, municipal and local elections
this year. The executive just issued, on 13 March, a
presidential decree calling people to the ballot box on
9 August, 25 October and, if necessary, 27 December.
Therefore, after facing manifold obstacles that could
have derailed the electoral process and jeopardized the
gains made in recent years, the Haitian Government
is pleased to have successfully completed what the
Secretary-General characterized in his report as a
decisive step towards the holding, by the end of the
year, of the long-overdue elections.
Things are on track. The holding of the next
election is crucial to the strengthening of democracy
and the rule of law and lasting stability in Haiti. In that
respect, the Haitian Government is deeply grateful to
the Secretary-General and Security Council members
for the interest, trust, solidarity and support they have
shown to the Haitian people, in particular during the
recent political crisis. We were particularly grateful for
the efforts undertaken by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honoré,
and the members of the core group for facilitating
dialogue among all political actors. Their participation
in the development of a consensus and the search for a
constructive and viable solution deserves recognition.
MINUSTAH’s presence has undoubtedly been
an important factor in the establishment of stability
and security in Haiti over the past decade. Ten years

15-0745621/38

S/PV.7408

The question concerning Haiti

after its establishment by the Security Council, the
Mission, as everyone agrees, must evolve and adapt to
an environment that is different from the one in which
it was created. That is the spirit in which the gradual
and progressive withdrawal of peacekeepers was
announced, and, in principle, the withdrawal has been
carried out up to the present from the perspective of
the Mission’s post-2016 reconfiguration, in accordance
with resolution 2180 (2014).
However, without wanting to call into question
the guidelines of the current withdrawal plan or the
prospects for the Mission’s reconfiguration, the Haitian
Government believes that it would be useful to call
on the Security Council to demonstrate the necessary
flexibility in implementing the reconfiguration.
In particular, in the light of the assessment of the
situation and the current needs in the area of security,
the Government believes that the timetable for the
withdrawal should be reassessed so as to take into
account, at each stage of the evolution, the actual
situation on the ground and, in particular, the threats
and risks that could jeopardize national stability and
security. That is why the Haitian Government strongly
hopes that, in the current pre-electoral context,
MINUSTAH troop numbers can be maintained at
a level at which they can significantly improve the
security environment, which, as members know, is a
key factor in voter confidence in the process and one of
the determining factors for the success of the elections.
In his report, the Secretary-General rightly notes
an upsurge in violence recorded over the past weeks
in Haiti, although the security situation has generally
remained stable and the ability of the Haitian National
Police to maintain order has continued to improve.
At this critical juncture, when the electoral process is
entering its decisive phase, we are indeed witnessing a
significant increase in violence, which is illustrated in
particular by the resurgence of clashes between armed
groups in certain neighbourhoods and a clear resurgence
of crime and violent outbursts, which in turn give rise
to socioeconomic or political protests. Those events, as
the report shows, often occur along with the destruction
of public property and facilities, as evidenced by the
recent MINUSTAH vehicle fire.
In that context, the Haitian Government attaches
the highest importance to the maintenance of a
sufficient presence by the MINUSTAH military and
police components. By supporting the work of the
Haitian National Police in a more proactive manner

22/38

18/03/2015

and throughout the electoral cycle, those components
would make a measurable contribution to enhancing
confidence in the security environment.
Therefore, given the renewed insecurity, the
obvious complexity of the upcoming elections and the
special challenges that they will present in terms of
managing logistics and security, as the report notes, the
Government of Haiti believes it necessary to appeal to
the Security Council and request that there be a pause
in the ongoing withdrawal process of the MINUSTAH
military contingents.
Meanwhile, the Haitian Government would greatly
welcome the strengthening of the police component of
MINUSTAH and its presence on the ground through
increased support to the Haitian National Police and
more sustained participation in the daily tasks relating
to the safety and protection of citizens.
Finally, the Haitian Government believes that, in
the light of the aforementioned resurgence in violence,
the United Nations should reassess, jointly with the
Haitian authorities, the rules for implementing the
withdrawal plan in two phases, as mentioned in the
Secretary-General’s August 2014 report (S/2014/617),
so as to take fully into account the evolution of the
situation on the ground throughout the election cycle
and beyond.
I would like to express the Government of
Haiti’s profound gratitude for the positions and
recommendations just expressed here by a certain
number of partners, including Spain, Venezuela, Chile,
New Zealand and, of course, your country, France,
Mr. President, and for the interest expressed in the
Haitian Government’s request. I noted the remark
made to that effect by the President. However, the
Haitian Government’s request relates to paragraph 4 of
resolution 2180 (2014), of 14 October 2014, which states
the Council’s commitment to act at any time to adapt
MINUSTAH’s mandate and force levels, if compelled
by a change of conditions in Haiti and if necessary to
preserve the progress Haiti has made towards durable
security and stability.
The Government is fully aware that the responsibility
for organizing elections and security rests with the
Haitian authorities. In that context, it fully counts on
the spirit of cooperation and flexibility that has always
governed the cooperation between the United Nations
and Haiti. MINUSTAH’s contribution will certainly be
essential to the holding of elections in the best possible

15-07456

18/03/2015

The question concerning Haiti

security conditions, which is key to their credibility and
legitimacy. In the same vein, the Government endorses
the deployment of international election observer
missions, which could only contribute to improving
confidence in the process.
The Haitian Government attaches great importance
to the eminently constructive role played by the United
Nations in Haiti. It reiterates its gratitude to all the
Member States that continue, in the spirit of solidarity
and international cooperation, to support the Haitian
people in their march towards the building of the
rule of law and a democratic society. I also express
the Government’s gratitude to the friendly nations in
the hemisphere that have recently spared no effort to
draw the Council’s attention to the need for consistent
support by the international community for Haiti and
its people.
We welcome the prospects for such continued aid
in the upcoming election cycle, whose importance we
all understand. We must not lose sight of the ultimate
goal, which is also the very foundation of the Mission,
namely, the consolidation of the rule of law and the
realization of long-term stability, which will ensure the
sustainability of democracy, growth and development
in Haiti.
That is why it is of the highest importance that
every effort be undertaken to promote a gradual and
orderly transfer of MINUSTAH’s responsibilities. That
transfer must, at every stage, take into consideration
the progress made and the existing vulnerabilities.
Care must be taken especially to avoid any premature
withdrawal that could create a vacuum in the security
situation, as was so eloquently recalled in the most
recent report of the Secretary-General.
I once again thank the Secretary-General for his
report, which will undoubtedly shape the Council’s
work with regard to the evolution and reconfiguration
of the Mission, and I reiterate the determination of
the Haitian Government to continue to work closely
with the Security Council and the Secretariat to fulfil
the mandate entrusted to MINUSTAH. I hope, in
particular, that the Council will grant Haiti its priority
attention and take whatever follow-up measures are
deemed necessary based on the requests of the Haitian
Government.
Haiti is the oldest child of France in the Americas.
You, Sir, know of the special historic and cultural
ties — and every other type of tie — between my

S/PV.7408

country and yours. You stated earlier that France stood
united with Haiti. I would like to reiterate to you that
Haiti shares a family bond with France.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Patriota (Brazil) (spoke in French): We thank
France for having organized this debate. I also thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Sandra Honoré, for her briefing. I reiterate my
Government’s respect for her leadership and the
ongoing support that she provides to the consolidation
of peace and democracy in Haiti. We recognize the
troop-contributing countries and the United Nations
personnel deployed in Haiti. I also welcome the
presence of the Permanent Representative of Haiti,
Ambassador Régis, here among us.
Allow me to start on a positive note. Brazil agrees
with the British economist Paul Collier that there are
reasons to be optimistic about the future of Haiti:
Haiti’s lack of inter-ethnic conflict, its location in a
region of peace and cooperation, its proximity to the
largest market in the world and its dynamic and highly
skilled diaspora in many developed countries. I would
add to that list the resilience and courage of the Haitian
people. Haiti is the first black republic in the Americas
and inspired several nineteenth century freedom
movements. Despite that history, the country was
isolated and even neglected in the region for some time.
Today, thanks to the efforts of regional and subregional
organizations and to the contributions of countries in
the region to the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH), Haiti has been welcomed and
integrated in its regional context in Latin America and
the Caribbean.
We must also recognize the progress made by Haiti
since the earthquake, much of which is highlighted
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/157).
Beyond Haiti’s macroeconomic stability, it is very
encouraging to see improvements in the indicators
related to the Millennium Development Goals, which
are the result of efforts by both the Government and
other stakeholders, which have focused on education,
health and the reduction of inequality and extreme
poverty. In that regard, I would like to highlight the
real impact of a number of programmes developed in
recent years, such as “Ti Manman Cheri” in the field
of education and “Aba Grangou” in the area of food

15-0745623/38

S/PV.7408

The question concerning Haiti

security. The decrease in the number of displaced
persons is also remarkable.
(spoke in English)
Brazil welcomes the Security Council visit to Haiti
last January, which was important in terms of reiterating
international support for Haiti and encouraging the
Government to quickly organize elections. The unified
and constructive message transmitted to Haitian
political actors contributed directly to recent political
achievements. We are fully aware, nevertheless, that
the process still requires close monitoring.
Brazil supports the Secretary-General’s positive
assessment regarding stability and security in Haiti.
While recognizing that there are still reasons for
concern in the security area, including in the light of the
upcoming electoral process, the enhanced performance
of the police in preventing crimes and controlling civil
unrest is worth underlining.
That should not give rise to complacency. The
Haitian National Police has yet to make further
progress. We encourage the Haitian National Police
to continue to benefit from MINUSTAH’s efforts to
ensure a successful handover of responsibility for
security in critical areas.
The relatively small number of operations that
have required active engagement on the part of the
military contingent of MINUSTAH since the previous
report (S/2014/617) illustrates both the Haitian National
Police’s increasing capacity and the fact that the current
stability threats in Haiti demand a response that is
increasingly less military in nature.
In that context, the continuation of the drawdown
foreseen in resolution 2180 (2014) is natural, as there has
been no dramatic deterioration in the security situation,
nor are we facing challenges that were not foreseen when
the decision to implement the drawdown was taken last
October. Should, however, new circumstances lead to a
deterioration of the situation on the ground, a revision
of the consolidation plan by the Security Council could
be considered.
We recognize that the electoral process may
exacerbate tensions, and we therefore support the
Secretary-General’s recommendation that the posture
of uniformed personnel be reviewed so as to ensure
maximum visibility and full use of the authorized force
levels.

24/38

18/03/2015

We concur with the Secretary-General’s view
on the importance of ensuring Haiti’s leadership of
the electoral process ahead. A lighter presence by
MINUSTAH should be accompanied by a stronger role
for national institutions.
In spite of its reconfiguration, MINUSTAH should
continue to promote a culture of peace by maintaining
its mandated tools to develop quick-impact and
community violence-reduction projects, as well as an
adequate engineering capability.
Brazil welcomes the efforts of the United Nations
country team to consolidate a comprehensive integrated
strategic framework aligned with Haiti’s priorities. The
challenge henceforth is to provide sustainability for the
gains of recent years, allowing for a gradual reduction
in the presence of United Nations troops while the
country evolves towards a stage of increasing stability
with institutional, economic and social progress.
In that process, the international community’s
relationship with Haiti should increasingly be guided by
the establishment of partnerships capable of improving
the living conditions within Haiti, the only country in
the Americas still categorized as least developed.
Without forgetting the enormous challenges that
the country still faces with regard to modernization,
Brazil is convinced that we should continue to look to
Haiti’s future with optimism.
Despite the concern caused by the political crisis
that led to the paralysis of the Parliament, we welcome
the various negotiations that led to the formation of
a transitional Government, the appointment of the
members of the provisional Electoral Council and the
recent adoption of the electoral law by presidential
decree.
Brazil hopes that progress and a constructive
attitude on the part of the Haitian political actors will
lead the country out of the crisis and contribute to the
holding of fair and transparent elections.
Brazil’s commitment to Haiti is long-term. A
scenario of prolonged political stalemate and the
prevalence of sectoral interests over collective wellbeing
will make our task more difficult. We therefore urge
Haitian leaders to persevere in their efforts to deepen
the social compact and consolidate democracy in Haiti
as soon as possible.

15-07456

18/03/2015

The question concerning Haiti

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Carrera Castro (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ambassador Sandra Honoré,
for her very informative presentation, as well as for
her presentation of the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2015/157). We reiterate our full support for the
Special Representative and for the work being carried
out on the ground in Haiti. We would also like to thank
the Permanent Representative of Haiti for his valuable
observations.
(spoke in French)
I should like to have a voice such as that of the
Permanent Representative of Haiti. We may well call
him the Pavarotti of diplomacy.
(spoke in Spanish)
I would like to highlight a few points with regard to
the Secretary-General’s report. First of all, we continue
to profoundly regret the fact that it has not been possible
to hold the elections that have been pending for so long
in Haiti. And we regret the fact that that has resulted
in the dissolution of the Haitian Parliament, which
occurred in January.
We welcome the recent approval of the legal
framework and the electoral calendar, and we believe
that that is a step in the right direction. Given the fact
that the elections have been pending for so long, we
hope that efforts will be redoubled and that additional
measures will be taken to ensure that the elections are
held this year.
As we have reiterated several times over the
past four years, elections are decisive. The proper
functioning of democratic institutions depends upon
the smooth conduct of elections. We are concerned that
the delay in the holding of the elections is seriously
affecting the system of checks and balances that allows
for the effective functioning of democracy in Haiti.
Secondly, we have noted that the settlement of
political differences through dialogue has been key
for the progress being made in various areas in Haiti.
On the one hand, we cannot hope for simple solutions
to extremely complex problems. On the other hand,
we know that the resolution of Haiti’s problems lies
fundamentally in the hands of the Haitian people.
Nevertheless, the message that we would like to send

S/PV.7408

today is that it is that the Haitian leaders in the executive
and legislative branches, civil society and the private
sector must be up to the challenge and collaborate
and work together constructively for the country’s
development.
We would like to emphasize the importance of
national strategies that bring about reconciliation
and that avoid winner-takes-all situations. Such
situations close the door to true consensus and
serious commitments. In that regard, we welcome the
initiatives, good offices and activities being carried out
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
Thirdly, the report of the Secretary-General warns
specifically of the fact that the upcoming elections run
the risk of further exacerbating the political tensions
in the country. It is very important, in that regard, that
MINUSTAH continue its consolidation process. As the
Council well knows, a sound security environment is
essential for the satisfactory carrying out of the muchawaited electoral process. We take note of the concerns
expressed by the Government of Haiti, and we think
there should be a favourable response to the requests set
out in the letter of President Martelly to the SecretaryGeneral, which the representative of Haiti reiterated
here today. We would like to echo the comments made
by the representatives of Spain, Venezuela, Chile and
New Zealand in calling openness in that regard.
The Secretary-General’s report gives an overview
of the generally stable security situation in the country.
At the same time, it mentions an increase in violence,
civil disturbances and criminal activity. We note the
progress being made in increasing the capacity of
the Haitian National Police. And we are aware that
the National Police is not yet in a position to respond
effectively, without assistance, to incidents involving
instability and demonstrations. That is why the firm
support of MINUSTAH continues to be essential.
There are important functions that MINUSTAH should
continue to ensure, such as the management of Haitian
prisons. MINUSTAH must fulfil an increasingly
important role in terms of security sector reform, as
well as in terms of border control and security.
Fourthly, serious efforts at peacebuilding must begin
while MINUSTAH is still present and can perform the
appropriate tasks and adopt measures to ensure that the
future transition of the Mission does not create vacuums
in security nor result in a decrease in the international
community’s level of commitment and support. We

15-0745625/38

S/PV.7408

The question concerning Haiti

need to have an inclusive approach, especially on the
part of the troop- and police-contributing countries, in
order to ensure that those countries’ views, including
Guatemala, are fully taken into account. Similarly, it
is necessary to ensure that the various stages of the
gradual withdrawal of MINUSTAH occur on the basis
of consultations with the Government of Haiti.
We note paragraph 55 of the Secretary-General’s
report: any transition plan requires comprehensive,
broad-based discussions on how to change the mandate,
structure and nature of MINUSTAH in order to ensure
that its gradual withdrawal is linked with the country’s
having developed much stronger institutions and
achieved significant progress towards lasting stability
and development. MINUSTAH and the United Nations
country team must work together in a timely manner
to achieve a transition plan that aims to support the
Government’s priorities for the strengthening of
stability and development with a view to an eventual
handover by MINUSTAH.
Fifthly, MINUSTAH is a success story, but that
is not the whole story. Security and lasting political
stability will be achieved only through the effective
presence of military and police, not simply through a
political process. Sustainable socioeconomic progress
is also needed. Much of Haiti’s progress remains
fragile, especially after the terrible difficulties of the
past five years. The case of Haiti reminds us once again
that we should not consider security and development
as separate spheres. They are inextricably linked.
Finally, Guatemala remains firmly committed to
MINUSTAH and to Haiti. We believe that with the
constant efforts of the leaders of Haiti, the unshakeable
determination of the exceptional Haitian people and
the continued support of the international community
will ensure that Haiti can achieve lasting security and a
stable democracy rooted in socioeconomic improvement
for all. Haiti must choose its own path, and we all must
contribute to helping the Haitian people to achieve it.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.
Mr. Morales (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you, Sir, for convening this debate.
I also wish to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honoré, for
her briefing and to recognize her tremendous efforts in
support of the people and authorities of Haiti.

26/38

18/03/2015

In recent days, we have witnessed significant
progress on the path towards the consolidation
of democracy and the strengthening of Haitian
institutions. While the domestic political situation
remains complex, it is remarkable that the Electoral
Council, after broad consultations with Haitian political
actors, has now proposed an electoral calendar, after
repeated postponements, that can lead to the realization
of the aspirations of the Haitian people. We also
recognize that President Martelly has welcomed the
proposal and has officially announced three rounds of
elections for presidential, legislative, municipal and
local authorities. Carrying out a successful election
process poses significant challenges for the Haitian
authorities, the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) and the international community.
The magnitude of the task is significant, if we take
into account the number of polling places in which the
elections will take place, the logistics involved and the
extent of the elections, which will take place throughout
the entire national territory.
However, the elections must be conducted in a free,
peaceful and inclusive manner and in accordance with
the established regulatory framework. That will be
crucial not only for the standardization and legitimacy
of Haitian institutions, but also for the population to
have a voice through their representatives with regard
to the future of the country. Haiti must focus on priority
areas, and the international community must provide
the needed support and assistance. That is why the
election timetable should be followed strictly. The
authorities responsible for the preparation and conduct
of elections must have the resources necessary for the
proper performance of their duties. Equally important
is the joint work, cooperation and constructive dialogue
with all Haitian political sectors. The work they carry
out with the national authorities must maintain the
credibility of the electoral process, for which a peaceful
and stable environment must be established. In that
regard, any differences among political actors should be
addressed through the appropriate existing institutional
means and avoid polarization, which would threaten the
country’s stability and the outcome of the elections.
In supporting the elections, MINUSTAH and the
international community play a fundamental role, as the
elections provide a key opportunity both to overcome
the political crisis and to normalize the democratic
system in the country so as to support the creation and
strengthening of national capacities and institutions in

15-07456

18/03/2015

The question concerning Haiti

S/PV.7408

electoral matters in the long term. Given that fact, we
must define clear and timely areas in which to work
together and provide the necessary support in response
to needs of the national authorities. There must be a
recognition of national ownership and leadership in
the conduct of the electoral process. In addition, the
international community must be prepared to provide
the necessary support to the national authorities on
technical issues relating to the elections and respond
to the Government’s call for the implementation of
election monitoring missions, the presence of which can
be decisive in ensuring the legitimacy of the process.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Mayr-Harting, head of the
delegation of the European Union to the United Nations.

While the Secretary-General mentions in his report
(S/2015/157) that the security situation in the country
remains stable and that significant progress has been
made by the Haitian National Police, it is essential to
recognize that the country is far from achieving its
goal of security, as President Martelly stated in his
recent communication to the Secretary-General. The
complex security situation, which has seen spikes in
certain types of crime and civil unrest, must now also
be understood through the lens of such security risks,
particularly those that arise during a relatively long
electoral process that will take place in an environment
characterized by political polarization. That is why
we cannot be complacent. The Security Council and
MINUSTAH must be vigilant with regard to threats
and developments on the ground and be sensitive to
the requests of the Government of Haiti, pursuant to
resolution 2180 (2014), so that the Mission can act at
any time to adapt its mandate and force levels and
maintain the country’s current level of stability and
security. It is equally important that the Secretariat be
able to promptly take the necessary actions to make full
use of the authorized police strengh, and that troopcontributing countries be prepared to answer the call
in that regard.

The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; and the Republic of Moldova and
Armenia align themselves with this statement.

The challenges facing Haiti will not end with the
conclusion of the elections. As important as they are,
we cannot lose sight of the need to continue efforts to
strengthen the rule of law, the promotion and protection
of human rights, and socioeconomic development
in the long term, among other matters. MINUSTAH
must therefore continue to support national efforts and
evolve according to the realities on the ground, while
promoting adequately the transfer of responsibilities
to the national authorities and the country team when
conditions are favourable.

Mr. Mayr-Hartig (spoke in French): It is my
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union and
its member States.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2015/157), and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for her briefing. I also wish to
thank my colleague the Permanent Representative of
Haiti for his statement.

In spite of the significant efforts made after
the earthquake of 2010 and the undeniable progress
accomplished since then, Haiti continues to face
formidable socioeconomic and development challenges.
The country has committed itself to seeking stability
and building on democratic achievements, which
will be crucial to its future in the short and long
terms. Ongoing serious socioeconomic inequalities
are a genuine threat to the stability and security of
the country. The European Union, which was a loyal
partner of Haiti even before the disaster of 2010 and
has been even more so since, is determined to act in
harmony with the country’s other partners to support it
in this very sensitive phase.
The European Union welcomes the continuing
decrease in the number of displaced people living
in camps more than five years after the earthquake.
However, nearly 80,000 people are still dealing with
deplorable living conditions and are more vulnerable
than ever. It is therefore essential that the Government
of Haiti continue its efforts to ensure that they have
acceptable living conditions and that their basic human
rights are respected. Considering those persistent
needs, the European Union and its member States are
firmly committed to continuing their humanitarian
assistance to Haiti. To give one example, this year the
European Union decided to continue its humanitarian
response in Haiti with an €11.6 million programme
designed to respond to the needs of the displaced,
contain the cholera epidemic and provide sustainable
assistance to rural populations suffering from food

15-0745627/38

S/PV.7408

The question concerning Haiti

insecurity. In addition, we will contribute to improving
natural-disaster preparedness.
It is also important to strengthen people’s resilience.
In that regard, the European Union is providing full
support to the Haiti Transitional Appeal for 2015-2016,
recently launched by the Haitian authorities and the
United Nations, a strategy with resilience at its centre.
The European Union has also begun developing a
strategy for resilience in Haiti designed to support the
Government’s efforts.
With regard to development aid and cooperation,
the European Union and the Government of Haiti have
signed a planning agreement for the period 2014 to
2020 with a budget of €420 million, since the funds
made available during the previous planning period
have been fully allocated. This attests to the European
Union’s continuing commitment to supporting the
Government’s development and socioeconomic
recovery strategy for the country. In 2014, the
European Union and the Government of Haiti signed
an agreement on a €120 million project in support
of State reform, designed to increase the State’s
budgetary capacity in promoting tax reform, as well as
to improve the management of public finances, support
the implementation of a national policy for primary
education and strengthen governance. That contributes
fundamentally to the healthy functioning of the Haitian
State, and thus to the country’s stability.
Beyond that, several areas in need of intervention
that are covered by the European Union’s programme
for 2014 to 2020, such as urban planning, education
and support for State administrative reform, can help
to contribute to the United Nations plan for eradicating
cholera. The European Commission is in the process
of ensuring that resilience is integrated into all of its
programmes in order to maintain the links between
humanitarian aid and development. A joint humanitarian
development framework is currently being developed.
In that context, the European Union remains open
to maintaining a dialogue with the relevant United
Nations agencies so as to study specific possibilities for
cooperation.
Haiti cannot afford another major political and
security crisis and must ensure that the progress
it has made cannot be reversed. In that regard, in
coordination with the other members of the core
group, in the past few months the European Union
has kept up its contacts with various institutional

28/38

18/03/2015

stakeholders in order to encourage dialogue and reach
the necessary commitments to ensure the holding of
presidential, legislative and local elections, which must
be transparent, credible and inclusive. Despite the fact
that the new electoral law could not be enacted by
12 January, and that as a result the Senate and hence
the entire legislature were rendered dysfunctional, an
agreement was reached with part of the opposition on
creating a new Government and establishing a new
provisional Electoral Council. The Electoral Council
has outlined an electoral calendar and we have hopes
that the electoral process will begin soon.
The European Union commends President Martelly
for agreeing to considerable sacrifices in order to
promote a consensus on emerging from the crisis, and
calls on all political actors to commit to a peaceful and
responsible electoral process. The European Union will
give that process substantial support. To that end, in
addition to a €5 million contribution to the electoral
fund managed by the United Nations Development
Programme, we may consider sending an election
observation mission, or at the very least a group of
electoral experts, as for the 2011 elections. Furthermore,
besides the regular high-level political dialogue with the
Haitian Government, the European Union is continuing
discussions and advisory work with the Club of Madrid
aimed at a huge number of institutional and civil-society
stakeholders. The programme’s purpose is to go beyond
the study of electoral issues and to tackle more global
topics relating to governance, strengthening the rule of
law and reforming the constitutional framework.
We also note, within the general improvement in
the security situation, a significant increase in protests
motivated by socioeconomic factors and a resort to
violence. In the context of a very significant and complex
election year, the European Union believes that a more
stable and inclusive political climate that transcends
political divisions and short-term interests is all the
more essential. The contribution of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) therefore
remains crucial to the country’s democracy, peace and
stability. In the European Union’s view, the presence
of a MINUSTAH military contingent can still make a
major contribution to ensuring peace and stability in
Haiti during the election period, in accordance with
resolution 2180 (2014).
In conclusion, I would like to express the European
Union’s appreciation for MINUSTAH’s important
contribution, during its 10 years of existence, to

15-07456

18/03/2015

The question concerning Haiti

stabilizing security and consolidating democracy and
the rule of law in Haiti. The European Union remains
committed to supporting the efforts of the Haitian
authorities, the United Nations and the international
community in order to ensure a better future for all the
people of Haiti.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mr. Sandoval (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank your delegation, Mr. President, for
convening this debate, and Ms. Sandra Honoré for the
comprehensive briefing she has given us.
Mexico welcomes the fact that the situation in
Haiti has shown some progress in the areas of security,
strengthening the rule of law and training the Haitian
National Police. However, we are concerned that once
again the country was unable to hold its elections
as expected. We therefore renew our call to Haiti’s
political forces, civil society and the private sector to
put collective interests first and, through constructive,
dialogue ensure that the elections will be held in 2015.
The fact that the pre-election period coincided
with the absence of a functional Parliament and the
resurgence of outbreaks of violence presents particular
challenges that could derail the progress made over the
past 11 years. Those events are a reminder of the inherent
links between security, development and the protection
and promotion of human rights that constitute a central
tenet of the mandate of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
In the context of the necessary reconfiguration of
the Mission pursuant to resolution 2180 (2014), Mexico
joins the appeals of the Secretary-General, the Haitian
Government and the Force Commander to guarantee
a stable security environment in order to bring the
pending political and institutional processes to a
successful conclusion. We must take advantage of the
multidimensional character of the Mission in the face
of the prevailing situations in which the Government
and the people of Haiti clearly need MINUSTAH’s
contribution, both in terms of security and the
strengthening of State institutions.
The visit to Haiti made by members of the Council
last January at the request of Chile and the United States
is a clear demonstration of the commitment of this
organ to directly consider the situation on the ground,
obtain at first hand more ample and better information

S/PV.7408

about the difficulties the Caribbean country still faces
and determine the next steps in a more calibrated
manner. The appeal by the Haitian Head of State to
the Secretary-General to maintain a visible and robust
presence in the military and civilian components of
MINUSTAH and the request for a pause in the process
of reducing it should be heard and analysed in their
proper perspective and from the point of view of the
electoral situation in motion.
Mexico believes that the reduction and eventual
withdrawal of MINUSTAH should be progressive
but careful and must be based on a transition plan
coordinated among the Mission, the States Members
of the United Nations, particularly the troop- and
police-contributing countries, and especially the
Haitian Government. Preconceived schedules are
sometimes counterproductive, and the Haitian case is no
exception. The abrupt withdrawal of the Mission could
further complicate the political instability, with risks
of incalculable consequences. We are confident that
in considering the future of MINUSTAH, the Council
will make decisions without compromising security
and allow Haitians and the international community as
a whole to consolidate the gains made in order to make
Haiti another success story.
In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to inform the Council that, following the announcement
that Mexico would gradually resume its participation in
United Nations peacekeeping operations, we will make
a contribution of personnel in the near future — namely,
a lieutenant commander/communications specialist and
an infantry major from the military command staff,
who will play an advisory and operations planning role
at MINUSTAH headquarters.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Okamura (Japan) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening today’s debate. I would also like to express
my appreciation and thanks to Ms. Sandra Honoré,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
her very important briefing. I would like to thank the
personnel of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) for their commitment and their
work in very difficult circumstances.

15-0745629/38

S/PV.7408

The question concerning Haiti

(spoke in English)
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General on
MINUSTAH issued on 4 March (S/2015/157). Although
various challenges persist, we are very pleased to
see progress and positive signs in the stabilization
and recovery process in Haiti. We recognize that
developments in the political process, which include
the holding of long-overdue elections, the increase in
the capacity of the Haitian National Police, the 50 per
cent reduction in new cases of cholera last year and so
forth, are the result of efforts by the Haitian authorities,
its people and the international community, including,
of course, MINUSTAH. Japan is proud to see those
improvements in Haiti since it dispatched approximately
2,200 Self-Defense Forces personnel to the country.
With respect to political developments in Haiti,
Japan highly appreciates the concrete progress that has
been made so far. Examples include the establishment
of the new provisional Electoral Council in January, the
promulgation of the electoral decree by the President of
Haiti on 2 March and the announcement of election dates
on 11 March. Japan strongly hopes that the elections
will take place in a just and transparent manner.
Mr. Bertoux took the Chair.
From that point of view, the Government of Japan
signed a document with the United Nations Development
Programme on 11 March to provide approximately
$4.5 million to assist in the smooth holding of
elections. We also expect this effort to contribute to
nation-building, which includes supporting democracy,
respect for the rule of law and stable peace.
We welcome resolution 2180 (2014), adopted
last October, which provides for the drawdown
of MINUSTAH’s forces and a reduction in police
component levels. The human and financial resources
that the United Nations can invest in peacekeeping
missions are limited. It is imperative that we reduce
the size of missions when concrete progress is being
made by them, as the need to create new missions and
reinforce others is real. The success of a peacekeeping
mission means that it has created an environment in
which it is no longer needed.
In conclusion, I would like to say that Japan counts
on the continuous and strong leadership of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Sandra
Honoré, so that MINUSTAH can achieve success in the

30/38

18/03/2015

context I just mentioned, by accomplishing its mandate,
which includes assistance with the upcoming elections.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Peru.
Mr. Thornberry (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, let me thank the President of the Security Council
for his initiative in convening this debate. I also
welcome the presence of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honoré,
and I welcome her briefing on the report of SecretaryGeneral on the situation in Haiti (S/2015/157).
Peru is committed to achieving and consolidating
security, stability, sustainable development and the
strengthening of institutions in Haiti. Therefore, my
country has actively participated in the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) since
2004 and intends to continue contributing to this
operation, which is the sole peacekeeping mission in
the Americas.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be made shortly by the representative of Uruguay on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti, especially with
regard to the recognition of the important role played
by MINUSTAH in supporting the stabilization and
security of Haiti as well as in strengthening democratic
institutions and the rule of law in the country. I should
like to make some additional comments in my national
capacity.
After the serious political and institutional crisis
that prevented the timely holding of elections to replace
local authorities and thereby avoid the dysfunction
of the Haitian Congress for lack of quorum, my
delegation welcomes the recent publication of an
electoral timetable to carry out presidential, legislative,
municipal and local elections throughout the second
half of this year. For Peru, the elections represent a
milestone in the process of democratic consolidation in
Haiti, which is why my delegation reiterates its call to
all Haitian political forces to cooperate with national
authorities with a view to concluding those processes
and to participate actively in them. Additionally, we
expect the international community to cooperate in the
process and expect to receive timely information on the
progress of the preparations and the execution of the
electoral calendar.
While the security situation in Haiti has remained
stable thanks to the crucial support of MINUSTAH,

15-07456

18/03/2015

The question concerning Haiti

the situation is quite complex, given the increase in
the protests, the deepening economic crisis, the lack
of basic services and the increasing political tensions
customary in election years.
Against that backdrop, Peru believes that the
drawdown of MINUSTAH’s military component,
which will be implemented in the coming weeks, may
affect MINUSTAH’s operational capacity to assist in
guaranteeing security and providing the technical and
logistical assistance needed to conduct the three rounds
of elections scheduled.
Peru reiterates its firm belief that decisions
regarding the future of MINUSTAH must be made
exclusively on the basis of the conditions on the
ground — the criterion on which the MINUSTAH
consolidation plan was designed.
While we recognize the progress made in the
professionalization and training of the Haitian National
Police, the Secretary-General’s report notes that that
institution does not yet have the capacity to maintain
public order and safeguard the security of the population
throughout the entire country. It therefore requires the
operational and strategic collaboration of MINUSTAH.
In that regard, we believe that MINUSTAH’s presence
in Haiti remains essential in working with the Haitian
authorities to maintain security and order as part of a
process of stabilizing and strengthening democracy in
the country.
My delegation has consistently maintained its
commitment to the principle of national ownership,
with the understanding that peace must be an inherently
national process, in which peacekeeping operations
support national authorities in setting out and
implementing their own stabilization and development
priorities. Peru therefore reaffirms its support for
the Haitian constitutional authorities in their task of
stabilizing Haiti, and asks the Council to take Haiti’s
position into account when taking decisions regarding
the timeline for transitioning the MINUSTAH mandate
and regarding the nature of the future United Nations
presence in the country. That position was expressed
most clearly by the Permanent Representative of Haiti
during this morning’s debate.
We join the call for the United Nations and the
international community to continue supporting
Haiti, while recalling that our assistance should be
comprehensive, given the interdependent nature of the
three pillars on which the work of the Organization

S/PV.7408

is based: upholding peace and security, attaining
sustainable development, and promoting and protecting
human rights.
In conclusion, my delegation reiterates that
MINUSTAH’s important achievements to date must not
lead us to believe that our work is done; it is far from
it. Experience has shown us the serious consequences
suffered in the past when the Organization decided to
withdraw its presence from the ground too early. My
country therefore wants MINUSTAH to successfully
complete the task it is carrying out so well in Haiti,
without haste or artificial deadlines.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in French): I
congratulate France on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council this month. We appreciate your
delegation’s intelligence and temperance — qualities
that are crucial for guiding the work of the Security
Council.
I would also like to express my warm congratulations
to all the peoples, including Haiti, who this week are
celebrating La semaine de la langue française et de la
Francophonie.
(spoke in Spanish)
I would like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Haiti, Ambassador Sandra
Honoré, for introducing the report (S/2015/157) of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and to recognize her
tireless work as Head of the Mission. Let me also
acknowledge in particular the valuable intervention
of the Permanent Representative of Haiti, Mr. Denis
Régis.
In September 2014, when the Security Council
considered the situation in Haiti, the prospect of
holding partial legislative and local elections seemed
hard to envision (see S/PV.7262). At that time we also
welcomed the fact that Haiti had taken decisive steps
towards the holding of such elections. Today we are
seeing the results of that. Haiti has taking decisive
steps towards holding elections thanks to the efforts,
dialogue and joint work of Haitian political actors and
the Haitian people. I want to underscore the decisive
participation of women’s groups in building greater
democracy, peace and security in Haiti.

15-0745631/38

S/PV.7408

The question concerning Haiti

With regard to the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2015/157), I would like to make two comments.
First, I reiterate the importance of the full
participation of the Haitian Government in taking
decisions regarding the presence of the United Nations
in its country. We believe that we must never overlook
the concerns of the Haitian Government and the Haitian
electoral authorities regarding the absence of troops in
six of the ten regions as a result of the implementation of
the Council’s decision to reduce the size of the military
contingent. Both have made public statements in that
regard and have requested MINUSTAH’s support in
logistics and security issues. In that regard, President
Martelly stated in his letter to the Secretary-General
of 9 March, which was cited by other colleagues, that
he would like the United Nations to put the process of
military withdrawal on hold and strengthen the police
capacity and MINUSTAH’s presence in the field.
Secondly, we are concerned about reports of a recent
increase in violence among armed gangs, which has
complicated the security situation in the country. As we
explained after the adoption of resolution 2180 (2014),
in our view security has not improved sufficiently to
draw down the MINUSTAH force strength so rapidly
and abruptly.
Together with other countries of our region in
September 2014 and during the negotiation of resolution
2180 (2014), Argentina emphasized the importance of
maintaining the mandate and configuration MINUSTAH
and to consider options for its reconfiguration only from
2015. We did so out of our concern to maintain stability
during the electoral process and the need to strengthen
the operational capabilities and resources of the Haitian
National Police, which is the force that ultimately will
be responsible for security after the withdrawal of the
international community.
In 2015, according to the electoral calendar, the
country will hold three rounds of elections, over a
period stretching almost six months. At the same time,
despite the significant progress made, the Haitian
National Police still lacks the resources to take full
responsibility for security, especially during the
elections. We therefore remain concerned about the
sudden and rapid reduction of the military contingent,
preventing the provision of the necessary logistics and
security support.
In particular, we are concerned that the military
component, after being reducing by 53 per cent, will

32/38

18/03/2015

no longer be able to carry out the important deterrence
and prevention tasks and patrols they have carried out
to date. Moreover, as the report acknowledges, the
force strength of the police component authorized by
the Security Council has not been reached, meaning
that the reduction will not necessarily be offset by
a strengthening of police capacity. We are further
concerned by the recent increase in violence that was
mentioned in the report, particularly given that the
drawdown of the military contingent is not yet complete.
Finally, I should like to make three short comments
on issues that, while not at the heart of the Council’s
agenda, have been mentioned in some statements.
With respect to the demonstrations and social
protests taking place, all of our countries — developed
and developing alike — have seen their people
protesting and demanding greater democracy, rights
and freedoms. However, that is not an indication that
international peace and security are at risk, or that a
given country is facing a critical situation. We must
ensure — to wit, MINUSTAH and the international
community — that the demonstrations, those legitimate
social protests taking place in all of our countries, take
place within a framework of law and democracy and the
absence of violence.
As to the second matter, references have been
made to prisons. I believe that the fact that more than
10 million people are incarcerated around the world is
an issue that one day will require serious consideration
in an appropriate body of the United Nations. The
numbers vary greatly by country, however, it bears
mentioning that some 40 or 50 per cent of them have
not been convicted. Should Haiti therefore be without
blame? No. I simply wish to note that Haiti is not the
only country dealing with the issue.
I would like to recognize the tremendous work
carried out by the international community in the camps
for internally displaced persons, nearly 300,000 of
whom were displaced by the earthquake. MINUSTAH
has experienced two major events in the past 10 years:
the catastrophic earthquake and the cholera outbreak.
As Ms. Honoré informed us today, of the nearly 300,000
internally displaced persons in 2012, about 70,000 to
80,000 remain in camps presently. Nevertheless, there
must be a focus on the living conditions in the camps.
Argentina, along with many other countries of
the region, has made significant efforts to support
the Haitian people and Government in their efforts to

15-07456

18/03/2015

The question concerning Haiti

S/PV.7408

bolster the democratic process, security, human rights
and economic and social development. That is why we
believe that the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti should remain in the country for as long as
necessary, to show that it is possisble to work with the
people and the Government of a country to achieve the
goals all of us need so much, namely, democracy, human
rights and peace. It is not about MINUSTAH’s presence
in perpetuity; it is about moving from assistance and
security to cooperation for development.

Canada welcomes the recent publication of the
electoral decree and calendar, and we strongly urge all
political stakeholders to continue to work collaboratively
to support all efforts towards fair, democratic and
inclusive elections. Canada has announced $8.7 million
in support of the elections through the United Nations
Development Program and the National Democratic
Institute. That contribution, along with those of our
partners, will complement the Government of Haiti’s
own election funding.

A leader of our time, who will speak for the first
time before the General Assembly in September, has
said that solidarity is a means of making history. It is
our hope that it is the path that the Council will choose
for the beloved people and the Government of Haiti.
May solidarity become a means of making history.

We recognize and appreciate the efforts of
MINUSTAH in providing electoral assistance and
logistical support for those elections, noting the
importance of strengthening the status and capacity of
Haitian institutions to take on an increasing role in the
future.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.

Canada continues to support the important work of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti. For
10 years, MINUSTAH has worked to improve security
conditions and contribute to lasting stability in Haiti.
Considerable progress has been made.

Mr. Bonser (Canada) (spoke in French): It has
been a tumultuous few months since we last convened
to discuss the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) (see S/PV.7262). A new Prime
Minister was named and a new Government sworn in.
Canada congratulates Mr. Evans Paul and his Cabinet
and wishes them success in achieving their objectives.
There are significant challenges ahead for Haiti and its
new Government, and Canada offers them its renewed
friendship and continued assistance.
Canada has shared a unique and multifaceted
partnership with Haiti for decades.
(spoke in English)
Since 2006, Canada has provided more than
$1.4 billion in development and humanitarian
assistance. Canada has worked on improvements in
a number of areas, including economic growth, food
security and governance — and, line with Canada’s
Group of Eight Muskoka Initiative, maternal, newborn
and child health. Those efforts have been designed
to complement and support the efforts and actions of
our partners, including the international and regional
bodies in Haiti.
Canada has long held the position that holding
elections is a necessary step towards advancing and
reinforcing democratic stability in Haiti. With the
recent shift to rule by decree, the Haitian people cannot
wait any longer. It is imperative that elections take
place in 2015.

Canada welcomes the recent Security Council
visit to Haiti, and in particular the concentrated review
process that has taken place with regard to the Mission’s
mandate. Canada maintains that the gradual reduction
of the United Nations footprint in Haiti must continue
to reflect the situation on the ground and the capacity
of the Haitian State to deliver security to its population.
We are pleased that support to the Haitian National
Police (HNP) remains strong. Indeed, the HNP has
demonstrated increasing capacity in recent months.
We commend both the Government of Haiti and the
Mission’s efforts towards those achievements. Canada
is proud to be among the top contributing nations in
terms of sending police trainers to Haiti, and we salute
our fellow Member States with whom we are working
in that effort, which must continue.
While MINUSTAH is not a permanent solution for
security in Haiti, we should avoid reduction scenarios
that could jeopardize the results achieved to date, and
take into account the role MINUSTAH should play in
contributing to stability and ensuring security during
significant national events, such as elections.
(spoke in French)
We want to ensure that MINUSTAH is the last
international mission to Haiti. We urge the Haitian
Government to continue to work and further build upon

15-0745633/38

S/PV.7408

The question concerning Haiti

it, prioritizing both the HNP and an independent and
strengthened judicial sector, thus ensuring that the
Haitian people can rely on the rule of law. Canada is
also pleased to see recent efforts by the Minister of
Justice to deal with the important issue of long-term
preventive detention.
Finally, I would like to assure the Council, but, more
importantly, the people of Haiti, of Canada’s ongoing
support and cooperation towards improving the lives of
Haitians —from economic growth to access to health
care to police training, among the many initiatives
Canada continues to work with Haiti for a more stable,
secure and prosperous future.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belize.
Ms. Young (Belize): On behalf of the Government
and the people of Belize, I thank the President and
the members of the Council for continuing to place
importance on the issues of Haiti’s stability, progress
and democracy.
Belize acknowledges the Council’s unanimous
adoption of resolution 2180 (2014) to extend the
mandate of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) for one year, albeit with a decision
to reduce the military component by half by July.
Belize also thanks the Secretary-General for his
report of 4 March (S/2015/157) on the extended mandate
and expresses thanks for the briefing (see S/PV.7372) on
the Council’s 23 to 25 January visiting mission to Haiti,
co-led by Ambassadors Samantha Power and Cristián
Barros Melet. I also thank Special Representative
Ms. Sandra Honoré for her briefing today.
The recent Security Council Mission to Haiti
was important to assure the Haitian people and their
Government that the international community is aware
of the difficulties they face and that we support bona
fide efforts to ensure that the Haitian people are able
to benefit from free, fair and inclusive elections.
With the tentative electoral calendar presented by the
provisional Council for three electoral rounds between
August and December 2015, Belize is of the view that
to keep the momentum going, another visiting mission
to Haiti should be arranged by the Security Council, to
take place at least by July of this year.
Belize recognizes that a key contributing factor in
the process of bolstering Haiti’s stability and security
has been the role played by MINUSTAH. Belize is

34/38

18/03/2015

also acutely aware of the serious costs associated with
sustaining the current military level beyond March
2015. The tremendous contribution made by all those
countries that supply military and police personnel is
invaluable.
Yet we are concerned and are of the view that the
reduction of MINUSTAH’s military component should
be re-examined, considering that, although the political
situation in Haiti has improved slightly, actual elections
are yet to take place. The elections will be complex,
involving presidential, legislative and municipal seats,
and mobilizing some 6.1 million voters. In addition to
President Martelly’s letter to the Secretary-General
dated 9 March, in an interview on Monday, 16 March,
with the Haitian-Caribbean News Network, the
Haitian Minister in charge of the elections within the
Government, Mr. Fritz Jean-Louis, said:
“The withdrawal of United Nations troops
from these regions [meaning six of the 10 electoral
regions] during the elections is a big concern,
not only for the Government, but also for several
countries and other partners supporting the
electoral process”.
He went on to say:
“It is true that we want to nationalize the
election process, so that the country and its people
may fully assume the responsibility of dealing with
all aspects of the organization of elections. But this
should be done in a way that allows us first to fill
the deficiencies”.
The re-examination should therefore take into
consideration whether a reduced military presence is
sufficient support for the Haitian National Police to be
able to carry out its functions of maintaining public
order and security, especially during the election
process itself. After all the efforts already made, it
would be a shame for the international community to
drop the ball at this stage.
Belize welcomes the launch on 11 March 2015, by
the United Nations, the Haitian Government and its
partners, of the transitional appeal programme for the
sum of $401 million, in an attempt to meet the acute
and urgent needs of Haiti in 2015 and 2016. It represents
a modest start: modest because it is earmarked to
address issues and structural deficiencies in Haiti,
manifested in displacement, the wanton spread of the
cholera epidemic following its introduction into Haiti,

15-07456

18/03/2015

The question concerning Haiti

food insecurity and malnutrition, and weak capacity
to recover from natural hazards and disasters. But it
is very appreciated and will work well, along with the
ongoing European Union financial assistance.
In conclusion, along with the international
community, Belize supports President Martelly’s
efforts to strengthen the democratic process in his
Caribbean Community nation of Haiti.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Antigua and Barbuda.
Mr. Webson (Antigua and Barbuda): I wish to
thank you, Mr. President, and your team for leading
this debate. I thank the Special Representative for her
very informative update and briefing this morning and
for her leadership, with the Université de la Fondation
Dr. Aristide, in the work in Haiti.
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf
of the 14 States members of the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM).
CARICOM believes that our active engagement
and concern for Haiti is not just a demonstration of our
solidarity towards a sister Caribbean nation, but also
a message as to the willingness and capacity of our
CARICOM community to live up to our international
responsibilities.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2015/157) provides
us with very incisive and useful information on the
progress of the efforts of the United Nations in bringing
lasting peace and stability to Haiti. CARICOM
commends the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) and the international community
for their continued efforts in stabilizing Haiti. At the
same time, CARICOM wishes to pay tribute to those
injured or killed in the line of duty.
CARICOM welcomes the recommendation of the
Secretary-General for the extension of the mandate of
MINUSTAH until 2016. We believe that stability and
economic development in Haiti is linked to the wider
development agenda of our subregion and to its stability
and opportunity for sustainable growth.
CARICOM welcomes the plans to encourage
investment, which will play a critical role in furthering
social and economic development opportunities for
Haiti. Nevertheless, we submit that international
assistance must be aligned with Haiti’s own national

S/PV.7408

development interests and plans. We believe that
national development must be grounded locally.
We remain optimistic that the forward momentum
achieved thus far will be sustained and that all parties
involved in the political process will aim to sustain such
progress as has been made, and also work together to
put in place the machinery for the next electoral cycle,
about which we have heard much this morning.
CARICOM notes with caution that this is the
third consecutive year of downsizing the Mission
in Haiti. We therefore emphasize the need for a
continued military presence on the ground in Haiti to
be maintained. The security of Haiti and its people is
paramount, particularly given the fact that at this time,
as the elections approach, the drawdown of military
resources introduces significant political challenges
and risks, particularly as we know and have heard about
the growth in the electorate in the country. It would
be unfortunate if the gaps created by this downsizing
compromised the gains that have been made thus far.
Nevertheless, we in CARICOM are encouraged by
the performance of the Haitian National Police. We are
pleased at the progress towards national security, for
which the police has taken increased responsibility. We
note, however, that the targets for the Haitian National
Police development plan fall short, and we recognize
the call made in the presentation this morning by the
Special Representative.
We are further encouraged by the reduction in the
levels of cholera, despite the spike about which we
heard earlier today. We therefore continue to encourage
international assistance in plugging the gaps in water
and health infrastructure and security that may have
been a cause of that increase.
While there have been a number of other positive
developments in Haiti — and we welcome the
continued development efforts for the Government
and the people of Haiti and the Framework for the
Coordination of External Aid, put in place by the Haitian
Government — CARICOM remains gravely concern
about the decline in international aid, especially in the
area rehabilitating services in Haiti. We join the call for
continued international aid to continue to support the
development effort to uphold the gains made to date.
Haiti continues to experience a political, social
and economic crisis; as such, the discussion at these
meetings should not be whether MINUSTAH should be

15-0745635/38

S/PV.7408

The question concerning Haiti

concluded or by how much it should be reduced, but
rather we should recognize the challenge presented and
uphold the mission to expand and continue MINUSTAH,
as we have heard in the appeal of the Government and
the people of Haiti.
CARICOM calls upon the international community
to convey by its action a message of confidence in
all Haitians. This is the time for us to reinforce our
readiness to lend ongoing support for Haiti’s continued
development. This is the time for us to lend international
collaboration and continued support for the work on the
ground.
In conclusion, CARICOM remains committed
to working together with other partners in the
international community in support of the agenda for
Haitian development and the agenda of the Haitian
Government and people.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uruguay.
Mrs. Carrión (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Group of Friends of
Haiti, which is made up of Argentina, Brazil, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, France, Guatemala, Peru, the United
States and my own country, Uruguay.
I would like to thank the President for organizing
this debate to discuss the latest report (S/2015/157) of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
The Group of Friends welcomes the presence of
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honoré, and wants to thank her for
her comprehensive briefing and for the hard work she
is doing.
The strengthening of the rule of law and democratic
institutions and the establishment of a political culture
conducive to democratic stability and the improvement
of socioeconomic conditions are key elements needed to
achieve greater security, stability and prosperity in Haiti.
In that regard, the Group of Friends expresses its
concern about the political situation in Haiti, the
continued postponement of the legislative, municipal
and local elections and the fact that on 12 January the
Parliament stopped functioning. The Group strongly
encourages all political actors in Haiti to expand their
dialogue and increase their cooperation with a view to
strengthening the country’s democracy. We reiterate
the importance of the holding of free and transparent

36/38

18/03/2015

presidential, legislative, municipal and local elections
in 2015.
The Group of Friends believes it is of the utmost
importance to adhere strictly to the electoral calendar,
to continue to take decisive steps towards adequately
preparing for the various rounds of elections, to allocate
adequate and sufficient resources for the holding of the
elections, and to ensure the integrity, inclusiveness and
transparency of the electoral process. In that regard,
the Group of Friends calls on MINUSTAH to fully
support, in accordance with Haiti’s national priorities,
the Haitian authorities in carrying out the electoral
process until its successful completion, which will be
an important step towards consolidating democracy in
the country.
The Group of Friends calls on all Haitian
stakeholders to engage constructively, while exercising
maximum restraint and working together peacefully
to maintain confidence in the electoral process. The
Group of Friends welcomes the efforts carried out by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
that regard.
The Group also welcomes the efforts of the Special
Representative to promote the continuation of dialogue
among all the national actors in order to strengthen
the ongoing political process and mitigate risk for
Haiti’s democratic institutions, as well as her efforts in
calling on the diplomatic and international community
to continue contributing in a coordinated manner to
promote political dialogue.
The Group of Friends welcomes the recent Security
Council mission to Haiti, which was carried out in
accordance with the terms of reference set out in tghe
annex to document S/2015/40, whose primary purpose
was to reaffirm the continued support of the Council
for the Government and the people of Haiti and to
highlight the importance of achieving an inclusive
and constructive atmosphere for political stability,
democratic governance and development. The mission
also called on all political actors to work together.
The Group of Friends recognizes that the security
situation is stable, but complex. The Group notes
the increase in the capacity of the Haitian National
Police, but believes that the presence of MINUSTAH,
including its military component, remains necessary
to ensure security in Haiti. In the light of Haiti’s
ongoing security challenges, including those related
to the upcoming elections, the Secretary-General

15-07456

18/03/2015

The question concerning Haiti

should closely monitor the situation on the ground and
recommend to the Security Council any changes with
regard to MINUSTAH’s mandate and force levels he
deems necessary.
The Group of Friends reiterates the importance
of the Haitian Government’s commitment to
strengthening the rule of law and to making further
progress in the judiciary and the security sectors. The
Group would like to acknowledge the progress made
in this area during the reporting period and the efforts
aimed at strengthening key institutions and improving
the capacity and increasing the professionalism of
the Haitian National Police, in accordance with the
2012-2016 development plan.
The Group of Friends acknowledges the progress
in the judicial sector. However, it is urgently necessary
to reduce prolonged pretrial detention and to eliminate
inhumane detention conditions, to ensure accountability
and put an end to impunity, including for past human
rights violations. The Group of Friends also urges the
Ministry of Justice to continue its efforts to address the
issue of prolonged pretrial detention.
In spite of the commitment shown by the Haitian
authorities in engaging with international human
rights mechanisms, the limited national capacity for
protecting human rights remains a concern, as does
the fact that the new Government no longer includes
a minister-delegate on human rights and on extreme
poverty. The Group of Friends welcomes the launching
of by the Haitian Government of the national policy on
equality between women and men.
The Group of Friends notes the continuing work
by the Government of Haiti, MINUSTAH and others
to protect vulnerable groups and urges all actors to
give priority attention to preventing and reducing
violent crime, particularly against women and children,
including rape and other forms of sexual violence. The
Group notes with concern the increase in the number
of reported rapes in comparison with the previous
reporting period, and encourages Haitian citizens to
continue reporting those crimes so that the perpetrators
may be brought to trial. In that regard, the Group also
supports continued efforts to reduce violence and
promote the well-being of at-risk youth and vulnerable
communities. The Group of Friends continues to
support the attention being paid to gender issues and
child protection.

S/PV.7408

The Group of Friends also expresses its concern
about persistent humanitarian challenges in Haiti,
including the living conditions in the remaining camps
for internally displaced persons. The Group of Friends
welcomes the significant progress made in 2014 in the
resettlement of those displaced by the 2010 earthquake.
The ongoing efforts to eradicate the cholera
epidemic remind us of the importance of sustained
cooperation between the international community and
the Government of Haiti in order to meet the needs of
the Haitian people. In that regard, the Group recalls the
United Nations’ two-year plan of short-term actions
launched in support of the 10-year national plan for the
elimination of cholera in Haiti. And it also supports
the efforts of the Senior Coordinator for the Cholera
Response in Haiti. Likewise, the Group of Friends
acknowledges the efforts of the donor community, and
calls on all donors to fulfil without delay the pledges
they have made. The Group of Friends hopes that the
interministerial task force will define an emergency
plan to address the increase in the number of cholera
cases in the last quarter of 2014. We look forward to a
coordinated response to solve the problem successfully.
The Group of Friends reiterates its commitment
to the United Nations zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse. In that regard, it reiterates its
expectation that all United Nations personnel will adhere
to the highest standards of conduct. The Group calls on
all actors involved to assume their responsibilities in
order to prevent such cases, to investigate allegations
and to hold those responsible accountable.
The Group notes with concern that the International
Monetary Fund has reported that a reduction in
international cooperation could significantly jeopardize
growth in Haiti. The Group is also concerned about
the alarming levels and persistence of food insecurity
in the country. It is also concerned about the limited
capacity of the State to generate revenue, which has
greatly affected the public budget.
The Group stresses that there can be no genuine
stability or sustainable development in Haiti without
strengthening democratic institutions and ensuring that
democratic processes are credible. In that regard, the
Group emphasizes the importance of promoting the rule
of law by strengthening Haitian institutions, and further
reaffirms MINUSTAH’s responsibility to support
the Haitian State by working towards improving the
structures of governance, extending State authority and

15-0745637/38

S/PV.7408

The question concerning Haiti

promoting and protecting human rights in accordance
with its mandate.
Finally, the Group of Friends reaffirms its solidarity
with and commitment to the people and Government
of Haiti as they pursue stability, reconstruction,
recovery, socioeconomic development and democratic
consolidation. The Group of Friends of Haiti
acknowledges the important role of MINUSTAH in
ensuring stability and security in Haiti, and expresses
its support for and gratitude to, the women and men of
MINUSTAH for their dedication and tireless efforts to
support recovery and stability in the country.
The President (spoke in French): I now once again
give the floor to Ms. Honoré.
Ms. Honoré: I thank the President and all members
of the Security Council for the observations that have
been made and the recommendations that have been put
forward with a view to bolstering the work of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
in support of the full development of Haiti’s electoral
management capacity, the professionalization of the
Haitian National Police, the strengthening of the rule

38/38

18/03/2015

of law, the promotion and protection of human rights
and the role of good offices. I would like to also extend
my thanks to all the other Member States, including
the Republic of Haiti, as well as the multilateral
organizations that have commented on the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2015/157) that was the object of
consideration by the Council at this meeting.
On behalf of all Mission personnel — military,
police and civilians, both international and Haitian,
as well as United Nations Volunteers — I also wish
to express deep appreciation for the many statements
of encouragement for the work of MINUSTAH as we
pursue our efforts with the Government of Haiti and
its international partners, as well as the United Nations
country team, in support of and in service to the people
of Haiti.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Honoré for her additional comments.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers.
The meeting rose at 2.15 p.m.

15-07456
