S/2019/198

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 March 2019
Original: English

United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2410
(2018), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) until 15 April 2019, requested me to
report to the Council every 90 days on the implementation of the resolution, and
requested me to conduct a strategic assessment mission to Haiti and present to the
Council recommendations on the future United Nations role, including any
recommendations for drawdown and exit. The report covers significant developments
that have occurred since the issuance of my previous report (S/2018/1059), progress
on the benchmarked exit strategy, an update on the transfer of tasks and
responsibilities to the Government, and the recommendations of the strategic
assessment mission.

II. Significant developments
A.

Political situation and related security developments
2.
The reporting period was marked by an initial return to relative calm. Simmering
political tensions grew as worsening economic conditions and demand s for the
Government to address corruption continued to feature prominently in the public
arena. Fuel shortages and further depreciation of the Haitian gourde caused no major
demonstrations in December and January and gang activity subsided ahead of the
holiday season. However, early in February the population responded to calls from
the opposition to march in the streets to demand better governance and to call for the
President to resign.
3.
In an effort to lower tensions, three days after the demonstrations of
18 November 2018, President Jovenel Moïse invited all sectors of society to
participate in an inclusive national dialogue led by the Prime Minister, Jean -Henry
Céant. A forum to review a proposed national pact of governability, suggesting a
series of possible reforms in areas such as governance, development, the rule of law
and security, was held in Port-au-Prince on 22 January 2019. The document also
included a proposal for increasing participation by opposition parties and civil society
in government and purported to serve as a basis for resolving the current political
crisis. However, it was criticized for lack of inclusiveness and transparency in its

19-03182 (E)

050319

*1903182*

S/2019/198

development and failed to garner buy-in from interlocutors across the political
spectrum.
4.
On 14 January, the National Assembly opened the first regular session of the
legislative year against a backdrop of citizen protests against parliamentary
performance during the 2018 legislative year, during which fewer than half of
scheduled sessions were held and only seven laws were adopted. In his annual state
of the nation address, President Moïse focused on the political, economic, social and
security challenges that lay ahead. He committed to promoting fair, credible,
democratic and transparent elections and urged lawmakers to adopt the electoral law
and the 2018/19 budget, to allow for elections.
5.
Popular demand for accountability in the alleged mismanagement of
PetroCaribe funds continued unabated. From 20 to 22 December 2018, and on
31 December 2018 and 1 January 2019, small demonstrations were organized in front
of the Superior Court of Audits and Administrative Disputes. In January 2019,
citizens who had filed private criminal complaints against government officials and
private companies awarded contracts under the PetroCaribe fund demonstrated
against the lack of progress in the investigation. In an attempt to recover a portion of
allegedly embezzled funds, the Government announced that it was preparing civil
complaints against those suspected of mismanagement. As a result of the publication
on 31 January of the report of the Court, which sheds light on the misuse of funds and
the abuse of processes, government officials indicated that criminal charges may be
filed against those suspected of mismanagement. A final report of the Court is
expected in April, while criminal complaints investigated by judges may take several
years to be completed, potentially stoking popular frustration.
6.
Following the declaration by the Government of a state of economic emergency
on 5 February, large-scale demonstrations were held in major cities across the country
starting on 7 February, coinciding with the second anniversary of President Moïse ’s
tenure and the thirty-third year since the ouster of former President Jean Claude
Duvalier; they resulted in the postponement of the formal launch of the national
dialogue by President Moïse. Protesters across the country’s urban centres,
expressing their discontent over the increased cost of living, called for the President ’s
resignation, vandalized public and private property, used firearms, erected roadblocks
and disrupted economic activity in the country’s major urban centres. The
disturbances affected trade and markets, and had a severe impact in the income generation activities of the population, in particular women-headed households that
depend on market-based jobs. By 19 February, MINUJUSTH was able to confirm that
34 people had been killed, including one minor and three women, 102 were injured,
including 23 officers of the Haitian national police, and 82 people had been arrested
in relation to the unrest. The national police maintained a visible and continuous
presence throughout the protest, patrolling, controlling crowds and removing
barricades to keep main access roads open. The perpetuation of the situation prompted
the Core Group to call for an inclusive and comprehensive dialogue to be held, while
effective economic reforms are carried out, in order for Haiti to emerge from the
crisis. In addition, the Caribbean Community, the Haitian Chamber of Commerce and
Industry and the Bishop Conference of the Catholic Church called for calm and urged
all actors to find a solution to prevent a further deterioration of the situation. By
17 February, the intensity of the demonstration had receded, although major roads
remained blocked and calls for new demonstrations continued to circulate.
7.
On the eighth day of the demonstrations, President Moïse delivered a speech to
the nation expressing understanding for the Haitian people ’s grievances, assessing
that the situation in the country had worsened since the first protests in July and
condemning the violence and the resulting loss of life. The President announced that
specific measures to address the economic crisis would be presented by the Prime
2/31

19-03182

S/2019/198

Minister. On 16 February, the Prime Minister, deploring the negative impact the
violent demonstrations were having on the economy and the provision of services to
the population, identified corruption, economic inequality and bad governance a s
serious challenges facing the country. Stressing that dialogue was the only way out of
the crisis, he promised to tackle corruption, act on the PetroCaribe case, reduce
government expenditure, and promote a number of economic measures to provide
relief to a population facing serious economic hardship.

B.

Humanitarian situation
8.
The country continues to face a lingering migration crisis characterized by
voluntary and, often, forced repatriation of its citizens and individuals of Haitian
origin from neighbouring countries and other countries in the Americas and the
Caribbean region. In order to mitigate statelessness, the Government continues to
work with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on a
reform of the civil registry to facilitate access to identity documents for Haitians
living abroad and in remote areas of the country, in line with its accession to the 1954
Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons and ratification of the 1961
Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness in the last quarter.
9.
The integrated food security phase classification conducted in October and
December 2018 for the whole country identified 5.5 per cent of the surveyed
population in the emergency phase and 27 per cent in the cri sis phase of food
insecurity. 1 A total of 2.26 million people were classified as food insecure and in need
of humanitarian food assistance. Food insecurity in the country has been exacerbated
by the closure of main road arteries as a result of the February demonstrations,
creating difficulties in the delivery of basic foodstuffs. The provision of other basic
services, such as health care, including sexual and reproductive services, water and
sanitation, has also been affected. The United Nations continues t o work closely with
the Haitian authorities to assess the humanitarian situation in the country and the
needs of the most vulnerable within the population.
10. Substantial progress continued to be registered in the fight against cholera. From
January to the end of December 2018, the Ministry of Public Health and Population
reported 3,794 suspected cholera cases (compared to 13,681 in 2017) and 43 related
deaths (compared to 146 in 2017). Compared to the number of weekly cases at the
inception of the epidemic, the weekly caseload of suspected cases has been reduced
by 99 per cent. The elimination of the transmission now seems within reach, provided
funding for cholera response is secured and global control efforts maintained. In that
regard, the Central Emergency Response Fund recently allotted $5 million to support
cholera response in Haiti throughout 2019.
11. Work on the Development Impact Bond to support track 1A of the new United
Nations approach to cholera saw significant progress. A feasibility study w as
undertaken with financial assistance from the United States Agency for International
Development, and work began on developing a potential model for a bond targeting
$25 million to contribute to cholera elimination. The model proposes a blended
finance approach by which traditional financing will continue to cover surveillance,
rapid response, medical care and coordination interventions in 2019, while the
proposed impact bonds would tentatively finance unfunded activities from 2020 to
2022.

__________________
1

19-03182

Integrated Food Security Phase Classification, “Analysis of acute food insecurity in Haiti,
October 2018–June 2019” (19 December 2018); available at www.ipcinfo.org/fileadmin/user_
upload/ipcinfo/docs/IPC_Haiti_AFI_2018Oct2019Feb.pdf.
3/31

S/2019/198

12. In the aftermath of the earthquake of 6 October 2018, the Central Emergency
Response Fund’s rapid response window granted $3,157,660 to Haiti to address
urgent humanitarian needs in education, water, sanitation and hygiene in schools, and
sexual and reproductive health needs for women and girls, including gender-based
violence survivors; it will also facilitate the provision of shelter and non -food
assistance in the North-West Department, benefiting an estimated population of
45,000 for a period of four months.
13. The 2018 humanitarian response plan, targeting 2.2 million Haitians in
vulnerable situations, had mobilized $32.4 million of the $252.2 million requested
(13 per cent) as at 11 January 2019. Additional funding for humanitarian activities
was received outside of the plan, for a total of $47.4 million. The 2019 humanitarian
needs overview and the plan for 2019–2020 have been finalized and will be published
by 22 February.

III. Mandate implementation
A.

Community violence reduction (benchmark 6)
14. Addressing gang violence and building stronger links with communities
affected by violent crime is a growing priority for the Government of Haiti. The
MINUJUSTH community violence reduction programme is mitigating violence in
“hotspots” in the Port-au-Prince metropolitan area. Projects are focused on promoting
dialogue in fragile neighbourhoods affected by chronic lack of socioeconomic
opportunities and limited access to basic services, including the police and justice
systems. Marginalized and at-risk women, men and youth received vocational training
and opportunities to generate income through the distribution of kits, small business
incubation and labour-intensive waste management initiatives. Since July 2018 a total
of 3,894 women and 2,685 men have participated in activities such as football
tournaments, capacity-building for community leaders, driving lessons, cultural
festivals, neighbourhood-based dialogue to promote peace, and support for children
to attend school.
15. In addition, five community violence reduction projects are ongoing in
Cap-Haïtien (North Department), Mahotière (North-West Department), Hinche
(Centre Department) and Port-au-Prince (La Saline, Bel-Air, Carrefour-Feuilles and
Martissant). They offer vocational training, professional r einsertion and labourintensive activities also as part of violence prevention efforts for 904 young women
and 896 young men at risk of being recruited by gangs or exploited to trigger violent
public protests.
16. MINUJUSTH has so far supported 40 conferences and town hall debates on the
rule of law throughout the country, attracting 5,840 participants, including
2,335 women. Within the same framework, a new series of countrywide debates,
round tables and core-group discussions were organized to build trust, de-escalate
existing conflicts, open spaces for dialogue and promote the rule of law, targeting
communities prone to violence and gang activity.
17. The United Nations Gender Thematic Working Group facilitated a discussion
on the draft law on violence against women. The text, which has been endorsed by
the Ministry of Women’s Affairs and Women’s Rights and the only female senator in
Haiti, Dieudonne Luma Etienne, was circulated to 26 civil society organizations and
women’s groups to ensure an inclusive approach and broad participation.

4/31

19-03182

S/2019/198

B.

Security and police development (benchmarks 1, 4, 5 and 6)
18. The Haitian national police have been increasingly self-sufficient in providing
security across the country. The positive performance demonstrated during the recent
protests is an indication of the force’s increased capacity and ability to maintain order
across the country. However, since December, 38 of 205 demonstrations required
mobilization of internal resources beyond the normal operational capacity of police
public order units. In addition, to address the rise in criminal gang activity in the third
quarter of 2018, the national police developed a strategy of targeted interventions in
the Port-au-Prince neighbourhoods of Village de Dieu, La Saline and, more recently,
Savanne Pistache. As a result, 4 of 12 larger operations were conducted by the
national police with limited support from MINUJUSTH. The national police have also
taken over full operational responsibility in the Grand ’Anse Department and have
increased their capacity over the West Department following the departure of two
formed police units during the current period, thus becoming autonomous in 6 of the
10 departments of Haiti, where crowd control units operate without MINUJUSTH
support.
19. During a meeting of the steering committee for the national police strategic
development plan held in January, donors were informed that 96 of 133 priority
actions were under way. However, the draft 2019/20 budget law, providing for a
6.24 per cent allocation to the national police of the overall State budget, will not
allow for sustained momentum in implementation.
20. Through an audit conducted by the Superior Court of Audits and Administrative
Disputes, the Director-General of the national police removed a number of inactive
officers from the payroll, lowering the operational number to 15,051, including nearly
10 per cent women, with a police officer to population ratio of 1.32 per 1, 000
inhabitants. The number of police personnel deployed to the dep artments increased
to 35 per cent of the overall police force. Meanwhile, recruitment efforts continue,
and 671 cadets, including 142 women, are in the seven-month training programme as
part of the thirtieth national police promotion. MINUJUSTH and the Uni ted Nations
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN -Women) have been
working with the police school to develop strategies to increase the number of female
candidates. The numbers of women among the ranks still need to rise, both for
effectiveness generally, for security sector reform, and for the impact that will have
on appropriately addressing gender-based violence crimes.
21. In January, the national police rolled out an officer appraisal system, piloted in
2018. The new performance evaluations will become part of a merit-based promotion
system. MINUJUSTH funded a 15-day training on internal audit for the General
Inspectorate of the national police and its Finance and Accounting Directorate, to
consolidate mechanisms to combat corruption and embezzlement. In order to
decentralize its oversight functions beyond Port-au-Prince, the General Inspectorate
drafted a proposal for a pilot project to be launched in one of the four departments
where this programme will eventually operate.
22. The regional mentoring and advisory programme for senior police managers is
being revised to better meet needs in the light of the forthcoming transition of the
United Nations presence. The new model makes the transfer of managerial skills and
competencies sustainable and to the benefit not only of senior management but also
of mid-level personnel and supervisors.
23. The police component of MINUJUSTH continued to conduct training on sexual
and gender-based violence for actors of the judicial chain in order t o build a common
understanding on victims’ care and to share best practices. The community violence
reduction project of mobilization against sexual and gender-based violence,

19-03182

5/31

S/2019/198

benefiting 11,864 people, including 7,635 women, through sensitization workshops
in the Artibonite, Grand’Anse and South departments was completed. An ad hoc task
force was established in each department to bring together State and non -State
representatives involved in the judicial processing of cases of sexual and gender based violence and to identify bottlenecks and possible solutions.

C.

Justice and the rule of law (benchmarks 1, 2 and 5)
24. President Moïse appointed judges for 10-year terms to the six seats which had
been vacant at the Supreme Court since December 2015, incl uding the President of
the Court and of the Superior Council of the Judiciary. None of the three women
candidates proposed by the Senate was appointed, resulting in only one woman in the
12-judge Court.
25. Following the dismissal and replacement of the Port-au-Prince prosecutor on
17 December, the two-month strike by lawyers of the Port-au-Prince Bar Association
was finally resolved, and judicial activities resumed. During the penal hearings held
at the end of December following the two-month hiatus, 15 detainees were assisted
by legal aid offices of Port-au-Prince through the MINUJUSTH community violence
reduction programme, 11 of whom were released.
26. From October 2017 to December 2018, prosecutors in the Port -au-Prince
jurisdiction received 1,369 penal cases. In 595 cases (43 per cent), the prosecution
decided either to bring charges or to close the case the same day. In 41.5 per cent of
those cases, charges were dropped. During the same period, the 22 investigating
judges closed 442 files, an average of 1.3 case per investigating judge per month. As
at 31 December, the proportion of detainees in pretrial detention for more than two
years at the Port-au-Prince national penitentiary was 65 per cent, compared with
63.6 per cent during the previous reporting period.
27. As part of ongoing efforts to reduce the rate of pretrial detention, MINUJUSTH
participated in the activities of the ministerial committee which prepared a new action
plan to address prolonged pretrial detention, launched on 18 January by t he Minister
of Justice and Public Security. At a meeting on 11 January, the dean and public
prosecutor of the court of first instance of Port-au-Prince, and the president of the bar
association, adopted a series of measures to promote an increase in the nu mber of
hearings at the court, including the mobilization of administrative and judicial staff,
and the full operationalization of the courtrooms; they included measures to maintain
court records and to ensure that detainees arrive on time for trials. Simu ltaneously,
MINUJUSTH, in coordination with UN-Women, carried out activities to offer legal
assistance services to 217 women, in the country’s only women’s prison, expediting
the judicial process and resulting in the release of 12 women. As part of the
MINUJUSTH-supported legal aid project which targets minors in conflict with the
law, on 14 January, the Port-au-Prince prosecutor ordered the release of 33 minors
from pretrial detention, 6 of whom were released while efforts are under way to locate
the parents of the remaining 27.
28. Following the promulgation of the law on legal aid, MINUJUSTH, through the
United Nations joint rule of law programme, supported the Ministry of Justice and
Public Security in its dissemination. Three workshops were held in Hinc he (Centre
Department), Les Cayes (South Department) and Port-au-Prince, reaching
200 participants including 34 women, to raise awareness and promote the law among
penal chain actors.
29. In parallel, three outreach projects, supported by the community vio lence
reduction programme and implemented with local partners, involved the population
in creating momentum and political will for the executive and the legislative branches

6/31

19-03182

S/2019/198

of the Government to promulgate legislation that improves access to justice and
security, prioritizing women’s access and enhanced representation. The projects
mobilized popular support for the adoption of the draft criminal code and the draft
code of criminal procedure, which, if implemented, will significantly address
weaknesses in the justice system, protect human rights and improve people ’s access
to justice.
30. On 6 December, UNICEF met representatives of the Prime Minister ’s Office
and the Institute for Social Welfare and Research to highlight the importance of a
child protection code and request their support in advocating for a vote and the
adoption by Parliament of the draft law that it received in 2014. The code promotes
justice for children by raising the age of criminal accountability from 16 to 18 years,
sets limits for the detention of children, and provides alternatives to detention in line
with the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
31. As part of an effort to promote judicial inspections, MINUJUSTH, through the
joint rule of law programme, handed over two vehicles, office furniture and computer
equipment to improve working conditions at the Ministry of Justice, the Superior
Council of the Judiciary’s judicial inspectorates and the joint vetting commission.
This donation will facilitate inspections of the 18 courts of first instance and 5 courts
of appeal throughout the country. The programme also supported the first inspection
tour in the jurisdiction of Croix des Bouquets (West Department), including the
prosecutor’s office, the clerk’s office, the prison, and four local courts.

D.

Corrections (benchmarks 1, 3 and 5)
32. As at 25 January, the prison population, comprising 11,684 detainees, including
412 women, 279 boys and 16 girls, remained almost unchanged compared to the
11,755 detainees recorded during the previous reporting period. The occupancy rate
of Haitian prisons stands at 360 per cent, based on a national goal of 2.5 m 2 per
detainee. Extreme overcrowding and poor hygiene conditions in most facilities
continue to contribute to health problems, which are compounded by irregular food
deliveries and a shortage of medical staff and medication. The death rate has increased
from 11.8 to 14 per 1,000 inmates, the leading causes of death among detainees being
tuberculosis, malnutrition and cardiovascular diseases. Regular payment of food
suppliers remains a chronic challenge. Increased financial and administrative
autonomy for the prison administration could alleviate these recurring issues. In order
to improve health services in the prisons, MINUJUSTH supported a n evaluation of
prison health services to define a remedial strategy. In addition, MINUJUSTH
continued to encourage partnerships with the Ministry of Public Health and
Population, the World Health Organization and the non-governmental organization
Health through Walls.
33. At a meeting on 3 December, MINUJUSTH reiterated to the Director-General
of the national police the importance of progressing on the draft prison law and the
organic law elevating the Directorate of Prison Administration to a central directorate
within the national police, thereby strengthening and formalizing its scope of
responsibilities and ensuring more effective action in related areas. These two draft
laws have not yet been submitted to the Ministry of Justice and Public Security an d
are being revised by the national police. Pending their promulgation, MINUJUSTH
continued to reinforce the administrative, managerial and operational capacities of
the Directorate through co-locations at headquarters and prisons.
34. The Prison Administration continues to welcome new police academy graduates
to its ranks. The specialized training programme for candidates to be posted into the
prison service ended with the graduation of 50 men and 7 women from the

19-03182

7/31

S/2019/198

twenty-ninth police promotion. The total number of prison officers nationwide
increased to 1,238, including 161 women. This brings the prison officer to prisoner
ratio to 1:9.45, far from the Prison Administration’s goal of 1:5. In order to increase
the number of dedicated prison officers, the Director-General of the police agreed on
a targeted recruitment and training strategy for the Prison Administration to properly
address the critical needs of 880 pending staff and reduce the high rate of attrition.
MINUJUSTH supported the Prison Administration in the evaluation of 288 uniformed
staff, including 63 women, in five prisons, carried out with the human resources
performance appraisal tool.
35. The Directorate of Prison Administration carried out the first round of prison
evaluations in December 2018, using the recently defined certification criteria, with
MINUJUSTH technical and logistical support. The results will guide the Prison
Administration in ensuring that prisons in Haiti meet the new standards.

E.

Human rights (benchmarks 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9)
36. With the support of MINUJUSTH, the Inter-Ministerial Committee on Human
Rights began work on the development of a national action plan on human rights
pursuant to the recommendation of the Human Rights Council of April 2 017. This
will allow Haitian authorities to tackle the structural deficiencies while also
positioning them to address recommendations issued by the United Nations human
rights mechanisms, thereby ensuring that indicator 9.1 of the MINUJUSTH
benchmarked exit strategy is eventually met.
37. MINUJUSTH continues to investigate allegations of human rights violations
reportedly committed by the national police, including during the demonstrations in
October and November 2018 (see S/2018/1059, paras. 3–6) and during the more
recent protests in February 2019. According to MINUJUSTH findings, during the
demonstrations of 17 October police officers were responsible for 57 human rights
violations, including three summary executions and 47 cases of excessive use of
force, resulting in the death of three protesters and injuries to 44 others. Of
72 casualties recorded from 18 to 23 November, 51 were attributable to armed
elements not belonging to the police forces and 21, including six deaths, allegedly
resulted from excessive use of force by police officers. The General Inspectorate of
the police opened multiple investigations, and a number of judicial investigations
have also been launched. Although the violations attributable to the national police
are of great concern, I am encouraged by the prompt response of the national
authorities.
38. In November, confrontations between rival gangs in La Saline neighbourhood
of Port-au-Prince resulted in the killing of several individuals. Local civil so ciety
organizations released public reports on the findings of their investigations into the
crimes. According to those reports, between 25 and 71 people were killed by members
of a criminal gang, up to 11 women and girls were raped, and up to 150 houses w ere
looted. While these organizations attribute the responsibility for the crimes
predominantly to criminal gangs competing for control over the local market, it is
troubling that they all allege some level of complicity with State actors. Two police
officers already under investigation, including one in relation to the Grand Ravine
case of November 2017 when eight persons were killed during a police operation,
also allegedly participated in the incident in La Saline.
39. In December, 35 victims filed a complaint before the Port-au-Prince court of
first instance against nine persons for murder, sexual violence and destruction of
property in connection with the events in La Saline. On 16 January, the Office of the
National Human Rights Ombudsperson released a report on the events, its first public

8/31

19-03182

S/2019/198

report on a major incident, in which it highlighted the positive actions taken by the
national police and the judicial system, including the intervention of the police to
secure the area, the opening of a police investigation, the appointment of a judge and,
subsequently, the conducting of interviews and the sending of officials to take
statements. The ensuing investigation resulted in the arrest of 19 individuals. In
parallel, MINUJUSTH continues its own investigation of the events.
40. While MINUJUSTH notes a general improvement in the capacity of the General
Inspectorate of the national police, it should be noted that it has investigated less than
half of the 229 violations documented by the Mission from October 20 17 to October
2018. During the reporting period, 105 disciplinary cases were reported to the General
Inspectorate, including 55 allegations of human rights violations. The Inspectorate
recommended sanctions in 21 cases, 11 of which were implemented. Only s ix
allegations of human rights violations have been transferred for judicial proceedings.
Of the 216 cases investigated by the Inspectorate from January 2017 to November
2018, 30 were transferred for prosecution and proceedings were initiated in 20 cases.
The violations that await effective judicial investigation include the emblematic cases
of Lilavois and Grand Ravine in October and November 2017 (see S/2018/241,
paras. 34 and 35).
41. On 10 December, in the presence of President Moïse, national authorities, local
civil society organizations and international partners, MINUJUSTH celebrated the
seventieth anniversary of the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
In his speech, the President reaffirmed his commitment to the respect of human rights
and reiterated his determination to improve the living conditions of Haitians.

F.

Election preparations (benchmark 11)
42. An electoral needs assessment mission, deployed to Haiti from 3 to 7 Dece mber
2018, recommended a positive response to the request by the Government for
electoral support, to be delivered through an integrated project led by the United
Nations Development Programme under a “One United Nations” approach, until
31 December 2020. It also recommended that my Special Representative establish a
mechanism in the international community to coordinate messaging and approach and
that a United Nations electoral task force be set up within the office of my Special
Representative, including the Deputy Special Representative in his role as head of the
United Nations country team. The Government has included an amount of
approximately $40 million in its 2018/19 draft budget law to address operational costs
in 2019.
43. While little action has been taken to review the draft organic law on a permanent
electoral council, a draft law covering several aspects of the organization of elections
is currently being reviewed by Parliament. The draft law incorporates a 30 per cent
constitutional quota for women candidates on party lists, as well as incentives and
sanctions for not meeting this standard. In supporting the effort to enhance women ’s
participation, UN-Women has developed a partnership with the Federation of Women
Mayors to tackle issues faced by women running for political office.

IV. Mission support
44. Mission support repatriated two formed police units, one in December 2018 and
one in January 2019. A third was redeployed from Jérémie (Grand ’Anse) to
Miragoâne (Nippes).

19-03182

9/31

S/2019/198

45. The Mission is further reducing its footprint by closing three camps by March
2019. In anticipation of the closure of Delta camp and the relocation of United
Nations police headquarters to the Log Base, Mission support completed the
construction of the United Nations police headquarters at the Log Base and the
renovation of the former aviation camp to accommodate United Nations police
personnel.
46. Since July 2018, the Mission has implemented a series of rightsizing activities
geared towards achieving management of a lean supply chain. In championing
inventory rightsizing activities, it has also implemented the asset distribution project,
an innovative approach which pairs mission surplus with substantive programme and
police projects, making efficient use of excess assets, while also having a positive
impact on mandate delivery.

V. Conduct and discipline and related issues
47. There have been no new allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse since the
previous reporting period. MINUJUSTH continued to implement the three-pronged
conduct and discipline strategy for all categories of United Nations personnel,
including training, risk assessment and public information, to sensitize the Haitian
population to United Nations standards of conduct, in particular the zero -tolerance
policy towards sexual exploitation and abuse. As part of the remedial action, the
Mission maintained continuous communication and referral for assistance of the
victims of sexual exploitation and abuse. A number of claims remain pending before
local courts, involving both confirmed and alleged mothers of children fathered by
peacekeepers of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
These are being addressed in consultation with the claimants, the host authorities, and
the contributing countries concerned. A strategy is being developed to ensure
continued monitoring of these cases, as well as support as applicable to the claimants
in Haiti, notwithstanding the possible transition to a non-peacekeeping presence.

VI. Financial aspects
48. The General Assembly, by its resolution 72/260 B, appropriated the amount of
$121.5 million gross for the maintenance of the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019. As at 8 February
2019, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special Account for the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti amounted to $54.9 million. Reimbursement of
police costs has been made for the period up to 31 October 2018, while reimbursement
of the costs of contingent-owned equipment has been made for the period up to
31 March 2018.

VII. Strategic assessment and transition planning
49. In response to the request of the Security Council in its resolution 2410 (2018),
the United Nations Secretariat, in cooperation with United Nations agencies, funds
and programmes present in the country, undertook a thorough and inclusive strategic
assessment of the situation in Haiti with a view to recommending the appropriate
timing for closing MINUJUSTH and ending peacekeeping; identifying areas where
continued United Nations support would best contribute to sustaining peace and the
path of Haiti towards sustainable development; and on that basis recommending an
appropriate United Nations configuration in the country following the end of
MINUJUSTH.
10/31

19-03182

S/2019/198

50. The assessment process was conducted over a period of five months through
joint analysis and planning and close coordination between Headquarters and the
United Nations system in the field, resulting in a unified vision that included a
regional perspective on the situation in the country and its ongoing challenges as well
as a detailed analysis of the comparative advantages of the engagement by United
Nations and non-United Nations partners. Consultations held throughout the process
with Haitian interlocutors, regional partners, key bilateral donors and international
financial institutions, together with the Mission’s assessments of progress in the
achievement of the benchmarks and the results of ongoing planning to increase the
preparedness of the United Nations country team, informed the findings and
recommendations contained in this report.
51. The United Nations Development Assistance Framework for 2017–2021
continues to serve as the main planning vehicle for coordinating the work of the
Mission and the United Nations country team in preparing for a smooth transition to
a non-peacekeeping presence in Haiti. The transition programming task force that
brings together the Mission leadership and the United Nations country team supported
the development of a new joint work plan on governance and the rule of law
(Framework outcome 5) for 2019–2020, which bridges the transition period. The
work plan includes the identification of resources currently available to the country
team and potential gaps following the withdrawal of MINUJUSTH, including national
police development, penitentiary administration, justice reform, r eduction of
community violence, implementation of a comprehensive human rights agenda,
gender justice and the implementation of a national plan for the elimination of
violence against women.
52. In parallel, a joint resource mobilization strategy was finalized by the country
team, in collaboration with MINUJUSTH and Headquarters, to support the
implementation of strategic priorities, while also taking into account requirements
arising from the transition to a non-peacekeeping presence and the new United
Nations approach to cholera. An action plan developed to operationalize aspects of
the joint resource mobilization strategy mapped the support provided by other
stakeholders and prepared concept notes to support engagement with national
authorities, traditional and non-traditional donors, civil society and other partners.
53. The process culminated in a strategic assessment mission to Haiti from 16 to
20 January 2019, led by the Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations,
Jean-Pierre Lacroix, and the Assistant Secretary-General for Europe, Central Asia and
the Americas, Miroslav Jenča. The visit, which built on extensive consultations led
by my Special Representative, Helen La Lime, focused on consultations with the
Haitian Presidency, the Government, stakeholders representing diverse political
affiliations, institutional sectors, civil society, the private sector, and human rights
and women’s organizations. The consultations ensured that the findings and
recommendations of the strategic assessment would be primarily anchored on the
Haitian people’s vision for their country.

VIII. Findings: achievements and challenges
54. Since the closure of MINUSTAH and the deployment of MINUJUSTH, Haiti
has remained on a positive trajectory. The cumulative impact of 14 years of national
efforts towards stabilization and reform, accompanied by United Nations support
through peacekeeping, as well as development and humanitarian support, is visible in
the democratic functioning and institutional strengthening, albeit to va rying degrees.
A number of current initiatives for dialogue taken by the executive branch

19-03182

11/31

S/2019/198

demonstrate a willingness to address complex political and socioeconomic issues to
improve social cohesion and the daily lives of the Haitian people.
55. The work of MINUJUSTH in the past year sought to help Haiti to address
structural and operational shortcomings in the areas of police development, human
rights, justice, corrections and strengthening institutional responses to promote public
trust in those sectors. As reflected in the benchmark assessment contained in my
reports, there has been incremental progress across the areas of the MINUJUSTH
mandate, with an improvement in the professionalism and efficiency of rule of law
and security institutions, and in the protection of human rights. In parallel, public
awareness and support for rule of law reform, accountable institutions and curbing
corruption has grown.
56. In no other sector has headway been so evident as in security and national police
development, continuing the trend observed since the full withdrawal of peacekeeping
military contingents, which was completed in October 2017. The important strides in
increasing police capacities are reflected in the force ’s current strength of
15,051 officers, up from an initial 2,500 recorded in 2004; its handling of major
security incidents; its significantly strengthened leadership capacities; along with the
its ability to independently conduct crime prevention operations and manage public
protests across the country. The steadily decreasing criminal activity reported year by
year is a concrete indication of the continuously improving security situation in the
country.
57. Despite the considerable progress, challenges remain in the capacity of the
national police to deliver on their constitutional mandates. Given that 27.6 per cent
of the five-year (2017–2021) strategic development plan has been implemented in the
initial two years, the force lacks an adequate budget and remains underequipped, with
limited logistics such as vehicles, protection equipment and medical support to
achieve its full capacity. Addressing performance issues related to human rights, such
as the excessive use of force and illegal arrests, which contribute to prison
overcrowding, remains a critical priority.
58. In addition, the resurgent security threat posed by armed gangs, in particular in
the capital, remains a significant challenge. Efforts to dismantle gangs should be
accompanied by political and socioeconomic reinsertion alternatives, sustaine d
engagement with community members, and weapons and ammunition management
programmes. The Government has expressed its intention to re -establish a national
commission to foster gang disarmament and labour-intensive projects on
infrastructure and sanitation. In conclusion, the growing national police force is still
in an evolving phase and the preservation of its gains could benefit from continuing
international accompaniment to consolidate its full effectiveness and operational
integrity.
59. Despite best-intentioned national efforts, supported by the United Nations and
bilateral and multilateral programmes over the past 25 years, progress in the justice
sector has been modest. The absence of a sectoral reform strategy has limited the
impact to fragmented and uncoordinated initiatives within the State. The persistent
high rate of prolonged pretrial detention – 65 per cent and higher – and overcrowding
in prisons exemplifies the sector’s dysfunctions. The inability of the judiciary to
achieve full independence is seen as one of the main drivers of corruption and
impunity and a challenge to good governance. In that context, the quest for
accountability in the high-profile PetroCaribe case is viewed as an important test for
the governance and judicial systems and is having a catalytic impact on public
opinion. Establishing a pragmatic dialogue to promote progress in the justice sector
by setting a nationally owned road map remains a fundamental need over the coming
years.
12/31

19-03182

S/2019/198

60. While the country has continued to make some progress in the area of human
rights, the overall situation and protection framework remain fragile. State
institutions have an uneven record of upholding rights guaranteed under the country ’s
international human rights obligations and domestic l egislation. Many civil society
organizations lack a strong voice and are fragmented as they strive to fully assume a
monitoring and advocacy role and serve as part of a national human rights protection
system. Lack of access to justice for vulnerable groups and impunity for human rights
violations are pervasive, and sexual and gender-based violence remains a serious
concern. Public confidence in security and justice institutions, including in addressing
sexual and gender-based violence and gang violence, remains low, also because of
the lack of recognition of sexual and gender-based violence as a crime and the absence
of gender-sensitive justice mechanisms.
61. Haiti continues to struggle with significant, interlinked development challenges
ranging from high underemployment levels, poor secondary educational attainment,
limited and regressive tax revenues, high levels of poverty and inequality (41.1 Gini
coefficient), low productivity and limited private investments (score of 181 on the
World Bank ease of doing business index). Access to health care is scant, compounded
by the fact that 72 and 42 per cent of the population, respectively, do not have access
to adequate sanitation and potable water, which directly affects the mitigation and
eradication of water-borne diseases, including cholera. Combined with high-level
exposure to natural and climate-related hazards, and continuing humanitarian needs
arising from food insecurity and the repatriation of migrants, these factors severely
test the resilience of Haiti.
62. Boosting private investment and productivity is key for future economic growth,
which needs to address deeply rooted inequalities to ensure stability. A combination
of political will, trust in public administration, efficiency in tax collection an d the
rationalization of current expenditure is essential. Progress in the socioeconomic
situation, in an equitable manner and in line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, remains a critical underpinning for longer-term stability. A strong
preparedness system to respond to natural disasters through the continued
strengthening of the Directorate of Civilian Protection is also critical, together with
recognition of its leadership role and allocation of adequate resources.
63. The political situation however remains fragile, marked by complex and at times
destabilizing dynamics. The political landscape, fragmented and polarized between
government and opposition, affects the implementation of much -needed reforms,
including in the justice and economic sectors. There is broad consensus across society
on the need to amend the 1987 Constitution, including the unaligned timing of
electoral terms, which leads to elections on an almost yearly basis. The scale and
scope of the envisaged amendments, however, mean that they are unlikely to
materialize in the medium term, owing to, inter alia, the complex amendment process
provided in the Constitution, which requires two successive legislatures to vote on
proposed changes. While there has been some progress regarding women’s
representation, such as the 24 per cent presence in the current Cabinet, serious
challenges remain regarding inequalities and limitations affecting women ’s political
voice, meaningful participation in governance and access to leadership roles , as is the
case in Parliament where only one senator and three members of the Lower Chamber
are women.
64. The situation is currently dominated by the economic and political crisis and an
apparent shortage of government resources to provide the basic need s of the State. If
the crisis is successfully overcome and political groupings agree to move forward
towards constitutionally scheduled elections, focus in the upcoming period will shift
to the legislative and possibly local elections in October 2019, foll owed by
presidential elections in 2021. Political tensions are expected to increase again around
19-03182

13/31

S/2019/198

the adoption of the electoral law, the establishment of a provisional electoral council
and nominations to municipal and departmental electoral offices. Electo ral delays,
however, would not only fuel tensions but also paralyse Parliament, as was the case
in 2015.

IX. Options
65. The risks for renewed instability arising from the political, security, human
rights, economic and humanitarian challenges outlined above have been carefully
considered in assessing the timeframe for the conclusion of the peacekeeping chapter
and the preferred post-peacekeeping presence in Haiti. As seen in the recent crisis, it
is clear that, while national capacities to handle internal threats to security and public
order are considerable, the key to preventing relapses lies at the political level, and
political stability in the country should continue to be nurtured. Similarly, as a number
of the objectives set in the two-year exit strategy of MINUJUSTH relating to the rule
of law and human rights are not expected to be fully achieved by October 2019, the
continuation of efforts in related sectors will remain critical for achieving the
benchmarks’ end state articulated in my report (S/2018/241).
66. In the light of the above, the strategic assessment mission discussed with
President Moïse and his Government the duration of the MINUJUSTH mandate,
foreseen by the Council to end no sooner than October 2019, as well as options for a
United Nations configuration that best corresponds to the current situation on the
ground, taking into account its significant evolution since 2004. Two broad models,
and their variations, were considered: transition to a special political mission which,
under different degrees and formats, would offer varying political and advisory
capacities alongside the technical and programmatic support provided by the United
Nations country team; and transition to a United Nations country team configuration
coordinated by a Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator.
67. Under the United Nations country team option, Haiti would no longer feature
on the agenda of the Security Council and the United Nations presence would focus
on supporting national efforts to advance sustainable development and system -wide
accountability for implementing the United Nations Development Assistance
Framework. This option, however, would not allow for the retention under a Security
Council mandate of a police commissioner and some international police officers,
whose presence in a mentoring and advisory role has been critical in ensuring the
performance and development of the Haitian national police.
68. The establishment of a special political mission would still support a strong
development focus, since the mission would complement the more technical and
longer-term development-focused role of the United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes. The Development Assistance Framework would continue to be the main
planning vehicle for coordinating the integrated activities of the mission and the
United Nations country team. A special political mission would allow the Security
Council to continue to accompany the efforts of Haiti towards sustainable peace an d
would enhance the good offices role of the United Nations through the mandate
provided to my Special Representative. The potential risks of relapse into political
instability, as are currently being experienced and which also have implications for
the human rights situation, highlight the comparative advantage of this option.
Various configurations for this option were reviewed, ranging from a small political
office to larger mission structures that include advisory functions for further police
development and mentoring, strategic and focused justice reform, corrections,
elections, human rights and community violence reduction, to support the
Government in the delivery of its strategic rule of law priorities in the

14/31

19-03182

S/2019/198

short-to-medium term. In the planning of the transition particular emphasis has been
placed on ensuring a smooth transition to the new configuration. A robust gender
analysis will be needed to identify risks and opportunities for women ’s participation
and security under the different potential configurations.
69. Throughout these discussions, Haitian interlocutors reiterated their view that it
was time to conclude the United Nations peacekeeping engagement and the
application of Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. No request was made
for an extension of the MINUJUSTH mandate beyond 15 October 2019.
70. At the same time, in recognition of continuing needs in the country, the Haitian
authorities expressed support for the deployment of a special political mission under
Chapter VI of the Charter designed to accompany current priorities in specific and
strategic rule of law, security, human rights and development areas for a transitional
period, so that Haiti would be subsequently removed from the Security Council
agenda.

X. Observations and recommendations
71. The strategic assessment process was concluded amid a context of renewed
demonstrations which reconfirmed key elements of its findings and
recommendations. I am encouraged by the continuous progress in the development of
the national police force, whose widely-acknowledged professional and effective
performance during the demonstrations showcased its capacities in addressing
security challenges in the country. In line with the vision of the Haitian leadership
and people, it is my assessment that unless there are mounting challenges to the
Government’s capacity to respond to the crisis, the national police will be able to
fully assume responsibility for the security and protection of Haiti by 15 October
2019, at the end of the two-year exit strategy foreseen by the Security Council. I will
continue to monitor the evolution of the situation in the country against this
assessment in order to keep the Council informed.
72. The end of peacekeeping represents a substantive and symbolic r ecognition of
the achievements and increased capacities of Haiti. The United Nations stands ready
to continue to support the country’s transition to sustainable development. In this
context, a period of continued assistance may be key, to address unresolve d drivers
of instability, support governance reform, promote human rights and the rule of law
and ensure that the country achieves further positive transformation.
73. It is significant that the Haitian leadership supports the deployment of a special
political mission, mandated to provide good offices and advise the Government on
specific areas in political reform, elections, justice, corrections, police development,
community violence reduction and human rights. I recommend that the Security
Council approve its establishment in the form of a small strategic advisory office led
by a Special Representative of the Secretary-General, functioning alongside the
technical capacities of the United Nations country team and supported by a
triple-hatted Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Resident
Coordinator and Humanitarian Coordinator, for a period of one year, starting on
16 October 2019. I look forward to working with the Haitian institutions in designing
this new, small office in a manner that fits Haitian expectations.
74. Drawing upon lessons from previous transitions in Haiti and other country
contexts, I recommend that the implementation of the MINUJUSTH mandate be
gradually phased out during the last six months, with a proper handover of all security
responsibility by the five remaining formed police units to their national police
counterparts, and that a seamless passage to a special political mission ensure the

19-03182

15/31

S/2019/198

uninterrupted continuity of my good offices. Accordingly, for MINUJUSTH to be able
to maintain adequate capacities until the end of its mandate, sustain support to the
political processes in the lead-up to the elections, and not place an undue burden on
the ensuing special political mission, I recommend that the Council consider
providing a separate liquidation period for MINUJUSTH, after 15 October 2019.
75. The small strategic advisory office, based in Port-au-Prince, would focus on
supporting and advising the Government and institutions of Haiti on national priority
areas, targeting strategic reform that can be catalytic for longer-term stability and
change in the country in the areas outlined below:
(a) Good offices related to national dialogue, elections and constitutional
reform processes;
(b) Strategic advice on police development, with a view to supporting the
operational integrity of the national police and further progress in the national police
strategic development plan 2017–2021. This would require a capacity of a limited
number of United Nations police advisers, under the leadership of a high-ranking
police commissioner, embedded within the senior ranks of the national police;
(c) Strategic advice on catalytic justice reform initiatives, within the
framework of the United Nations global focal point for the rule of law, including
curbing corruption and the adoption and implementation of key legislation through a
nationally owned reform road map;
(d) Strategic advice on community violence reduction, in support of a national
strategy to address the challenges posed by the recruitment of young people into
gangs, including links to community policing and a weapons and ammunition
management programme;
(e) Strategic advice on corrections, to complement efforts through justice and
police reform to continue to improve prison conditions and the welfare of inmates,
and sustain progress in promoting the autonomy of the Directorate of Prison
Administration;
(f) Strategic advice on the protection and promotion of human rights,
women’s protection and women’s empowerment, as informed by human rights
monitoring and reporting.
76. The United Nations presence in the country would comprise this small strategic
advisory office and the United Nations country team, which will be integrated through
multi-disciplinary teams and cross-cutting priorities. The two entities will be
co-located and function hand in hand, structurally and substantively. Capacities from
the advisory office and the United Nations agencies, funds and programmes will
address shared priorities, within the broader framewor k of the Haitian vision for a
secure, democratic, middle-income country based on the 2030 Agenda. The Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights will continue to provide
support to the United Nations joint efforts in Haiti to foster th e human rights agenda
of the national authorities, including by providing additional capacity and resources.
77. The role of the United Nations country team in supporting institutional action
towards progress in achieving the Sustainable Development Goals would have
renewed focus on areas previously receiving MINUJUSTH programmatic support. In
particular, the United Nations agencies, funds and programmes would assume
responsibility for technical support in the areas of justice, police and corrections, as
well as elections, and work hand-in-hand with the new office in its advisory and good
offices role, ensuring coherence between strategic and technical engagements. Strong
cooperation and coordination with bilateral partners, who continue to provide
considerable programmatic support and resources to the development of the rule of

16/31

19-03182

S/2019/198

law in Haiti, would ensure coherence in international engagement, in addition to
ensuring adequate allocation of resources to gender equality and women ’s
empowerment within the rule of law sector. The United Nations country team would
also play a major role in continuing outreach to the population outside Port -au-Prince
on critical areas of reform, currently undertaken by the MINUJUSTH mobile teams,
in the light of lessons learned from the long-standing United Nations engagement in
Haiti on the need to sustain a bottom-up approach.
78. Progress in these efforts should continue to be assessed through the benchmarks
used for the MINUJUSTH exit strategy, to the extent that these are not f ully achieved
and as reviewed in the light of the mandate of the strategic advisory office. The
specific objectives of the office should be articulated in partnership with the Haitian
leadership, on the basis of its vision for the country. As part of the p rocess of
establishing the new mission I will enter into negotiations with the Government of
Haiti on a status-of-mission agreement.
79. In order to complement the good offices and advisory tools of the new, small
strategic advisory office, there is a need to continue scaling up United Nations country
team technical assistance programmes in the areas of justice, corrections and police
development. I call on Member States to provide the voluntary funding necessary to
build capacities in these priority areas as a prerequisite for a successful transition, in
line with the Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations and Security Council resolution 2447 (2018). Discussions between the
Haitian leadership and the Secretariat on possibilities for accessing the Peacebuilding
Fund should be further pursued.
80. Despite the regrettable absence of any newly appointed women judges, the
conclusion of the appointment process to the Court of Cassation is welcomed and
shows that progress is possible even in areas where gridlocks have been persistent. I
also welcome the preparation of a new action plan to address prolonged pretrial
detention and call for concerted action to make substantive progress in its
implementation.
81. Recognizing the country’s overall achievements in recent years, I commend the
Governments and people of Haiti for their efforts to advance political and security
stability in their country, despite the many challenges. The violent demonstrations
that occurred during the reporting period, after an initial period of relative calm, bring
into focus the urgent need for national dialogue to underpin longer-term stability. It
is the responsibility of all Haitian leaders, in government and opposition, and in other
sectors of society, to support it.
82. Considerable progress has been made in institutional development, while
longer-term stability will require further consolidation of the political system and
collaborative relationships between the three branches of power, which, in turn, can
only be achieved through strong political leadership and courageous action on the
part of the current and future administrations.
83. As we move towards an adjustment of the United Nations partnership with Haiti,
I encourage the Haitian leadership and people to take full advantage of and continue
working with MINUJUSTH to prepare for a successful end of peacekeeping in Haiti
and the beginning of our new relationship. I therefore hope that the impending
transition will provide renewed impetus for faster progress in the benchmarks.
84. Lastly, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my Special Representative
for Haiti, Helen La Lime, and the women and men of MINUJUSTH and the United
Nations country team for their work and dedication in contributing to the stabilization
of Haiti and supporting the country on its path to development. I would also like to
thank those Member States that have continued to provide police and corrections
personnel to the Mission.
19-03182

17/31

S/2019/198

Annex I
Benchmark indicators, targets and baselines
Symbol

Equivalent

Symbol

Equivalent

On track to achieve target by the timeline
(8 indicators, 17 per cent)

Challenges expected to achieve target by
the timeline but with a descending trend
(4 indicators, 8 per cent)

Challenges expected to achieve target by the
timeline but with a positive trend
(15 indicators, 32 per cent)

No progress/Not on track to achieve target
by timeline (7 indicators, 15 per cent)

Challenges expected to achieve target by the
timeline but with a stagnating trend
(11 indicators, 23 per cent)

No update on progress was expected during
the reporting period (1 indicator, 2 per cent)

Target
timeline

Indicator

1. The executive and
legislative branches
have promulgated
legislation that
improves access to
justice, enhances the
development of the
national police and
addresses prolonged
pretrial detention,
which is a cause of
prison overcrowding;
all branches have
initiated
implementation of the
new legislation,
including through
sustainable budget
allocations

1.1 Existence of the
new Criminal Code
(1 – draft law
initiated; 2 – draft law
voted by each
chamber; 3 – law
promulgated by
President)

April
2019

3 – New
1 – Senate Justice and
Criminal Code is Security Commission
promulgated
issued its report on the
draft law. Lower
Chamber commission
is finalizing its report
and preparing a
summary of the draft
law.

1.2 Existence of the
Code of Criminal
Procedure (1 – draft
law initiated; 2 – draft
law voted by each
chamber; 3 – law
promulgated by
President)

April
2019

3 – Code of
Criminal
Procedure is
promulgated

1 – Senate Justice and
Security Commission
issued its report on the
draft law. Lower
Chamber commission
is finalizing its report
and preparing a
summary of the draft
law.

1.3 Existence of the
Legal Aid Law
(1 – draft law
initiated; 2 – draft law
voted by each
chamber; 3 – law
promulgated by
President)

April
2019

3 – Legal Aid
Law is
promulgated

3 – Law on the
creation, organization
and functioning of the
National Council on
Legal Aid adopted by
both chambers on
10 September 2018,
transferred to President
on 27 September and
published in the
official gazette on
26 October

18/31

Target

Update as at 15 January (or
otherwise specified)

Benchmark

Trend

19-03182

S/2019/198

Benchmark

Indicator

Target
timeline

Target

Update as at 15 January (or
otherwise specified)

1.4 Existence of the
organic law on the
Haitian national police
elevating Directorate of
Prison Administration
to a central directorate
(1 – draft law initiated;
2 – draft law voted by
each chamber; 3 – law
promulgated by
President)

April
2019

3 – Organic law
on national
police is
promulgated

1 – Draft organic law is
pending validation by
the Director General of
the national police

1.5 Existence of the
Prison Law (1 – draft
law initiated; 2 – draft
law voted by each
chamber; 3 – law
promulgated by
President)

April
2019

3 – Prison Law
is promulgated

1 – Draft Prison Law
validated by
Directorate of Prison
Administration and
submitted to the
national police

1.6 Identification of
the implementation
requirements by the
relevant institutions,
including budgetary
allocations, for the
new legislation
(disaggregated by law)

October
2019

Implementation
requirements,
including
budgetary
allocations, are
determined for
new legislation

Identification of
implementation
requirements for:

Trend

(a) Draft Criminal
Code: not yet adopted
(b) Code of Criminal
Procedure: not yet
adopted
(c) Legal Aid Law: a
technical committee on
the implementation of
the law has been set up
by the Ministry of
Justice and Public
Security
(d) Organic law on
national police: not yet
adopted
(e) Prison Law: not
yet adopted

1.7 Number of new
case files processed in
real time by the
prosecutors in the
jurisdiction of Portau-Prince

19-03182

October
2019

800 new case
files processed
in real time by
the prosecutors
in the
jurisdiction of
Port-au-Prince
per year

October 2017–
December 2018: 595
new cases processed in
real time by Port-auPrince jurisdiction
prosecutors

19/31

S/2019/198

Benchmark

2. The Haitian
authorities make
timely, genderbalanced and meritbased appointments in
the justice sector,
including in the
Superior Council of
the Judiciary, the
Court of Cassation
and the Superior
Court of Audits and
Administrative
Disputes

20/31

Indicator

Target
timeline

Target

Update as at 15 January (or
otherwise specified)

1.8 Proportion of
detainees in pretrial
detention in excess of
two years at the civil
prison of Port-auPrince

October
2019

50.4 per cent of
detainees in
pretrial
detention at the
civil prison of
Port-au-Prince

31 December 2018:
64.9 per cent (2,408
out of 3,705)

1.9 Number of cases
closed by
investigative judges in
the jurisdiction of
Port-au-Prince

October
2019

750 orders
issued per year

October 2017–
December 2018: 442
orders issued

1.10 Number of penal
cases adjudicated by
the court of first
instance of Port-auPrince

October
2019

800 penal cases
adjudicated by
the court of first
instance of Portau-Prince

October 2017–
December 2018: court
of first instance of
Port-au-Prince
adjudicated 452 penal
cases

2.1 Existence of the
annual report of the
Superior Council of
the Judiciary, to
include: judiciary
staffing by gender;
judiciary inspection
results; number of
certified judges; and
implementation of
judge evaluation
process.

April
2019

Annual report of
the Superior
Council of the
Judiciary
available,
including:
judiciary
staffing by
gender; judiciary
inspection
results; number
of certified
judges; and
implementation
of judge
evaluation
process

Preliminary report on
the state of the
judiciary finalized and
submitted to the
Superior Council of the
Judiciary. Drafting of
the body’s annual
reports yet to be
initiated.

2.2 Number of seats
filled at the Superior
Council of the
Judiciary, the Court of
Cassation and the
Superior Court of
Audits and
Administrative
Disputes,
disaggregated by
gender

April
2019

Superior
Council of the
Judiciary: 9/9
(3 women)

President Moïse filled,
on 31 January, the six
seats which had been
vacant at the Court of
Cassation since
December 2015. The
new judges are
appointed for a 10-year
term. As none of the
three women
candidates proposed by
the Senate was
appointed, there is one
woman in the 12-judge
Court. One of the six

Court of
Cassation: 12/12
(1 woman)
Superior Court
of Audits and
Administrative
Disputes: 9/9
(3 women)

Trend

19-03182

S/2019/198

Benchmark

Indicator

Target
timeline

Target

Update as at 15 January (or
otherwise specified)

Trend

new judges was also
appointed President of
the Court and President
of the Superior Council
of the Judiciary.
3. The Directorate of
Prison Administration
performs key
management
functions providing
basic services to all
detainees and ensures
respect for their rights

19-03182

3.1 Number of deaths
per 1,000 inmates

October
2019

Ratio equal to or
below 10/1,000
inmates

1 January 2018 to
15 January 2019: 12.9/
1,000 inmates

3.2 Number of
prisons supported by
functioning health
services for inmates,
disaggregated by
gender

October
2019

Nine out of 18
prisons and four
largest national
police holding
facilities
supported by
adequate healthcare facilities for
inmates

Seven out of 18 prisons
supported by
functioning health
services for inmates

3.3 Number of
Directorate of Prison
Administration
officers recruited
through a dedicated
process, disaggregated
by gender, out of the
941 new officers
required by 2021 to
meet the Directorate’s
needs

October
2019

300 Directorate
of Prison
Administration
officers
recruited, of
whom 30 per
cent are women,
out of the total
941 new officers
to meet the
Directorate’s
needs by 2021

1 January 2018–
15 January 2019: a
total of 151 cadets
including 21 women
have been recruited,
trained and deployed to
the Directorate of
Prison Administration

3.4 Number of
prisons certified by
the Directorate of
Prison Administration
as being able to
operate without fulltime support from
international actors
(MINUJUSTH or
others)

October
2019

Nine prisons
certified out of
18

First round of prison
evaluations, based on
the defined
certification criteria,
completed by Joint
Directorate of Prison
Administration/
MINUJSTH
Monitoring and
Evaluation Committee
on the basis of the
defined certification
criteria. Report with
recommendations to be
discussed with DAP
senior management of
the Directorate of
Prison Administration.

21/31

S/2019/198
Target
timeline

Indicator

4. The national
police respond to
public disorder and
manage security
threats throughout
Haiti, demonstrating
elevated levels of
professionalism,
human rights
awareness and gender
sensitivity, without
requiring international
support, as a result of
the implementation of
the relevant priorities
of the strategic
development plan of
the national police for
2017–2021

4.1 Implementation
rate of the strategic
development plan of
the national police for
2017–2021

October
2019

43 per cent
implemented (57
of 133 priorities
in strategic
development
plan)

Current
implementation rate:
27.6 per cent. Out of
the 133 priority actions
comprising the plan, 96
are foreseen to be
implemented during
2017–2019. To date, no
priority action is
completed, 14 are at an
advanced stage, 82
have been initiated and
37 have not started.

4.2 Number of police
officers per 1,000
citizens

October
2019

1.45

1.32 after a readjusting
process following an
exercise to clean up the
payroll

4.3 Percentage of
women police officers

October
2019

11 per cent

9.89 per cent (1,498
women out of 15,154
officers)

4.4 Percentage of
national police
capacity statically
deployed outside the
Port-au-Prince
metropolitan area

October
2019

40 per cent

35.04 per cent

4.5 Number of
specialized public
order units out of the
13 existing units of
the national police
(12 Unités
départementales pour
le maintien de l’ordre
and 1 Compagnie
d’intervention et de
maintien de l’ordre)
capable of responding
to security threats
with no MINUJUSTH
support

October
2019

All 13 units are
capable of
responding to
security threats
with no
MINUJUSTH
support

Seven of the 13 units
operate without
MINUJUSTH support

4.6 Percentage of
public order/security
operations planned
and executed by
national police
without MINUJUSTH
support

October
2019

100 per cent of
operations
without
MINUJUSTH
support

95 per cent of
operations without
MINUJUSTH support

22/31

Target

Update as at 15 January (or
otherwise specified)

Benchmark

Trend

19-03182

S/2019/198

Benchmark

5. Strengthened
internal oversight and
accountability
mechanisms in the
justice, corrections
and police sectors
address misconduct
and ensure increased
effectiveness and
compliance with
human rights

19-03182

Indicator

Target
timeline

Target

Update as at 15 January (or
otherwise specified)

4.7 Percentage of
national budget
allocated to national
police

October
2019

8.0 per cent of
national budget
allocated to
national police

Currently, 6.6 per cent
of national budget is
allocated to the
national police. If most
recent draft of 2018/19
budget law is adopted
by Parliament, the
national police would
receive 6.2 per cent of
the national budget.

5.1 Number of courts
of first instance
inspected (out of 18)

April
2019

All 18 courts of
first instance
and 5 appeal
courts inspected
by the Ministry
of Justice

Inspection tour
launched in December
2018, starting with
Croix des Bouquets
jurisdiction. The Portde-Paix and Anse-àVeau jurisdictions are
scheduled to be visited
by end of January
2019.

5.2 Percentage of
April
allegations of human
2019
rights violations
against public officials
(national police
officers, Directorate of
Prison Administration
officials) investigated
by the General
Inspectorate of the
national police

80 per cent of all
allegations
investigated by
the General
Inspectorate of
the national
police

1 January–
31 December 2018:
75.7 per cent of human
rights allegations
against national police
officers, including
Directorate of Prison
Administration agents,
investigated (196
investigations out 259
allegations received)

5.3 Percentage of
confirmed misconduct
by national police and
Directorate of Prison
Administration
officers disciplined by
the national police

60 per cent of
cases
investigated
have sanctions
implemented

1 January–
31 December 2018:
21.5 per cent (87 cases)
have yielded sanctions,
out of 404 allegations
of misconduct against
national police officers,
including Directorate
of Prison
Administration
officials. The General
Inspectorate of the
police launched an
investigation for 353 of
those cases.

Number of appeal
courts inspected (out
of 5)

April
2019

Trend

23/31

S/2019/198

Benchmark

6. Haitian women
and men, in particular
those from the most
vulnerable and
marginalized
communities,
demonstrate increased
trust in the capability
and willingness of the
justice system to
address crime and of
the national police to
provide security

24/31

Indicator

Target
timeline

Target

Update as at 15 January (or
otherwise specified)

5.4 Percentage of
confirmed crimes or
human rights
violations committed
by national police and
Directorate of Prison
Administration
officers prosecuted by
judicial authorities

April
2019

100 per cent of
confirmed
crimes or human
rights violations
committed by
national police
officers
prosecuted by
judicial
authorities

1 January–
31 December 2018:
police officers were
prosecuted in 12.4 per
cent of cases of human
rights violations (32
officers prosecuted out
of 259 cases)

5.5 Percentage of
staff of the General
Inspectorate of the
national police
deployed outside the
Port-au-Prince
metropolitan area,
disaggregated by
gender

April
2019

30 per cent of
projected 340
staff of the
General
Inspectorate of
the national
police deployed
outside the Portau-Prince
metropolitan
area

As of January 2019,
none of the 194
personnel assigned to
the General
Inspectorate of the
national police are
deployed outside the
Port-au-Prince
metropolitan area.
However, a draft plan
to open a regional
office of the General
Inspectorate in the
North Department is
under consideration by
the Directorate General
of the national police.

6.1 Proportion of the
population expressing
satisfaction on how
the national police
performs at reducing
crime

April
2019

88 per cent

The survey has yet to
be conducted.

6.2 Number of youth
at risk and women
benefiting from
community violence
reduction/reinsertion
programmes
demonstrating
willingness to work
with national police
community policing
initiatives and law
enforcement
authorities

April
2019

500 youth at risk
and women
cooperating with
national police
community
policing and law
enforcement
authorities (per
year)

3,326 at-risk youth and
2,027 women
cooperating with
national police
community policing
and law enforcement
authorities

Trend

19-03182

S/2019/198

Benchmark

7. The national
Office of the
Ombudsperson
functions
independently and
protects citizens
whose rights have
been violated

19-03182

Indicator

Target
timeline

Target

Update as at 15 January (or
otherwise specified)

6.3 Number of
victims of intentional
homicide per 100,000
citizens, disaggregated
by gender and age

April
2019

Rate of 9.3 or
less of
intentional
homicide,
disaggregated by
gender and age

1 January–
31 December 2018:
homicide ratio
estimated at 6.63 per
100,000 citizens (757
intentional homicide
victims – 697 male
(including 13 minors)
and 60 female
(including 10 minors))

6.4 Number of
kidnappings reported
in the Port-au-Prince
metropolitan area

April
2019

50 or fewer
kidnappings
reported in the
Port-au-Prince
metropolitan
area (per year)

1 January–
31 December 2018:
46 cases of kidnapping
concerning 49 people
(21 men and 28
women). Of the 46
cases, 29 were reported
in the Port-au-Prince
metropolitan area.

6.5 Number of gangrelated incidents in the
hotspot zones of Cité
Soleil, Bel-Air and
Martissant

April
2019

18 or fewer
gang-related
incidents in the
hotspot zones of
Cité Soleil, BelAir and
Martissant (per
year)

1 January–
31 December 2018):
32 incidents

6.6 Number of sexual
and gender-based
violence cases
investigated by
national police,
reflecting enhanced
national police
capacity

April
2019

At least 275
cases of sexual
and genderbased violence
are investigated
(per year)

1–31 December 2018:
213 cases are
investigated, all of
them involving women
(58 women and 155
female minors)

7.1 Level of
compliance of the
Office of the
Ombudsperson with
international standards
on the work of
national human rights
institutions, and
structural capacity to
operate as an
independent and
effective institution in
accordance with the
Paris Principles

October
2019

Status A
according to
Paris Principles

Status A according to
Paris Principles until
next decision of the
Global Alliance of
National Human Rights
Institutions, due May
2019

Trend

25/31

S/2019/198

Benchmark

8. Civil society
organizations,
including those
representing women,
engage with the
Haitian authorities to
advocate the
promotion and
protection of human
rights, and are
empowered to bring
allegations of human
rights violations to
the competent judicial
or administrative
authorities

Indicator

Target

Update as at 15 January (or
otherwise specified)

7.2 Number of
recommendations of
the Office of the
Ombudsperson
implemented by
national rule of law
institutions

April
2019

Three
recommendations
of the of the
Ombudsperson
implemented by
national rule of
law institutions

No recommendations
made

8.1 Number of
alternative reports
prepared and
submitted by civil
society organizations
to international human
rights mechanisms

April
2019

Two reports
prepared and
submitted by
civil society
organizations to
international
human rights
mechanisms

Since October 2017,
special procedures
mandate holders of the
Human Rights Council
have been seized of
three cases of
allegations of human
rights violations as a
result of reports
submitted by civil
society organizations.

Trend

On 5 December, the
Inter-American
Commission on Human
Rights held a hearing
in Washington on the
situation of “persons
deprived of liberty in
Haiti”, based on a
report submitted by one
Haitian civil society
organization. The
Commission
recommended that its
Rapporteur on the
Rights of Persons
Deprived of Liberty
conduct an official visit
to Haiti.
8.2 Number of cases
reported by local civil
society organizations
monitoring human
rights violations

26/31

Target
timeline

April
2019

10 reports
published by
local civil
society
organizations
monitoring
human rights
violations (per
year)

In 2018, a total of 17
reports were published

19-03182

S/2019/198
Target
timeline

Indicator

9. National
authorities comply
with international
human rights
obligations, including
holding individuals
responsible for
current and past
human rights
violations and
fulfilling their
reporting obligations
to human rights treaty
bodies

9.1 Availability of
national plan of action
for human rights

October
2019

National plan of
action for the
implementation
of the
recommendations
made by human
rights
mechanisms, in
particular
through the
universal
periodic review
of the Human
Rights Council

The Inter-Ministerial
Committee on Human
Rights has begun to
work on the
development of a
national action plan on
human rights, pursuant
to the recommendation
of the Human Rights
Council of April 2017.

9.2 Number of
recommendations
made by the human
rights mechanisms
accepted by the
Government of Haiti

April
2019

Three
recommendations
made by human
rights
mechanisms
accepted by the
Government of
Haiti

Of the 16
recommendations
issued by the Human
Rights Committee in
2014, the State has
shown in the periodic
report prepared in 2018
that action was taken to
partially implement
eight.

9.3 Number of
reports prepared and
submitted to
international human
rights mechanisms by
the Government of
Haiti

April
2019

Two reports
prepared and
submitted to
international
human rights
mechanisms by
the Government
of Haiti

On 20 December, Haiti
submitted to the
Human Rights
Committee its second
report on the
implementation of the
International Covenant
on Civil and Political
Rights.

9.4 Appointment by
the Government of
Haiti of a high-level
human rights focal
point within the
executive branch

April
2019

One high-level
focal point
within the
executive branch
appointed by the
Government of
Haiti

Target achieved in the
previous reporting
period

10.1 Availability of
annual report on
public spending by
Superior Court of
Audits and
Administrative
Disputes

April
2019

The annual
report on public
spending of
Superior Court
of Audits and
Administrative
Disputes is
available

Report being finalized
prior to publication

10. Rule of law and
anti-corruption
institutions
demonstrate increased
capacity to fight
corruption

19-03182

Target

Update as at 15 January (or
otherwise specified)

Benchmark

Trend

27/31

S/2019/198
Target
timeline

Indicator

11. The Permanent
Electoral Council is
established through a
credible and
transparent process
and exercises its
electoral
responsibilities in an
independent and
transparent manner,
without requiring
international support

11.1 Nomination by
the three branches of
their three members
for the Permanent
Electoral Council,
with a view to
establishing the
Council as an
operational and
independent body

October
2019

The nine
members are
nominated, and
the Permanent
Electoral
Council is
established, is
operational and
functions
independently

Nomination process
has been initiated by
each branch of power

11.2 Update of the
electoral lists in
preparation of the next
electoral cycle

October
2019

The electoral
lists are updated

Action has yet to be
taken

11.3 Existence of the
Electoral Law in
preparation of the next
electoral cycle (1 –
draft law initiated; 2 –
draft law voted by
each chamber; 3 – law
promulgated by the
President)

October
2019

3 – Electoral
Law is
promulgated

Draft Electoral Law
and Draft Organic Law
on Permanent Electoral
Council were submitted
to Parliament on
14 November 2018.
The former is currently
being reviewed by the
Lower Chamber of
Parliament. On
11 December 2018, the
Government also
submitted a draft
2018/19 budget, which
includes $40 million
for the Provisional
Electoral Council for
that fiscal year.

28/31

Target

Update as at 15 January (or
otherwise specified)

Benchmark

Trend

19-03182

S/2019/198

Annex II
Composition and strength of the police of the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti as at 7 February 2019
United Nations police officers
Country

Women

Formed police unit members
Men

Argentina

4

Benin

29

Bangladesh

3

Burkina Faso

13

Canada

5

13

Chad

1

3

Cameroon

5

1

Colombia

1

1

Côte d’Ivoire

7

30

Djibouti

2
1

Guinea

2

India

140

Jordan
Madagascar

6
1

9

Mexico

1
2

Niger
1

Norway

3

Pakistan

7

133

6

14

126

6

18

122

3
1

Republic of Korea

3

1

Romania

2

11

Russian Federation

5

Rwanda

19-03182

4
21

Nigeria

Senegal

140

14

Mali
Nepal

Men

1

El Salvador
Germany

Women

8

Slovakia

2

Spain

2

Sri Lanka

1

Sweden

1

2

Togo

2

5

Tunisia

4

16

Turkey

10

United States of America

4

29/31

S/2019/198
United Nations police officers
Country

Women

Uruguay
Subtotal
Total

Formed police unit members
Men

Women

Men

39

661

1
47

233
280

700
980

30/31

19-03182

S/2019/198

Annex III
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti:
deployment map

19-03182

31/31
