A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/50/61
9 January 1996

Fiftieth session
Agenda item 59
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the First Committee (A/50/579)]
50/61.

Verification in all its aspects, including
the role of the United Nations in the
field of verification

The General Assembly,
Affirming its continued support for the sixteen principles of
verification drawn up by the Disarmament Commission, 1/
Stressing that the critical importance of verification of and compliance
with arms limitation and disarmament agreements is universally recognized and
that the issue of verification is a matter of concern to all nations,
Recalling its resolution 48/68 of 16 December 1993, in which it
requested the Secretary-General, as a further follow-up to the 1990 study on
the role of the United Nations in the field of verification 2/ and in view
of significant developments in international relations since that study, to
undertake, with the assistance of a group of qualified governmental experts,
an in-depth study on verification issues identified in that resolution,
Also recalling that, in its resolution 48/68, it requested the
Secretary-General to submit a report on the subject to the General Assembly at
its fiftieth session,

1/
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifteenth Special
Session, Suppplement No. 3 (A/S-15/3), para. 60 (para. 6, sect. I, of the
quoted text).
2/
The Role of the United Nations in the Field of Verification
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.91.IX.11).
96-76009

/...

A/RES/50/61
Page 2

1.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General, 3/ which was
unanimously approved by the Group of Governmental Experts on Verification in
All its Aspects, including the Role of the United Nations in the Field of
Verification, and commends the report to the attention of Member States;
2.
Requests the Secretary-General to give the report the widest
possible circulation and to seek the views of Member States on the report;
3.
Encourages Member States to consider the recommendations contained
in the report and to assist the Secretary-General in their implementation
where they consider it appropriate;
4.
Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General
Assembly at its fifty-second session on the views received from Member States
on the report and on actions taken by Member States and by the Secretariat
with respect to the recommendations contained in the report;
5.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-second
session the item entitled "Verification in all its aspects, including the role
of the United Nations in the field of verification".
90th plenary meeting
12 December 1995

3/

A/50/377 and Corr.1.
