SS

Resolution11 adopted on the reportll of the Second Committee

26 July 1966 regarding the development of natural
resources,
Expressing its appreciation of the initiative taken by
the Secretary-General in submitting to the Economic
and Social Council a five-year survey programme for
the development of natural resources, comprising nine
selected natural resources surveys, as outlined in his
report dated 18 January 1966,18
1. Notes wi,th satisfaction the progress made by the
Advisory Committee on the Application of Science and
Technology to Development, the group of experts consulted by the Secretary-General and the Economic and
Social Council in the evolution of a long-term survey
programme in the field of natural resources ;
2. Endorses .the continuing study by the Economic
and Social Council of the means of implementing a fiveyear survey programme for the development of natural resources, intended to strengthen the economic
base and the economic independence of the developing
countries;
3. Invites the Secretary-General to study the technical and financial implications of carrying out surveys
of petroleum and natural gas resources in the developing countries and to submit specific proposals on this
subject to the Economic and Social Council.
1485th plenary meeting,
6 December 1966.
2177 (XXI). Special session of the Trade and
Development Board
The General, Assembly
Invites the Trade and Development Board to hold a
special session to be convened in New York for one
day, on 21 December 1966, in order to review the
calendar of meetings of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development for 1967 which the Board
adopted at its fourth session. 19
1488th plenary meeting,
9 December 1966.

2178 (XXI). International Symposium on
Industrial Development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1940 (XVIII) of 11 December 1963 and Economic and Social Council resolutions 1030 C (XXXVII) of 13 August 1964 and
1081 B (XXXIX) of 30 July 1965 on the holding
of international and regional symposia on industrial
development,
Recognizing the importance of the results and recommendations of the regional symposia held at Manila,
Cairo and Santiago and of the Conference on Industrial
Development in the Arab States held in Kuwait,
Noting wi,th approval the recommendations contained
in Economic and Social Council resolutions 1180 (XLI)
of 5 August 1966 and 1185 (XLI) of 15, 16 and 17
November 1966 concerning the preparation and organization of the International Symposium on Industrial
Development,
Considering that the Symposium, as the first worldwide forum on industrialization to be held under United
18 Ibid., Fortieth Session, Annexes, agenda item 7, document
E/4132, chapter V.
19 See Official Records of the Trade and Development Board
F011rth Session, 115th meeting.
'

Nations auspices, is likely to play a significant role in
focusing attention on policies and measures aimed at
strengthening international co-operation in the field of
industrial development and accelerating the industrial
development of the developing countries,
1. Endorses the decision of the Economic and Social
Council to convene the International Symposium on
Industrial Development at Athens in December 1967;

2. Invites the Governments of States Members of
the United Nations and members of the specialized
agencies and of the International Atomic Energy
Agency to take an active interest in the preparatory
work for the Symposium and to ensure their effective
participation in it;
3. Calls upon the United Nations Industrial Development Organization to devote all the necessary attention to that preparatory work in order to ensure
the success of the Symposium;
4. Invites the specialized agencies, the International
Atomic Energy Agency, the regional economic commissions, the United Nations Economic and Social
Office in Beirut and the intergovernmental organizations concerned to co-operate actively in the preparatory
work for the Symposium;
5. Expresses the hope that the recommendations of
the Symposium will give an added impetus to international co-operative efforts aimed, in particular, at
achieving the accelerated industrialization of the developing countries ;
6. Requests the Industrial Development Board to
study in due course the recommendations of the Symposium and to take appropriate follow-up action.
1488th plenary meeting,
9 December 1966.

2179 (XXI). Provision of operational personnel
under the Technical Assistance component
of the United Nations Development Programme
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1946 (XVIII) of 11 December 1963 authorizing the use of funds from the
Special Account of the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance for the provision of operational personnel by all the participating organizations, at the
request of Governments, on an experimental basis for
the years 1964-1966,
Noting the actions taken by the Governing Council
of the United Nations Development Programme at its
second session and by the Economic and Social Council at its forty-first session, in response to the General
Assembly's invitation to review the results of the experimental provision of operational personnel,
Decides to authorize temporarily the continued use
of the funds of the Technical Assistance component of
the United Nations Development Programme for the
provision of operational personnel by all the participating organizations, at the request of Governments,
for the years 1967-1968.
1488th plenary meeting,
9 December 1966.
