United Nations

A/RES/58/218

General Assembly

Distr.: General
9 February 2004

Fifty-eighth session
Agenda item 95

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 23 December 2003
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/58/485)]

58/218. Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the
Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes
of the World Summit on Sustainable Development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 55/199 of 20 December 2000, 56/226 of 24 December
2001, 57/253 of 20 December 2002 and 57/270 A and B of 20 December 2002 and
23 June 2003, respectively,
Recalling also the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, 1
Agenda 21, 2 the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21, 3 the
Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable Development 4 and the Plan of
Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (“Johannesburg
Plan of Implementation”), 5
Reaffirming the commitment to implement the Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation, including the time-bound goals and targets, and other
internationally agreed development goals, including those contained in the United
Nations Millennium Declaration, 6
Expressing its satisfaction that the Commission on Sustainable Development,
at its eleventh session, agreed on its new organization of work and multi-year
programme of work, as well as new methods of work aimed at promoting and
supporting implementation and the provision for the Commission to work in a series

_______________
1

Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro,
3-14 June 1992 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I: Resolutions
adopted by the Conference, resolution 1, annex I.
2
Ibid., annex II.
3
Resolution S-19/2, annex.
4
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa,
26 August-4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I,
resolution 1, annex.
5
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.
6
See resolution 55/2.

03 50760

A/RES/58/218

of two-year action-oriented implementation cycles, alternating review and policy
years, 7
Noting the adoption by the Commission, at its eleventh session, of criteria and
guidelines on partnership initiatives voluntarily undertaken by some Governments,
international organizations and major groups, announced at the World Summit on
Sustainable Development and in the follow-up to the Summit, as endorsed by the
Economic and Social Council, 8
Reaffirming the continuing need to ensure a balance between economic
development, social development and environmental protection as interdependent
and mutually reinforcing pillars of sustainable development,
Reaffirming also that poverty eradication, changing unsustainable patterns of
production and consumption and protecting and managing the natural resource base
of economic and social development are overarching objectives of, and essential
requirements for, sustainable development,
Noting the convening in Marrakesh, Morocco, from 16 to 19 June 2003, of an
international expert meeting on a ten-year framework of programmes for sustainable
consumption and production,
Recognizing that good governance within each country and at the international
level is essential for sustainable development,
1.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General 9 on the activities
undertaken in implementation of Agenda 21,2 the Programme for the Further
Implementation of Agenda 213 and the outcomes of the World Summit on
Sustainable Development;
2.
Reiterates that sustainable development is a key element of the
overarching framework for United Nations activities, in particular for achieving the
internationally agreed development goals, including those contained in the United
Nations Millennium Declaration6 and in the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation;5
3.
Calls upon Governments, all relevant international and regional
organizations, the Economic and Social Council, the United Nations funds and
programmes, the regional commissions and specialized agencies, the international
financial institutions, the Global Environment Facility and other intergovernmental
organizations, in accordance with their respective mandates, as well as major
groups, to take action to ensure the effective implementation of and follow-up to the
commitments, programmes and time-bound targets adopted at the Summit, and
encourages them to report on concrete progress in that regard;
Calls for the implementation of the commitments, programmes and time4.
bound targets adopted at the Summit and, to that end, for the fulfilment of the
provisions relating to the means of implementation, as contained in the
Johannesburg Plan of Implementation;
Requests the Secretary-General to strengthen system-wide inter-agency
5.
cooperation and coordination for the implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme
for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the Johannesburg Plan of
_______________
7
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 9 (E/2003/29), chap I,
sect. A.
8
See Economic and Social Council resolution 2003/61.
9
A/58/210.

2

A/RES/58/218

Implementation, and in that regard to report on such inter-agency cooperation and
coordination activities to the Commission on Sustainable Development and the
Economic and Social Council in 2004;
Welcomes the decision of the Commission at its eleventh session to invite
6.
the regional commissions, in collaboration with the secretariat of the Commission,
to consider organizing regional implementation meetings in order to contribute to
the work of the Commission,7 and in this regard urges the regional commissions to
take into account the relevant thematic clusters contained in the Commission’s
programme of work and to provide inputs as specified by the Commission at its
eleventh session;
Also welcomes the decision of the Commission at its eleventh session to
7.
invite other regional and subregional bodies and institutions within and outside the
United Nations system to contribute to the preparations for the Commission’s
review and policy sessions and the intergovernmental preparatory meeting;7
8.
Requests the Secretary-General, in reporting to the Commission at its
twelfth session on the state of implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the
Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation, on the basis of inputs from all levels, as specified by the
Commission at its eleventh session, to submit:
(a) One report on each of the issues of water, sanitation and human
settlement, to be addressed in an integrated manner during the session, which should
contain a detailed review of the progress of implementation relating to those issues,
taking into account, as appropriate, their interlinkages, while addressing the crosscutting issues identified by the Commission at its eleventh session;
(b) A report on overall progress in the implementation of Agenda 21, the
Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the Johannesburg Plan
of Implementation, reflecting:
(i)

Cross-cutting issues identified by the Commission at its eleventh session;

(ii) Progress made in the three dimensions of sustainable development and
their integration;
(iii) Constraints, challenges, opportunities, best practices, informationsharing and lessons learned;
9.
Invites the Bureau of the Commission at its twelfth session to continue to
recommend to the Commission the specific organizational modalities through openended and transparent consultations to be conducted in a timely manner, following
the established United Nations rules of procedure, bearing in mind that the activities
during Commission meetings should provide for balanced involvement of
participants from all regions, as well as for gender balance;
10. Decides to allocate the resources previously devoted to the former ad hoc
intersessional working groups of the Commission to support the participation of
representatives of member States of the Commission in one of their respective
regional meetings in each implementation cycle;
11. Invites donor countries to consider supporting the participation of experts
from developing countries in the areas of water, sanitation and human settlement in
the next review and policy sessions of the Commission;
12. Decides that resources released by the termination of the work of the
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources for Development, whose work has
3

A/RES/58/218

been transferred to the Commission, shall be used to support the work of the
Commission;
13. Encourages Governments and organizations at all levels, as well as major
groups, including the scientific community and educators, to undertake resultsoriented initiatives and activities to support the work of the Commission and to
promote and facilitate the implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the
Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation, including through voluntary multi-stakeholder partnership
initiatives;
14. Encourages Governments to participate, at the appropriate level, through
representatives of relevant departments and agencies responsible for water,
sanitation and human settlement, in the next review and policy sessions of the
Commission,
15. Requests the Secretariat to submit a summary report containing
synthesized information on partnerships to the Commission at its twelfth session, in
accordance with its programme and organization of work, noting the particular
relevance of such reports in review years, with a view to sharing lessons learned and
best practices and identifying and addressing problems, gaps and constraints in the
implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further Implementation of
Agenda 21 and the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation;
16. Requests the Commission, in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 47/191 of 22 December 1992 and as specified by the Commission at its
eleventh session, to examine progress made in the cross-cutting issues in the
relevant thematic clusters, utilizing inputs from all levels;
17. Requests the Economic and Social Council to implement the provisions
of the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation relevant to its mandate, in particular to
promote the implementation of Agenda 21 by strengthening system-wide
coordination;
18. Urges the Secretariat, in the preparation of the reports of the SecretaryGeneral referred to in paragraph 8 above, to take due account of national reports;
19. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-ninth session the
item entitled “Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further
Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the World Summit on
Sustainable Development”, and requests the Secretary-General, at that session, to
submit a report on the implementation of the present resolution.
78th plenary meeting
23 December 2003

4
