S/PV.8320

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8320th meeting

Friday, 27 July 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Skoog . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Sweden)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Tenya
Mr. Radomski
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393
(2017) and 2401 (2018) (S/2018/724)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-24158 (E)
*1824158*

S/PV.8320

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258
(2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017) and 2401 (2018)
(S/2018/724)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, and
Ms. Virginia Gamba, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/724, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191
(2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017) and 2401
(2018).
On 9 July, we met in this Chamber for an open
debate on children in armed conflict (see S/PV.8305).
The consensus among the representatives of Member
States who spoke that day was clear — children in war
must be protected. That sentiment was mirrored in the
unprecedented support of States Members for resolution
2427 (2018). The time has come for the Security Council
to move from words to action. That is why we suggested
that today’s meeting on the humanitarian situation in
Syria focus on the effects of the humanitarian crisis
on children.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lowcock.
Mr. Lowcock: I am pleased to be here together with
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict today. The appalling
suffering that this war has wrought on Syria’s children
2/24

27/07/2018

is truly unimaginable. Yet it is Syria’s children who are
the future of the country. Ensuring that their rights are
respected, protected and fulfilled must be at the centre
of all of our efforts.
The Secretary-General’s Envoy briefed the Security
Council comprehensively in closed consultations on
Wednesday on the hostilities in south-west Syria. I
agree with everything that he said and I do not believe
that I need to repeat it. What I would like to say is that
the United Nations and its partners have mobilized
a response, which is reaching tens of thousands of
people across much of the south-west. That has built on
sustained efforts to preposition supplies through crossborder deliveries and now draws on programming
from inside Syria, implemented through the Syrian
Arab Red Crescent in agreement with the Government.
That has included the delivery of food from the World
Food Programme for approximately 200,000 people
across Dar’a governorate in recent weeks. United
Nations personnel went to Al-Sahwa and Kahil in Dar’a
governorate to assess needs and deliver food on 12 July.
On 15 July, United Nations personnel participated
in a high-level mission to Nasib and Um Al-Mayazen
in Dar’a, as well. However, an estimated 110,000 newly
displaced people remain in Quneitra governorate in
areas that have largely been cut off from sustained
humanitarian assistance. Prepositioned supplies of
shelter materials and basic household items for those
people have now run out. That leaves displaced people
exposed to soaring temperatures and desert winds.
Access to water and sanitation is also of increasing
concern, with deaths resulting from dehydration and
contaminated water already reported. The response
therefore now needs to be urgently scaled up across the
south-west, and in Quneitra in particular.
Since November 2017, the total number of people in
need of assistance in Aleppo and Idlib governorates has
increased by close to 600,000 to a total of 4.2 million
people. Of those people, half are in acute need owing
to new displacement, exposure to ongoing conflict,
reduced access to food or water and other factors.
The recent arrival of thousands of evacuees from the
south-west follows a pattern seen elsewhere earlier this
year, which resulted in nearly 120,000 people being
displaced into the north-west from March to May. With
violence continuing and the risk of a further escalation
looming, prepositioning of aid, together with efforts to
scale up our ongoing response to immediate needs, is
increasingly critical.
18-24158

27/07/2018

S/PV. 8320

The situation in the Middle East

I have briefed the Council many times on the
appalling suffering of the people of Fo’ah and Kefraya,
who have been besieged by armed groups for years.
On 16 July, an agreement was reportedly reached to
evacuate the towns with approximately 120 buses
transporting people to the Mahalej shelter in Aleppo.
The United Nations was not party to the agreement,
and we have not had access to the evacuees. However,
efforts continue to provide the necessary emergency
support, in coordination with Syrian Arab Red Crescent
and other local organizations.
The United Nations and its partners continue to
respond to the needs of people displaced from Afrin
district in Tell Rifaat subdistrict, Nubul and Zahra
towns, and in surrounding communities. Protection
remains a key concern across the area, including in
relation to freedom of movement for those wishing
to return to their homes and relatedly ensuring that
housing, land and property rights are fully respected.
We also note worrying reports of insecurity in Afrin
town itself, including two vehicle-borne improvised
explosive devices being detonated late last month and
killing 15 civilians and wounding 23.
Humanitarian needs remain high in eastern Ghouta,
although there are also reports of markets beginning to
function again and some other normalizing activities.
Close to 10,000 people from eastern Ghouta — mostly
men between the ages of 15 and 65 — are reported to
remain in displacement sites across rural Damascus. In
the north-east, returns to Raqqa city have continued,
despite risks related to high levels of explosive hazard
contamination. There are also very serious concerns
about civilians trapped in areas held by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham in the eastern part of Deir ez-Zor
governorate, reports of civilian casualties in air strikes
in Al-Sousa and Baghour Fukhani earlier this month,
and hundreds of cases of diarrhoeal disease, including
at least 12 deaths resulting from the consumption of
contaminated water. Humanitarian demining in Raqqa
city and Deir ez-Zor remains a key priority, together
with ongoing efforts to scale up broader humanitarian
assistance. The humanitarian situation at Rukban, on
the Jordan-Syria border, remains dire, with reports of
diarrhoea and dehydration in the camp. Discussions on
the deployment of an aid convoy to the area continue.
Humanitarian organizations continue to reach
millions of people throughout Syria. More than 3 million
people received food this past month, but in many
areas, needs have continued to increase, in particular

in the south-west and north-west, as well as in Raqqa.
Our efforts to keep pace with the rapidly evolving
situation depend on support from many Member States.
That includes financial contributions to the projects in
the Syria humanitarian assistance response plan, aid
provided by neighbouring Governments and in-kind
donations such as those provided by France, which
were facilitated by the Russian Federation earlier this
week and distributed in Douma yesterday.
Unfortunately, the United Nations appeal for
Syria this year remains substantially underfunded.
Sustaining and increasing the confidence of donors
depends on the ability of the United Nations and the
humanitarian organizations, with which we work, first,
to independently assess needs; secondly, to prioritize
responses; and, thirdly, to provide assurance and
evidence that help is reaching those in greatest need.
That in turn requires safe, unimpeded and sustained
access in line with the obligations of the parties to the
conflict under international humanitarian law. The
United Nations remains fully committed to working
with the Syrian authorities and other stakeholders in
that regard to demonstrate the principled nature of our
collective effort and to ensure that we reach as many
of the most vulnerable people as possible throughout
the country.
The President:
his briefing.

I

thank

Mr.

Lowcock

for

I now give the floor to Ms. Gamba.
Ms. Gamba: First, I would like to thank the current
President of the Security Council, Sweden, for giving
me the opportunity to brief the Council today and share
the most recent updates on the situation of children
affected by the armed conflict in the Syrian Arab
Republic. I concur with the statement delivered just now
by my colleague from the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Mark Lowcock.
The monitoring and reporting mechanism, created
through resolution 1612 (2005) in 2005, collects
information on the six grave violations against children
in armed conflict situations. The Reporting Mechanism
in Syria was established in 2013 following the listing
of the Syrian Government for the killing and maiming
of children and attacks on schools and hospitals. Every
year since then, there has been a tremendous increase
in all grave violations committed by all parties to
the conflict.

18-241583/24

S/PV.8320

The situation in the Middle East

This specific Mechanism is unique in its set up,
as it operates as a regional mechanism, gathering
information from inside of Syria as well as from
neighbouring countries, allowing for a broader scope in
monitoring and capturing violations committed across
Syria, while large parts of the country is inaccessible
to the United Nations. However, I must stress that,
although the cases documented by the Mechanism have
all been verified by the United Nations, they represent
only a mere fraction of violations committed in Syria
as of today.
Since the beginning of the Syrian crisis in March
2011, the United Nations has verified through the
Mechanism that more than 7,000 children have lost
their lives or have been maimed as a result of this
conflict. I must stress that this is the verified number
alone; the unverified reports reflect numbers that go
way beyond 20,000 child casualties. The Mechanism
makes a distinction between reported and verified
cases. Only verified cases lead to the listing of parties.
The methodology of verification is carefully elaborated
and requires a thorough triangulation of information
procedures, which makes it a very strict mechanism that
generates data that appears lower than figures in other
monitoring initiatives and mechanisms of the United
Nations. Indiscriminate and disproportionate attacks by
all parties, of which now we tally over 88 — including
the use of weapons prohibited under international law,
aerial attacks, mortars and rockets, indiscriminate
shelling and improvised explosive devices — have been
used against civilian areas and civilian infrastructures
and have had a deadly toll on children.
As Council members know, the Mechanism reports
on six grave violations: recruitment and use, killing
and maiming, rape and other forms of sexual violence,
attacks on hospitals and schools, abductions, and denial
of humanitarian access. Over the years the SecretaryGeneral has listed in the annexes of his annual report on
children and armed conflict seven parties committing
grave violations against children in Syria.
Since the beginning of 2018 alone — a period of
six months — the Mechanism has verified over 1,200
violations against children. Of these, more than 600
children have been killed or maimed, more than 180
recruited and used, and more than 60 schools attacked,
while over 100 attacks on hospitals and medical
facilities or personnel have been all verified. Most of
these verified grave violations have occurred in the last
six months in the context of military surges by various
4/24

27/07/2018

parties in the areas of Afrin, Hama, Idlib, eastern
Ghouta and Dar’a. Each of these surges has resulted in
hundreds of thousands of displaced people, of which a
vast proportion are children.
As war rages, detention of children for alleged
association with armed forces and armed groups has
exponentially increased. In 2018 alone, over 1,300
children are reportedly held by parties in the northeastern part of Syria, of which the Mechanism could
verify only seven cases since the beginning of the year
due to the inaccessibility of the area and the relevant
actors. In other parts of Syria, detention of children is
also reported, and the Mechanism was able to verify
more than 300 cases since 2014.
The figures emerging from the first six months of
2018 reflect large increases, as compared to previous
similar reporting periods. For example, in the first
quarter of 2018, there was an increase of 25 per cent
in recruitment and use of children, and a 348 per cent
increase in killing and maiming, both as compared to
the previous quarter. In fact, the total number of grave
violations for the first quarter marks a 109 per cent
increase over the last quarter of 2017.
Attribution for these violations indicates that all
recruitment and use in 2018 have been committed
by non-State actors, while most killing and maiming
figures are attributed to Syrian Government and proGovernment forces. Although figures for the beginning
of 2018 include few verified cases of sexual violence
and abduction, these are violations reported across all
the years since the establishment of the Mechanism in
Syria. For example, boys and girls have been sexually
abused and exploited, sold as sexual slaves and forcibly
married to fighters for the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant. Rape has been used as a means of torture,
especially when children were being deprived of their
liberty. Despite being underreported, cases of sexual
violence against children in Syria also reflect the
despicable nature of this conflict.
Attacks on schools and medical facilities have
been one of the persistent features of the conflict in
Syria. One in three schools are estimated to be out of
use — either damaged, destroyed or used as a shelter
or for military purposes. An estimated 2.1 million
children alone are out of school inside Syria, due to a
range of factors including insecurity, lack of facilities
and quality education, poverty and displacement.
18-24158

27/07/2018

The situation in the Middle East

In the upcoming months, the Security Councilmandated country report of the Secretary-General
on children and armed conflict in Syria will be
published, covering almost five years of the conflict.
The findings of the Mechanism over that period of
time are utterly unsettling. I am deeply disturbed by
the stories of children born and raised throughout
this conflict, children who have never seen peace in
Syria, children who have suffered repeatedly from
all types of violations in their homes, communities,
schools, detention centres and in refugee and internally
displaced persons settings. We have to think that these
children are in severe psychosocial distress. They do
not know the meaning of the word “peace”.
The violence Syrian children have been subjected
to, and are still being subject to — as well as the pain
they and their families have faced throughout these
years of crisis — is simply unacceptable. Given the
dynamics and violations occurring against children
this year, I am especially concerned about children
deprived of their liberty and the conditions of detention
of children allegedly associated with parties to the
conflict. These children must be treated primarily as
victims of violations of international law.
I call on all parties involved in the conflict in
Syria to comply with applicable obligations under the
Convention of the Rights of the Child and its optional
protocol on the involvement of children in armed
conflict and to give civilian child-protection actors
access to children deprived of liberty for association
or alleged association with armed forces and groups.
I further call on all parties to the conflict in Syria
to take immediate measures to ensure that their
military operations are conducted in full compliance
with international law, including through respecting
the principles of distinction, proportionality and
precaution. Humanitarian access must be granted to
all children in all locations in Syria, including through
the implementation of humanitarian corridors and
pauses for the delivery of humanitarian assistance that
are indispensable for their survival and development,
without any discrimination. This standard should also
be applicable to returnees.
I would like to conclude by emphasizing that
children continue to be disproportionately affected
by the armed conflict in Syria. It is essential that
the Security Council does everything in its power
to put pressure on parties to the conflict to comply
with their obligations under international law and

S/PV. 8320

ensure that children are no longer subject to grave
violations of their rights. Parties to conflict must take
immediate, concrete and effective action to prevent
child casualties during the conduct of hostilities,
including by immediately ceasing to use means and
methods of warfare that are inherently indiscriminate
or disproportionate in nature and ensure that children
deprived of their liberty be treated primarily as victims
of violations of international law.
There is clearly no alternative other than peace to
stop the increasing violations against children in Syria.
We must make peace a priority and, in the pursuit of
that peace, we must ensure that all peace negotiations
include children at the centre of the discussion.
Nowhere it is more important to consider children as
an indispensable part of peace processes than in the
Syrian conflict. There will be hundreds of thousands of
children who will need assistance and we must prepare
to meet their needs.
The prolonged exposure to war has immediate
and major detrimental effects on the psychosocial
well-being of children. If left untreated, the long-term
negative consequences will affect them for the rest of
their lives. In that regard, recalling the recently adopted
resolution 2427 (2018), children affected by the conflict
must be able to access protection programmes designed
to meet their needs in an integrated and comprehensive
approach to mental health and psychosocial support,
including the specific needs of children with disabilities.
The international community must prioritize funding
and provision for quality education for all children at
all levels, from the initial stages of child development
through to vocational training for youth. No one must
be left behind, especially those who, through no fault
of their own, have been robbed of their most important
developmental years.
It is time for the children of Syria to believe in their
own future and to learn what peace means. It is time
for them to retake the childhood that was taken away
from them. It is time for them to stop being victims and
become game changers in the restoration of normality
in peace and justice. They have been used and abused
by, in and for this armed conflict for far too long.
The President: I thank Ms. Gamba for her briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.

18-241585/24

S/PV.8320

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank the presidency of the Council for proposing
to focus today’s meeting on the plight of children
in Syria. Let me also thank the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Mr. Mark Lowcock, and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba,
for their briefings and for the relentless efforts of the
humanitarian workers in all areas of conflict.
I will focus my remarks on two key points: the
humanitarian situation and Syria’s children.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, as the
Syrian crisis enters its eighth year, our Syrian brothers
are facing a humanitarian catastrophe and extremely
difficult economic and social situation. Thousands of
Syrians are subjected daily to the most heinous and
blatant violations of international law and international
human rights law as a result of the ongoing cycle of
violence, which to date has claimed the lives of no
fewer than 400,000 people, including a large number of
women and children.
We have followed with great concern the military
escalation in south-western Syria over the past
few weeks, which has led to the displacement of
almost 300,000 people and the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation of innocent civilians, including
women, children and the elderly. Although this number
has decreased following the return of some refugees to
their homes, many of them remain in dire need of urgent
humanitarian assistance. We share the SecretaryGeneral’s concerns with regard to ending cross-border
humanitarian operations in south-western Syria as
a result of the recent escalation. We underscore the
need to providing humanitarian assistance to all those
in need in south-western Syria as soon as possible,
lifting all restrictions on international organizations
and agencies and delivering assistance to those in need
throughout Syria.
The war in Syria, which began in 2011, has created
the largest refugee crisis in modern history. The Syrian
people have been left with no choice but to escape or
to live under the stress of armed conflict. It has led to
more than 5 million Syrian refugees abroad, including
2 million children, and nearly 6 million internally
displaced persons, 2.5 million of whom are children.
That represents a total of 11 million Syrians. We
underscore that the return of refugees and displaced
6/24

27/07/2018

persons to their homes must be safe, voluntary
and dignified.
Undoubtedly, the children of Syria continue to pay
the highest price of a war that has been going on for
eight years in their country. They have been robbed of
their innocence, dreams and their inherent right to life
and dignity. The suffering of Syria’s children is a stigma
for the international community. Millions of children
know only war. They have experienced only war since
they were born. They remain the most vulnerable and
the most in need of protection. Therefore, we must not
disappoint them because they are the future of Syria.
There are more than 5 million children in Syria
in need of humanitarian assistance. As Ms. Virginia
Gamba stated a while ago, children in Syria are subjected
to grave suffering as a result of the ongoing conflict.
They are killed, abducted, kidnapped, recruited,
tortured and subjected to other tragedies. The conflict
has affected almost 2 million children, who have not
even received basic education, which could result in a
whole generation losing their right to learn.
In 2017, as Ms. Gamba just stated, 67 schools and
more than 108 medical facilities were targeted. This
information is included in the report on children and
armed conflict. We strongly condemn the systematic
targeting of vital and basic facilities, including schools,
hospitals and medical facilities. They represent a red
line, as underscored in resolution 2427 (2018). This
resolution, which was adopted unanimously at the
beginning of the current month and was sponsored by
Kuwait and 97 States Members of the United Nations,
is explicit and clear. It condemns the attacks on schools
and hospitals, and calls upon all parties to the armed
conflict not to thwart children’s access to education and
health services. We urge all parties to the Syrian crisis
to implement this resolution. Furthermore, resolution
2401 (2018) is yet another example of a blatant violation
pertaining to Security Council resolutions. Although it
was adopted unanimously and called for a ceasefire
without delay and the delivery of humanitarian access
to besieged areas, that resolution, unfortunately, was
not implemented.
In conclusion, the State of Kuwait reaffirms that
there is no military solution to the Syrian crisis. We
must redouble our efforts to end the suffering of an
entire people — the brotherly Syrian people, who are
rich in history, culture and civilization. We must end
the repercussions of a crisis that is destroying the region
18-24158

27/07/2018

The situation in the Middle East

and the world at large, by supporting a political solution
in line with relevant Security Council resolutions,
especially resolution 2254 (2015), and the 2012 Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex). This would lead to
a comprehensive settlement, agreed by all components
of the Syrian people, in order to meet their legitimate
aspirations and achieve the unity, independence and
sovereignty of Syria.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and
Special Representative Gamba for their detailed and
disturbing briefings and for their important work
on Syria.
The United States condemns the attack that took
place earlier this week in Syria’s Al-Suwayda province,
for which the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham has
claimed responsibility. The barbaric attack killed
scores of civilians and we send our sympathies to the
families of the victims.
Civilians, in particular children, continue to bear
the brunt of ongoing violence in Syria. Each month,
Mr. Lowcock briefs us on desperate civilians caught
up in military offensives and the thousands who are
denied access to the most basic necessities, including
life-saving aid. The most recent military campaign in
the south-west is yet another dark chapter in Syria’s
tragic story. This month, Special Representative Gamba
has provided us with an even closer look at the misery.
It is clear that Syria’s children have experienced an
almost unimaginable level of suffering and trauma that
they will carry with them for the rest of their lives.
The statistics cited here and in the monthly reports
on Syria should not be misinterpreted. Yes, the number
of besieged areas has been reduced to zero, but not
because the regime lifted sieges. Instead, it is because
it mercilessly followed through with its surrender-orstarve campaign. Similarly, the number of Syrians
living in hard-to-reach areas is down from just over
2 million last month to 1.5 million in July — not
because the regime is allowing more access, but because
it has taken more territory by force. Sadly, more than
13 million people in Syria still require humanitarian
assistance, and at least 6 million of those are children.
In south-west Syria, the regime’s military offensives
since 17 June have displaced more than 325,000
civilians, approximately half of whom are children.
Yet, humanitarians are largely unable to reach those
vulnerable populations and supplies are dwindling.

S/PV. 8320

Even more concerning is the fact that this loss of
humanitarian access in south-west Syria includes the
halting of United Nations cross-border aid deliveries
demanded by the Council, most recently in resolution
2393 (2017).Nothing about the regime’s failure to
facilitate humanitarian access has changed since last
month’s Council meeting (see S/PV.8296). Instead of
placing the needs of its own population first, the regime
continues to weaponize humanitarian assistance and
withhold access as a tool to force reconciliation in areas
formerly held by the armed opposition.
We call on the Syrian regime and its Russian allies
to allow the United Nations to resume cross-border
convoys from Jordan and to facilitate delivery of crossline assistance from Damascus to people in need, in line
with the Council’s previous resolutions on the matter.
For the 800,000 people dependent on life-saving crossborder assistance, United Nations operations need
to continue.
Turning to Idlib, the Syrian regime and its
supporters have continued their aggressive actions and
are building up their military forces for their next major
offensive. The United Nations dire warnings have been
clear and unmistakable — a Syrian regime military
campaign in Idlib, akin to what we saw in eastern Ghouta
and Aleppo, would result in a disastrous humanitarian
crisis. The Council urgently needs to put measures
in place to protect civilians and ensure humanitarian
access in Idlib, where hundreds of thousands of people
are at risk.
The United States will once again put on record
that United Nations humanitarian convoys are welcome
at any time in Rukban. We welcome this assistance and
are ready to do everything we can to facilitate it.
In Raqqa, removing unexploded ordinance is
one of our top priorities; it is a critical first step for
humanitarian and stabilization assistance. To date,
coalition-funded explosive hazards removal teams
have cleared more than 20,000 explosive hazards from
15.5 million square meters of territory in Manbij,
Tabqa and Raqqa cities and trained over 300 Syrian
nationals to conduct marking, survey and clearance up
to international humanitarian mine action standards.
The task is not easy, but it is vital to ensure that Syrians
can return home safely.
The United States continues to support refugee
returns when they are safe, voluntary and dignified.
The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

18-241587/24

S/PV.8320

The situation in the Middle East

assesses that it is not yet safe for large-scale refugee
returns in Syria. We also remind the Council that the
cessation of violence is a critical element for planning
successful large-scale refugee returns. Russia is
still not upholding its commitment to maintaining a
de-escalation zone in south-western Syria. If Russia
is serious about its concern for refugees and other
displaced Syrians, it should work with the Syrian regime
to stop the violence and allow unhindered humanitarian
access to civilians in need.
In conclusion, the positive developments are few
and far between, but we must find light where we can.
We are glad that children and their families in two
previously besieged parts of Idlib were finally able to
depart for safer areas and no longer face being cut off
from the basic elements of survival. Now, we must find
a way to protect the other children in Idlib in the weeks
and months ahead.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock and Ms. Virginia
Gamba de Potgieter for their briefings, which are always
very enlightening, but unfortunately also bleak, as well
as for their tireless efforts and those of their teams.
Civilians continue to be the victims and targets of
the regime’s military strategy. The retaking of southwest Syria is another episode in the humanitarian
disaster that has been unfolding in Syria since 2011.
What remains of the de-escalation zone and the
commitments undertaken by the guarantors of the
ceasefire to reducing violence and ensuring respect for
international humanitarian law?
In Idlib, the threat of a regime offensive that has
been publicly announced by Bashar A1-Assad is a
looming tragedy for the 2.2 million people present
there. Such an offensive would also be a source of
further destabilization not only for northern Syria and
Turkey, but also for the entire region, specifically as
a result of the dispersal of terrorist fighters to which
it will inevitably give rise. A new, bloody offensive in
Idlib will open chapter two of the Syrian tragedy — that
of a regional spillover of the conflict.
In that context, I would like to highlight three key
priorities that should serve as a guide for our action: the
protection of vulnerable people, ensuring humanitarian
access, and achieving a lasting political solution in
Syria with the support of the United Nations.
8/24

27/07/2018

The first priority is the protection of all vulnerable
populations. I would like to echo Ms. Gamba’s remarks
and stress the seriousness of the violations against
children in Syria, which has made it the most dangerous
country for children in 2018. Tens of thousands
of children have been killed or wounded since the
outbreak of the conflict as a result of indiscriminate
shelling by the regime. An entire generation has been
out of school, with consequences in terms of social and
professional integration and potential radicalization.
The recruitment and use of children, in particular by
terrorist groups, such as Da’esh, continue to increase.
Currently, 5.3 million children need humanitarian
assistance. There are tangible and immediately
operational measures and we call on all parties to the
conflict to urgently adopt them. It is important to refrain
from targeting schools and school infrastructure and
to protect civilian and residential areas in the conduct
of operations.
I also want to revisit the urgent need to ensure
the security of humanitarian workers. It is important
to ensure that humanitarian workers in areas that have
been retaken by the regime will be protected and that
humanitarian services for the people in those areas
will continue. We are heartened by the successful
rescue operation of a number of White Helmets, who
have saved many lives at the risk of their own and
have been constantly targeted by the Syrian regime.
Not all White Helmets have been evacuated and those
remaining in Syria are now under serious threat. We
must secure safety guarantees for those individuals and
their families and ensure that they are not the target of
retaliation by the regime.
I also want to raise the issue of the protection of
journalists and their families trapped in Syria. As the
Council is aware, this issue is a priority for France. I
call for further collective mobilizing to that end.
With regard to refugees, the conditions for a safe,
dignified and voluntary return have not been met. Their
safety is not ensured because the regime continues to
violate all ceasefires. Many of them are exposed to
abuses or are forcibly recruited into the regime’s army
upon their return. Law No. 10, which makes population
displacement irreversible and is part of the regime’s
demographic engineering strategy, constitutes a major
obstacle to the return of refugees and displaced persons.
Like the European Union (EU), we demand its repeal,
as well as indemnities and substantive work on property
restitution and recruitment. I would like to point out
18-24158

27/07/2018

The situation in the Middle East

that this question is not limited to a legal text, because
Law No. 10 merely formalizes and systematizes the
regime’s practices.
Secondly, I would like to highlight the priority of
humanitarian access, which continues to deteriorate
in Syria. The Syrian regime continues to impose
unacceptable obstacles to the delivery of aid, in
violation of international humanitarian law. Letting
that indispensable aid through everywhere, especially
in hard-to-reach areas, is an obligation of all parties.
It is intolerable to deprive populations of vital aid of
which they are sorely lacking, whether in ldlib, eastern
Ghouta or Quneitra.
We are particularly concerned about the situation
in the south of the country, where no cross-border
convoy from Jordan has been arranged since 25 June.
Only aid from Damascus remains, but it is distributed
exclusively in areas under the control of the regime. We
therefore call on the actors with influence on the regime
to ensure that cross-border convoys via Jordan are
restored and secured as soon as possible. All convoys
must be able to move safely and unhindered throughout
the country, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions and international humanitarian law.
It is imperative that the entire population in need
receive humanitarian aid on the basis of a neutral
evaluation conducted by the United Nations. France
has fully mobilized to meet that challenge. It is with
that objective in mind that President Macron and
President Putin decided to undertake a joint project to
deliver humanitarian aid to Douma, in eastern Ghouta,
where the needs of the population remain considerable
several months after the end of the fighting. Fortyfour tons of medical equipment and basic necessities
were transported from France to Syria via a Russian
plane during the night of 20-21 July. The distribution
of non-food items to beneficiaries took place yesterday,
26 July, in partnership with the United Nations.
Medicine and the medical equipment were received by
the Douma health centre.
In that context, I commend the work of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
United Nations agencies, which have spared no effort
to ensure that the people of Ghouta receive that aid
under the best possible conditions. That result remains
modest in relation to the magnitude of the needs, but it
makes a real difference to the people of a particularly
hard-hit area, which that aid would undoubtedly not

S/PV. 8320

have reached otherwise. More needs to be done, as
Mark Lowcock rightly pointed out.
Thirdly, the humanitarian situation will never
be addressed in a sustainable manner without a
breakthrough in the United Nations-led political
process. Despite its reconquests, the regime has achieved
nothing but victories without peace. As resolution 2254
(2015) recalls, without a political transition, Syria will
remain a lasting factor of regional destabilization, for
want of the voluntary return of refugees and displaced
persons, in safe and dignified conditions; the financing
of reconstruction by multilateral donors; and national
reconciliation that makes it possible to stamp out
terrorism, the presence of foreign militias and the
persistence of a civil war mindset. On these various
points, the deadlock will persist unless we advance the
political process.
In that regard, the pursuit of the regime’s military
strategy undermines the efforts of the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General to bring the actors in the conflict
closer together and relaunch the political process
around the formation of a constitutional committee.
It is imperative that the regime’s supporters exert the
pressure necessary to ensure an environment conducive
to the continuation of the consultations launched by the
Special Envoy.
In the same way, I repeat here clearly before the
Council that we will not take part in the reconstruction
of Syria without the effective implementation of a
political transition, with a genuine constitutional
and electoral process. That is sine qua non for the
stability of the country and our contribution towards
financing reconstruction. Otherwise, there is no reason
why France and the EU should commit themselves to
financing reconstruction. To ensure the country’s longterm stability through a negotiated political solution, we
are sparing no effort to encourage concrete convergence
with key players in the conflict, particularly those in
Astana and the Small Group.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting on a very this
important subject with these impressive briefers. We
thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and Special
Representative of the Secretary General Gamba for
their sobering briefings.
Frankly speaking, I was shocked to hear yet again
about the terrible suffering of Syrian children. Children
should be protected, including in times of war, yet such

18-241589/24

S/PV.8320

The situation in the Middle East

protection is completely lacking in the Syrian conflict.
We express our strong support for the mandate of
the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict. We are grateful for the extremely valuable
work that the Special Representative and her team
have done regarding Syria — valuable work in spite
of the lack of access and cooperation from the Syrian
regime. It is deplorable that the Syrian regime ignores
its international obligations, even when it comes to the
protection of children. We expect the upcoming country
report to address those issues in clear terms, and we
support the idea of more frequent country reports.
Today we are talking about the humanitarian situation
in Syria, but let us not forget the fate of the 6.5 million
refugees who have been forced to flee their country.
In my statement I will address three points: first,
the situation in southern Syria; secondly, the situation
in Idlib; and thirdly, the continuing violation of
humanitarian law and humanitarian principles in Syria
First, we express grave concern about the violence
in southern Syria. Hostilities in the past few weeks
have been marked by civilian casualties, attacks on
schools and hospitals and the rapid displacement of
around 180.000 individuals. We strongly condemn the
recent series of suicide attacks by the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant. As Mr. Staffan de Mistura told
us on Wednesday, 180,000 civilians have become
internally displaced as a result of the ground and aerial
offensives of the Syrian regime and its allies in the
south-west. Some of the internally displaced persons
(IDPs) near Quneitra remain without shelter and are
exposed to the sun, in temperatures reaching up to
40°C. Humanitarian partners based in Damascus have
not been granted access due to a lack of necessary
approvals by the regime. Cross-border humanitarian
operations are also suspended.
The Syrian regime should respect international
humanitarian law and provide sustained access for
humanitarian actors and protection to all people in
need, including IDPs located near the Golan border. We
call on all parties to provide cross-border humanitarian
convoys with the necessary security guarantees,
including the relevant guarantors of the de-escalation
zone, as it was called at the time. Cross-border aid
delivery remains of paramount importance and must be
facilitated where it is the most effective, or the only
way to reach those in need.
10/24

27/07/2018

Let me welcome the humanitarian operation that
has led to the evacuation of a group of White Helmets
and their family members from southern Syria. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands is currently looking into the
possibilities of a contribution to the resettlement plans.
We pay tribute to the selfless work of the White
Helmets in all parts of Syria, who have saved countless
Syrian civilian lives. Let me underline that all sides of
the conflict should accept and protect all aid workers.
It is deeply disturbing that instead, many have to fear
for their lives because of the advance of Syrian troops
and their allies. We regret that the White Helmets in
particular have been targeted both on the ground and
here at the United Nations, by slanderous accusations.
Let me also underline the point made by our French
colleague about the need to guarantee the safety of
journalists in conflict.
That brings me to my second point — the situation
in Idlib. Currently, the Idlib region is completely
surrounded by forces of the Syrian regime. We are
deeply concerned about the fate of the 2.3 million
civilians in Idlib, of which approximately 1.3 million
are displaced persons from elsewhere in Syria. They
are under constant threat of air strikes and of hostilities
between armed groups. An assault by the Syrian regime
will lead to a humanitarian catastrophe with grave
regional consequences.
Let me stress that the civilians in Idlib are neither
terrorists, nor combatants. Civilians must be protected
during armed conflict. Medical facilities need to be
protected too, as the Council so clearly underlined in
resolution 2286 (2016). The Astana guarantors have a
particular responsibility to work on arrangements to
prevent further human suffering, protect civilians and
provide a non-violent exit to this growing tragedy. In
our opinion, the Council should send a very strong
signal to the regime and its allies not to attack Idlib. We
regret that we were unable to agree on such a signal last
Wednesday in our meeting.
That brings me to my third point — the continuing
violations of humanitarian law and humanitarian
principles in Syria. Years of bombardments, sieges and
deprivation by the Syrian regime have in the past months
led to the regime taking over several severely damaged
areas. Even now, United Nations access to those areas
is consistently denied by the regime. The Organization
is often banned from inter-agency convoys, meaning
that United Nations coordination and monitoring of the
18-24158

27/07/2018

The situation in the Middle East

distribution of aid is hampered. As a consequence, aid
is not being delivered to those who need it most.
Let me give an example. Between January and
April, a mere 22 per cent of aid in territories controlled
by the Syrian regime was delivered to those in acute
need. That is simply unacceptable. We therefore call
on the Syrian regime, the Russian Federation and Iran
to immediately allow unimpeded and sustained access
for all humanitarian actors. If the regime continues to
obstruct the ability of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs to work from Damascus,
it effectively blocks the possibilities for principled,
evidence-based humanitarian action in Syria. As a
consequence, many more innocent people and many
more innocent children will suffer.
In conclusion, let me stress the need for
accountability for the ongoing crimes committed in
Syria by all parties. We will continue our efforts in
that regard both on and off the Council. We call on
those with influence to ensure that Syrians in need can
be helped by the United Nations. Furthermore, they
should convince the regime to reconsider Law Number
10, as stressed by our French colleague. Complying
with international humanitarian law and providing
humanitarian access remain essential to improve
the conditions of the suffering Syrian civilians. That
particularly applies to the suffering Syrian children,
as Virginia Gamba so clearly described. Respect for
international humanitarian law is key if we want to
prevent a repetition of eastern Aleppo, eastern Ghouta
and Dar’a.
Finally, we call for assurances that humanitarian
workers in areas that have recently changed control
will be protected and that humanitarian services for the
people in those areas will continue to be available.
Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome
the convening of this meeting and thank Mark Lowcock
and Virginia Gamba for the important work they have
been carrying out and for the extremely troubling
information they have just provided us. The picture they
have painted is bleak. The Syrian conflict continues to
claim civilian victims and features scenarios where
the risk of new escalation is alarming. Humanitarian
assistance is very limited. International law and
international humanitarian law continue to be violated
with impunity.
Peru deeply regrets that situation and is
particularly concerned about the vulnerability of

S/PV. 8320

internally displaced persons and refugees, particularly
in the southwest of the country. We note that more
than 13 million people require humanitarian assistance
in Syria, and more than 5 million are children. We
underline the ethical and legal commitment of the
Syrian authorities and other influential actors on the
ground to facilitating full, unimpeded and immediate
access to humanitarian assistance from the United
Nations and other relevant agencies.
We also stress the need to facilitate the safe and
voluntary return of Syrian citizens to their homes
and businesses, in accordance with internationally
agreed standards. That requires political will,
confidence-building and resources. We believe that
the support of the international community and the
participation of the United Nations is critical.
We note with concern the negative consequences
that the implementation of Law 10 would have on
millions of displaced persons and on the building of
sustainable peace in Syria. Similarly, we are alarmed
by the risk of an escalation of violence in Idlib, which
could lead to a new hell on Earth. We consider it of
the utmost importance to prevent a new humanitarian
tragedy, and we stress that the fight against terrorism
in no way justifies the violation of human rights or
international humanitarian law.
It is important to bear in mind that children
are particularly vulnerable. Death, orphanhood,
malnutrition, injury, illness, trauma, neglect, destruction
of schools — these are the consequences of violence for
millions of children in Syria. Many of them have known
only conflict and forced displacement. According to the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/724), in 2017 alone,
there were almost 3,000 serious violations of children’s
rights, more than in the previous year. And the number
of verified cases of recruitment and use of children for
military purposes increased by 13 per cent, mostly in
Aleppo, Hama and Idlib provinces.
In view of that, we would like to highlight the
timely and necessary emphasis placed by the Swedish
presidency on the responsibility to protect them. That
means providing them with a peaceful environment in
which to recover and develop a life free from violence
of all kinds, as part of a comprehensive strategy to
resolve the conflict and maintain peace.
I conclude by underlining the particular
responsibility of this Council, in line with recent
resolution 2427 (2018) on children and armed conflict.

18-2415811/24

S/PV.8320

The situation in the Middle East

In particular, we emphasize the need to promote
rehabilitation activities for recruited children, with a
view to facilitating their reintegration into society and
building sustainable peace in Syria.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea)
(spoke in Spanish): We welcome the convening of
this meeting. I take this opportunity to express our
gratitude to Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and
Special Representative Gamba for their illuminating
updates on the humanitarian situation in Syria and the
impact of the current conflict on children.
We take advantage of this open informative session
to condemn in the strongest terms the series of suicide
attacks carried out by the Islamic State on the morning
of 25 July in many villages of Al-Suwayda province.
Those latest attacks, resulting in more than two hundred
deaths and a hundred injured, must not undermine the
efforts to return to sustainable peace and stability
in Syria.
Government forces and local militias, which
control much of the country, particularly in the
southern region, must step up their presence along
the whole eastern administrative border of Suwayda
and take provisional control measures with regard to
citizens arriving in this area. However, my country’s
Government wishes to express to the Council its great
concern at the situation of insecurity prevailing in the
south-west part of the country, given that the clashes,
following the implacable logic of military operations,
are resulting in hundreds of deaths and injuries as
well as the massive displacement of civilians, and are
also preventing United Nations entities from sending
cross-border humanitarian supplies owing to the lack
of security.
The continuing airstrikes against medical and
educational facilities and personnel in Idlib, the high
levels of contamination by explosives in Raqqa, the
presence of numerous improvised explosive devices
and the significant number of civilians who remain in
camps for displaced persons in eastern Ghouta all attest
to the precarious humanitarian situation. It is therefore
vital that United Nations humanitarian agencies and
their partners spare no effort and create synergies to
provide assistance to as many people in need as possible,
and also that the parties of the conflict guarantee safe,
sustained and unimpeded access to inter-institutional
humanitarian convoys, in compliance with resolution
2401 (2018).
12/24

27/07/2018

Given this situation of devastation and anguish,
Equatorial Guinea cannot but join its voice to those
calling for the defence and protection of the rights of
children in armed conflict, particularly in Syria, the
issue with which we are dealing today. This was made
clear with the adoption of resolution 2427 (2018) during
the open debate held on 9 July (see S/PV.8305). There is
a need to tackle factors such as the lack of humanitarian
assistance, which exposes Syrian children to a greater
risk of violence and exploitation, including child labour,
recruitment and forced marriage. This prolonged
conflict has without a doubt had a significant impact
on children throughout the country and could cause
post-traumatic stress disorder and toxic stress, which
can lead to long-term physical and mental damage if
not appropriately treated.
Air strikes against schools and educational
personnel and the use of schools for military purposes
also significantly affect children, increasing their risk of
suffering and dying from vaccine-preventable diseases.
In order to remedy this situation, the parties to the
conflict must consistently abide by their commitment
to protecting the rights of children.
The information provided by Ms. Gamba is very
significant and should induce all parties to the conflict
to reflect very deeply. We have said on many occasions
that this conflict cannot have a military solution. But
even if there is an insistence on not reaching agreement,
the parties must at least respect humanitarian law and
use force proportionately so as to save the lives of the
most vulnerable, that is to say, children.
Let me conclude by expressing the firm support of
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea for the recent joint
initiative of the Russian Federation and the French
Republic aimed at providing humanitarian assistance
to the inhabitants of eastern Ghouta and Douma.
This initiative is the result of a coordination meeting
between the leaders of both countries held in May, in
St. Petersburg, and aims to provide first-aid medical
teams for more than 500 people with serious injuries
and medical supplies to treat 15,000 minor injuries.
This supplements the assistance targeted at meeting
the urgent humanitarian needs of the people of eastern
Ghouta. This Franco-Russian cooperation deserves
our full attention and praise, because it shows how,
with a little political will, the countries of the Security
Council with influence upon the parties to the conflict
can, if they so wish, reach an understanding and work
to ensure that the conflict is resolved peacefully.
18-24158

27/07/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Radomski (Poland): I should like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock and Special
Representative Virginia Gamba for their impressive
briefings. We deeply appreciate their dedicated service.
Even as we meet today to discuss once again
the humanitarian situation in Syria, military logic,
unfortunately, continues to drive developments on
the ground. We still face unceasing and widespread
violence as well as violations of international law,
including abuses of human rights and international
humanitarian law. The most striking examples of this
were the recent events in the south-west de-escalation
zone, where more than 55,000 children remain deprived
of access to humanitarian assistance, and a total of
100,000 internally displaced persons (IDPs) have fled
the recent wave of violence.
Taking into consideration those recent events,
we strongly condemn the intensification of military
operations. Unhindered, safe and sustainable
humanitarian access must be secured, as called for in
resolution 2401 (2018). Unfortunately, even after the
Syrian Government has retaken control of many areas
of the country, we still lack regular access to areas
in need.
We express our grave concern about the
humanitarian situation in south-west Syria as well as
in the north-western part of the country. The military
operations led by Government forces, with the support
of Russia, have already displaced thousands of civilians,
the majority of whom are moving towards the northern
part of the country. As we heard in the briefing, Idlib
governorate is struggling with a new significant influx
of IDPs, leaving it with the highest total number of
displaced persons in Syria.
The humanitarian imperative should be our primary
priority. We would like to reiterate our strong call on all
parties with influence on the situation on the ground to
take all actions necessary to achieve a full cessation of
hostilities throughout the Syrian territory in order to
avert tragic scenarios such as those we have already
witnessed in eastern Ghouta, eastern Aleppo and Dar’a.
Let me emphasize the importance of protecting the
most vulnerable groups, especially children, women
and religious minorities, who are too often affected by
the conflict in Syria.
Let me also stress the need for the protection of
refugees. We support the safe, voluntary and dignified

S/PV. 8320

return of the Syrian people under a United Nationsled framework once conditions allow. In this context,
I should like also to express our concern about the socalled Syrian Law No. 10, on property rights. We are
deeply worried by its possible significant repercussions
on the future return of Syrian IDPs and refugees. That
is why we underline the need for the Security Council
to remain seized of the matter.
This seventh year of the armed conflict in Syria
means that millions of children have known only life in
fear. They suffer from malnutrition and are deprived of
their fundamental rights, including the rights to food,
water, sanitation, education and medical care. The
denial of humanitarian access to children has traumatic
consequences. There is also a need to accelerate
humanitarian mine-action programmes by prioritizing
areas to which civilians are returning in order to address
the growing number of child victims.
We are very concerned at the impact of the conflict
on education. With more than 2 million Syrian children
out of school and one third of schools unusable, the
conflict has devastated the lives of a generation of young
people. The lack of access to education and the trauma
experienced by children, including that due to sexual
violence, has created a lost generation in Syria, which
will affect the future of the country and that of the whole
region, undermining prospects for the reconstruction
and recovery of a free and democratic Syria.
Therefore, we want to stress the importance of
ensuring funding for protection programmes to support
children affected by the conflict, as well as quality
education for all children, including girls, at all levels.
In that regard, we strongly condemn the continued
attacks on schools and the use of schools for military
purposes. Let me recall that this year’s annual report of
the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict
(S/2018/465) listed 67 verified attacks on schools
and education personnel in 2017, most of which were
air strikes.
In conclusion, let me stress the necessity of
maintaining the unity of the Council on the question
of the full implementation of the relevant humanitarian
resolutions throughout Syria, especially as we again
face an increase of violence, this time in the northern
part of the country. The adoption of resolution 2401
(2018) was just the beginning of the process. We again
call on all stakeholders with influence on the ground
to take the necessary steps to ensure that the fighting

18-2415813/24

S/PV.8320

The situation in the Middle East

stops, the Syrian people are protected and, finally,
urgent humanitarian access is provided.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank UnderSecretary-General Lowcock for his very detailed
briefing. I would also like to thank Special Representative
Gamba for her briefing. It was particularly useful to be
reminded of the horrific suffering of Syrian children
throughout the conflict.

27/07/2018

We, like others, are deeply concerned about the
Russian-backed offensive by the Al-Assad regime into
the de-escalation area in south-west Syria. Over the
past month, that offensive has had a devastating impact
on civilians living in the area, with more than a quarter
of a million civilians displaced. UNICEF has reported
that approximately half of all those who have fled the
recent wave of violence are children.

We should all remember that one of the sparks
that lit the flame of this conflict was the arrest and
detention by Syrian Mukhabarat of schoolchildren
from Dar’a simply for posting anti-regime graffiti on
a school wall. We should all remember the horrific
recruitment and enslavement of children by Da’esh, and
we should all remember the appallingly high number
of children killed and maimed by indiscriminate aerial
bombardment, whether in Aleppo, eastern Ghouta or
other areas, by the Syrian regime and its allies.

People fleeing fighting must have freedom of
movement to be able to choose where they go and be
allowed to return home once it is safe to do so so that
they can reclaim their property and rebuild their lives.
They must be protected against regime reprisals and
have access to essential supplies and basic services.
We expect the regime and Russia to ensure the safety
and security of all those in southern Syria, including
the safety of humanitarian actors and those active in
civil society.

I was particularly struck by Ms. Gamba’s conclusion
that most of the killing and maiming of children has
been attributed to the Syrian Government and proGovernment forces. I would strongly echo her call on
the parties for three things: to respect international
humanitarian law, to comply with obligations under
the Convention on the Rights of the Child and its
Optional Protocol and to allow access for civilian child
protection actors to children deprived of liberty for their
association with armed groups. Given the presence of
the representative of the Syrian Government in this
Chamber today, I would hope that in his statement he
could commit his Government to fulfilling those three
requests that she made.

Like the representatives of Peru, the Netherlands
and others countries who spoke today, we are extremely
concerned about the situation in Idlib, where, as we
heard from Staffan de Mistura the other day, close
to 3 million civilians are in fear of attacks by the
regime and its backers, and more than 50 per cent of
the population have been displaced from their homes,
in some cases multiple times. The dire humanitarian
situation will continue unless real, unhindered
and sustained humanitarian access is allowed. We
urge Russia and pro-regime forces to comply with
de-escalation and remove all obstacles to the delivery
of humanitarian aid.

We join the United States and others in condemning
the appalling terrorists attack claimed by Da’esh in
Al-Suwayda province on 25 July, which killed many
innocent civilians. Such callous disregard for human
life is horrifying. Our ministers have expressed
their condolences to the families of the victims and
reaffirmed our commitment to peace in Syria and
Da’esh’s lasting defeat.
The Kuwaiti Ambassador has already reminded us
that in February, all Council members voted in favour of
resolution 2401 (2018) whereby we demanded a cessation
of hostilities and unimpeded humanitarian access. It is
to our deep regret that the Syrian authorities have made
no effort to abide by the terms of that resolution or,
indeed, those of the de-escalation agreement reached
between Russia and the United States last year.
14/24

We are particularly concerned about the lack
of humanitarian access to areas that have recently
come under regime control. We urge Russia to use its
influence to secure rapid and unhindered access to those
areas for humanitarian agencies. Such access needs to
be sustained rather than one-off token convoys. The
delivery of aid also needs to be transparent and subject
to appropriate accountability and oversight.
Cross-border aid represents a significant proportion
of all United Nations humanitarian deliveries. It is
essential that humanitarian assistance be able to reach
people throughout Syria through the most direct routes.
In that regard. I would like to echo the call made by
the representative of France for Russia and Syria to
provide the United Nations with the necessary security
assurances to continue using the Al-Ramtha crossing
from Jordan. This Council has mandated the United
18-24158

27/07/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Nations to use the crossing. Resolution 2393 (2017)
remains in force and is a key element to ensuring that
aid is delivered to those in need.
In concluding, let me say that it is clear from
today’s briefing that there are several ways in which
the Syrian authorities and their allies could improve the
humanitarian situation in the country. On that basis, I
would like to ask the Syrian authorities and Russia to
do three concrete things: first, ensure safe, immediate,
unimpeded and sustained access to Quneitra for the
United Nations and its humanitarian partners; secondly,
ensure safe, immediate, unimpeded and sustained access
for the United Nations and its partners to priority areas
that have recently changed control, including Douma
and the towns of eastern Ghouta, southern Damascus
and northern, rural Homs; and thirdly and finally, give
the Council assurances — and I hope that we might hear
such assurances from the Syrian representative later in
this meeting — that humanitarian workers in areas that
have recently changed control will be protected and
that humanitarian services for the populations in those
areas will continue.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the
briefings by Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs Mark Lowcock and by Ms. Virginia Gamba,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, to whom we reiterate our
support for the sensitive work that they are carrying out.
We express our regret that this conflict has lasted
for eight years, and we continue to bear witness to the
unrelenting siege and violence suffered by the Syrian
people, especially those most vulnerable, like children,
who in some cases have known only this reality since
birth. Sadly, if appropriate measures are not taken, most
of them will have to live with persistent psychological
trauma. According to the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), 13.1 million people
remain in need humanitarian assistance, of whom
approximately 5.3 million are children. There are
approximately 6.1 million internally displaced persons,
of whom 2.6 million are children, and some 200,000 of
those children live in difficult-to-access areas. We must
prevent those figures from growing larger.
We are alarmed by the escalation of violence in
south-west Syria and call for a cessation of hostilities in
the framework of resolution 2401 (2018). Any increase
in tensions must be avoided in order not to further

S/PV. 8320

destabilize the region. We also reiterate the importance
of safeguarding the lives of thousands of civilians
who continue to move into the city of Idlib, including
those children and their families who are swelling the
numbers of persons internally displaced by of violence.
It is essential to avoid any kind of tension or escalation
of violence in that area so as to avoid a major tragedy.
To that end, the full implementation of resolution
2401 (2018) is indispensable. In that connection, we
highlight the different initiatives that allowed local
agreements to be reached to facilitate not only the entry
of humanitarian assistance, but also the evacuation of
people in need.
The necessary measures must also be taken to
prevent the resurgence of terrorist groups and to stop
further violence. We strongly condemn the attack on
the city of Al-Suwayda, which resulted in more than
two hundred deaths, and those responsible for those
heinous attacks must be held accountable.
We repudiate all attacks on civilian facilities, and
therefore we call on the parties to respect their obligations
under international law and international humanitarian
law, including with regard to the protection of civilians,
hospitals and educational institutions. We regret that,
according to figures from OCHA and UNICEF, more
than 2.7 million Syrian children have not attended
school since the beginning of the conflict. According
to the most recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/724), 104,000 children benefited from essential
learning materials and remedial education, and 172,000
children benefited from protection and psychosocial
support services.
However, we believe that more must be done for
such a vulnerable population. We must do everything
we can to get these children back into school. We cannot
allow their first lessons in life to be forced displacement
or shelter. Measures should also be taken to keep them
from being subjected to sexual violence or recruitment.
We highlight the tireless work of the various
humanitarian agencies and workers who have put
their own lives at risk in providing the humanitarian
access that so many need. We note that, according to
the latest report, more than 218,000 people in hard-toreach areas were served, and that a total of 3 million
children received care from UNICEF. We also note that
more than 1 million children and mothers had access to
first aid and that around 293,000 children and pregnant
and breastfeeding mothers had received nutritional

18-2415815/24

S/PV.8320

The situation in the Middle East

supplements. We call on the Syrian Government to
cooperate in that matter and to coordinate more closely
and actively with United Nations agencies and their
representatives so that that assistance may continue to
increase. That is why visa authorizations are urgently
required, as well as authorizations for the entry of
convoys, including cross-border convoys.
In addition, we highlight the technical assessment
conducted by the United Nations Department of Safety
and Security and the United Nations Mine Action
Service in the city of Raqqa to ensure the clearance
of explosive remnants of war. We believe that that is a
basic and urgent action that could avoid fatalities and
allow the population to return to their daily lives. It
would also allow the displaced population and refugees
to gradually return to their homes. That return must be
safe, dignified, voluntary and informed, as it must be
throughout Syria, .
The reduction of violence on the ground must
be based on increased confidence-building among
the parties involved. Relieving the humanitarian
situation of the civilian population, especially the most
vulnerable, such as children, must be a priority on the
agenda of political dialogue and high-level diplomacy.
We reiterate that the only way to resolve this conflict
is through an inclusive, dialogue-based and concerted
political process, led by the Syrian people and allowing
for a peaceful solution.
Finally, we highlight the work that Special
Representative Virginia Gamba has been doing on
behalf of children in armed conflict and encourage her
to continue her important work in coordination with
the agencies of the United Nations, Member States, and
regional and subregional organizations, in accordance
with resolution 2427 (2018). We reiterate the full
support of my delegation.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank UnderSecretary-General Mark Lowcock and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Virginia Gamba
for their comprehensive and very informative briefings.
While carefully studying the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/724), we are also closely
following developments on the ground. Kazakhstan is
concerned about the humanitarian situation in southwestern Syria. There can be no alleviation of the
suffering without a political agreement in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015), the Geneva communiqué
16/24

27/07/2018

(S/2012/522, annex) and other platforms aimed at
bringing peace to Syria.
We are also alarmed at the significant increase in
the scale, frequency and severity of grave violations
affecting children in Syria. Last year was the deadliest
for children since the beginning of the conflict, as a
result of which 2 million Syrian children became
refugees and 2.5 million were internally displaced.
We therefore call on the parties to fulfil their
obligations under international humanitarian law to
reverse the growing number of child victims. Parties
need to protect the civilian population and avoid
attacking civilian infrastructure, especially schools and
health facilities and their personnel. It is equally critical
to implement the demining programme to save lives
and prevent lifelong injuries. There is also a need for
increased support for reintegration and rehabilitation
programmes for children formerly associated with
armed groups.
Children have been the most vulnerable and affected
victims of this seven-year conflict. Every effort must
therefore be made to provide schooling, health care and
social services so as not to have a lost generation, as
they are the country’s richest resource.
Resolution 2165 (2014) and subsequent resolutions
pertaining to cross-border operations and all other
methods of delivery are also essential for a needsbased response. It is crucial to ensure safe, sustained
and unimpeded humanitarian access for all civilians in
need, especially children, if further deterioration of the
humanitarian crisis is to be averted. That is particularly
vital across conflict lines under circumstances of
changed control.
Kazakhstan endorses the Secretary-General’s call
to ensure that the necessary security guarantees are in
place for the continued rapid and unimpeded delivery
of assistance, which must be impartial and unbiased in
character. Civilians wishing to flee the fighting should
be allowed to do so without hindrance and in full
dignity and safety, while those wishing to stay need to
be protected. We need to ensure accountability and end
impunity for those who perpetrate violations.
The humanitarian crisis requires a holistic and
comprehensive approach that goes beyond the mere
delivery of aid. It is obvious that the military option
is not a solution. Kazakhstan therefore assures its full
support for the relaunching of the political negotiations
18-24158

27/07/2018

The situation in the Middle East

through the Astana Process and its guarantor countries.
That in turn would also lead to the mitigation of the
humanitarian crisis. A durable solution can be reached
only through an inclusive dialogue of all stakeholders,
including women and young people.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Lowcock and
Ms. Gamba for their briefings.
The facts on the ground attest to improvements in
the situation in Syria, including on the humanitarian
front. With the evacuation of residents of Fo’ah and
Kafraya, there are no more besieged areas left in the
country. As the risks to safety are being reduced in
areas recently liberated from terrorists, the stage is
gradually being set for the geographical expansion of
humanitarian deliveries. However, there are still major
problems with humanitarian access in a number of
areas that are not controlled by Damascus, including
those occupied by the so-called coalition, in violation
of Syria’s sovereignty. Thus no significant progress
has been seen in the provision of vital supplies for
the inhabitants of the Rukban camp, located in a
closed zone around the United States Al-Tanf military
base. Nor do we see anything in the functioning of
this camp that contributes to establishing peace and
eradicating terrorism.
We are once again obliged to draw attention to the
need to prepare for winding down the cross-border
mechanism, which the Security Council introduced
as a special measure at a time and in circumstances
when it was not possible to conduct humanitarian
operations in a number of areas from Syrian territory
itself. The situation today is fundamentally different,
and it makes no sense to continue to maintain this relic
of the past, which infringes on Syrian sovereignty.
In addition, the Secretary-General’s review does not
give us a convincing impression of the effectiveness
of United Nations control over cross-border supplies
and the distribution of goods in Syria. By its nature the
mechanism is discriminatory, since it serves only areas
temporarily controlled by armed groups.
Russia continues to provide humanitarian assistance
to the Syrian side on a daily basis. We regularly
present the members of the Security Council with the
numbers. More than 2,800 tons of humanitarian cargo
have been delivered and more than 86,000 people have
been treated by our medics. In the past few years, in
cooperation with specialized United Nations bodies,

S/PV. 8320

the International Committee of the Red Cross and the
Syrian Arab Red Crescent, Russian specialists have
provided about 300 humanitarian convoys, sometimes
in extremely difficult conditions. We are also carrying
out joint humanitarian actions with international
partners, a good example of which was the recent
delivery of humanitarian supplies to residents of eastern
Ghouta mentioned by my French colleague, conducted
according to a top-level arrangement between Russia
and France, an operation for which Russia provided the
transport component. In the past few weeks decisive
measures have been taken to eliminate terrorist centres
in the southern regions of the country, fully responding
to the goals set by the Security Council and in the
interests of Syria’s immediate neighbours as well as
Syria itself. We in Russia have given unfailing attention
to the priorities of the regional stakeholders and we
maintain intensive contacts with them at various levels.
However, it is still too soon for rosy scenarios.
Sadly, it does not lack for moments of tragedy, as my
American colleague also mentioned today. We were
shocked by the series of terrorist attacks just the other
day in Suwayda province whose victims were in the
hundreds. The perpetrators of that crime must be severely
punished. Where punishing the guilty is concerned, it
is crucial to ensure that we have the uncompromising
determination of all international stakeholders to fight
together and with uniform standards against terrorism
in all its forms, as Council resolutions demand.
The implementation of local pacification
arrangements is continuing in the areas of Dar’a and
Quneitra provinces that have been liberated from
terrorists. These were agreed on with the direct
participation of specialists from the Russian Centre for
the Reconciliation of Opposing Sides. The militants are
given the opportunity to take advantage of the State
amnesty, regulate their status and join the efforts to
restore peaceful life, and many are making that choice.
Those who are unwilling to accept reconciliation leave
for the northern regions of the country with their
family members.
As we have said many times, and I would like to
say it again, the real humanitarian workers, whether
doctors, teachers or journalists, have nothing to fear
from the central authorities’ restoration of control in
the liberated territories. Those who should fear for
their safety are the people hiding an entirely different
activity, designed to destroy the Syrian State and
spread extremism and false propaganda, behind a

18-2415817/24

S/PV.8320

The situation in the Middle East

humanitarian facade. We receive requests for help in
evacuating all kinds of activists from south-western
Syria and review such appeals based on humanitarian
considerations and our capabilities. The standouts in
this story are the White Helmets, whom my colleagues
have already discussed today, who disguise themselves
as an organization for Syria’s civil defence and yet have
taken part in disgusting acts of provocation, including
the use of poisonous substances. Their trademark in
the information war against Damascus has become
the production of videos in which they have cynically
exploited little children. We have already reported on
such cases a number of times. We believe that once the
White Helmets are kicked out, Syria will become safer,
and that once these people have moved to their foreign
sponsors in Europe and North America they will
eventually stop engaging in provocations and refrain
from helping terrorists.
As the situation in much of Syria is normalized,
the task of returning refugees and internally displaced
persons to their permanent homes is becoming ever
more urgent. It will reduce the migration burden on
host States, primarily Lebanon, Jordan, Turkey, Egypt
and various European countries. The main thing is that
all Syrians who want to should be able to return to their
homes and take part in the restoration and development
of their homeland. This process has already started.
The numbers of citizens returning to Syria are already
in the thousands. Of course, they need appropriate
conditions for their safe and dignified return and
placement, and the Syrian authorities are ready to work
on providing them. In an official statement on 3 July,
the Government of Syria urged its citizens to return
home and affirmed its responsibility for their safety
and integrity. We note that the appeal was welcomed
in various States that have been hosting refugees from
Syria during the conflict.
I would like to emphasize that there is no basis for
the insinuations that have been made with regard to
Law No. 10 have no basis, as the Syrian authorities have
continually explained. A whole information campaign
has been cooked up accusing Damascus of wanting
to expropriate the property of critics of the current
Government living abroad. But the law’s only and very
pertinent objective is regulating the situation related to
real estate property rights, which are in a state of chaos
thanks to the conflict. It is important to note that the
Syrians are not rushing to implement the law and are
18/24

27/07/2018

prepared to continue discussing the details with United
Nations experts.
Successfully implementing the plans for the return
of refugees and internally displaced persons will
require the coordinated efforts of all stakeholders in
cooperation with the Syrian authorities. The specialized
bodies in the United Nations system should play a major
role in this, including the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees. The issue will be on
the agenda of the tenth international high-level Astanaformat meeting, to be held on 30 and 31 July in Sochi.
Russia is taking concrete steps to help. The Centre for
Refugee Reception, Distribution and Settlement has
begun its work in coordination with Damascus with an
extensive network of branches at checkpoints in various
parts of the country.
In that context, the revival of the Syrian economy,
including job creation, is a critical challenge. The
war has dealt a severe blow to many sectors of Syrian
industry and agriculture and has destroyed homes
and infrastructure. There is an acute shortage of
construction materials and heavy equipment, which
also needs fuel. The education system must be restored,
along with the medical field, a source of great pride for
the Syrian people before the conflict. The right thing
for all international partners to do would be to help the
Syrian recovery efforts and refrain from clinging to
artificial political dynamics. It is also long past time
to lift the unilateral sanctions, whose primary victims
are ordinary Syrians, as the United Nations has shown.
I would also like to touch on the issue of
humanitarian mine clearance. Our Russian specialists
have done tremendous work in sharing their expertise
with their Syrian colleagues, and more than 1,200
local sappers have been trained. We spoke about
this in detail recently in a special Security Council
meeting (see S/PV.8304). We hope that the signing of
the memorandum of understanding between the Syrian
Government and the United Nations Mine Action
Service (UNMAS) will be followed up with concrete,
practical and non-politicized measures. In Raqqa alone
there is a ton of work to be done, and regrettably, months
after the terrorist centre there was wiped out, the socalled coalition has not done enough to make the city
it destroyed habitable. We would also like to think that
our international partners could help UNMAS through
dedicated financing for demining projects in Syria and
by providing technical support.
18-24158

27/07/2018

The situation in the Middle East

In conclusion, I would like to digress from purely
humanitarian issues and point out that thanks to
Russian specialists, both sappers and archaeologists,
the monuments in Palmyra that the terrorists destroyed,
which are part of the heritage of all humankind, are
being restored. We expect the specialized international
bodies, in particular UNESCO, to show genuine interest
in this issue.
In a broader sense, it will be important to start
talking about Syria’s reintegration into the regional
trade and economic system. Unblocking a number of
internal roadways and border crossings has to be an
important prerequisite for strengthening the traditional
links between Syria and its partners in the region. That
is by far the best way to meet the goal of normalizing
relations among the States of the Middle East, and
Russia is ready to support it in every way. And, of
course, stabilization will also help advance the political
settlement process under the auspices of the United
Nations, which all members of the Security Council
unanimously support.
Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks Mr. Lowcock, the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, and Ms. Gamba, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, for their briefings.
China takes note of the Secretary-General’s recent
report on cross-border humanitarian relief operations
(S/2018/724) and would like to express its grave concerns
about the humanitarian situation in the country and the
obstacles to humanitarian activities there. We applaud
the efforts of United Nations humanitarian agencies
and related parties to ease the humanitarian situation
in certain parts of Syria. We hope that all Syrian
parties will continue to coordinate with United Nations
humanitarian relief operations. Given the ongoing
conflict in some parts of Syria, we hope that the parties
concerned will refrain from harming innocent civilians
and work to improve the protection of children affected
by the conflict. All Syrian actors must bear in mind their
country’s future and their people’s well-being, abide by
the relevant Security Council resolutions and resolve
their differences through dialogue and consultations,
with a view to easing the humanitarian situation as
quickly as possible. In all humanitarian endeavours, it
is imperative to adhere to the principles of neutrality,
impartiality and non-politicization and respect Syria’s
sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial

S/PV. 8320

integrity. The United Nations and the international
community must enhance their communication and
coordination with the Syrian Government and provide
assistance to all areas in need.
Greater support is needed from the international
community to help Syria’s neighbours accommodate
the large numbers of Syrian refugees. We have noted
the progress made in returning Syrians to their homes.
The international community must prioritize and
actively support Syria’s reconstruction, stepping up
efforts to clear mines, improvised explosive devices
and explosive remnants of war, minimize accidental
casualties among civilians and help refugees and
displaced persons return home.
Terrorist groups continue to launch attacks
within Syria. We condemn the recent terrorist attack
in Suwayda governorate in southern Syria. The
international community must enhance cooperation
and uphold uniform standards in combating all groups
that the Council designates as terrorists.
Any serious improvement of the humanitarian
situation in Syria requires greater efforts to promote
the political process. The international community
should make every effort to endorse the United Nations
as the main mediation channel and support Special
Envoy de Mistura in facilitating the political process,
in accordance with the principle of Syrian ownership
and leadership and based on resolution 2254 (2015). It
is important to ensure that the Council remains united
on the issue and can help to create the conditions
conducive to a political settlement. China attaches
great importance to the humanitarian situation in Syria.
China’s President, Xi Jinping recently announced
another $600 million in aid to Syria, Jordan, Lebanon
and other countries in support of humanitarian and
reconstruction efforts on the ground. We will continue
to help Syria and its neighbours affected by the flow of
Syrian refugees to the best of our abilities.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation would first like to join previous speakers in
condemning the recent terrorist attack perpetrated by
Da’esh in Suwayda province, which claimed hundreds
of lives.
My delegation thanks Mr. Mark Lowcock and
Ms. Virginia Gamba, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
for their briefings.

18-2415819/24

S/PV.8320

The situation in the Middle East

Côte d’Ivoire remains concerned about the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in Syria,
the result of a resurgence in the fighting that has
claimed many lives, as well as forcing the suspension
of United Nations humanitarian aid delivery owing
to a lack of security guarantees. We would like to
recall here that the cross-border aid authorized by
resolutions 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015) and
2393 (2017) remains a vital element of United Nations
humanitarian action in Syria, which has saved many
lives and eased the suffering of thousands. While
reiterating our condemnation of the military escalation
in south-western Syria, Côte d’Ivoire once again calls
for strict respect for resolution 2401 (2018), which
demands an immediate cessation of hostilities in
order to enable the unhindered and safe delivery of
humanitarian aid to people in need. I therefore remind
parties to the conflict of their obligations, pursuant to
international humanitarian law, to protect civilians,
social and educational infrastructure such as schools
and health facilities, and humanitarian workers. Above
all, they must refrain from obstructing the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to people in distress.
My delegation welcomes the agreements on the
cessation of hostilities that were reached between
Government forces and armed rebel groups at the
prompting of the Russian Federation. That truce should
allow the delivery of humanitarian aid to people in
need under safer conditions. My country also especially
welcomes the joint humanitarian operation of the
Russian Federation and the French Republic, which,
with United Nations assistance, delivered medical
assistance and basic necessities to people in eastern
Ghouta. At the same time as that operation in eastern
Ghouta, it is equally fortunate that nearly 40 Syrian Red
Crescent trucks were able to access formerly besieged
areas of the southern province of Dar’a to distribute
assistance to the people who stayed behind.
Similarly, my delegation welcomes the gradual
improvement in the security and health situation in
Raqqa, which has enabled some 138,000 civilians to
return to their homes since the liberation of the city
from the grips of Da’esh in October 2017. My country
encourages the international community to continue
its efforts so as to respond appropriately to the
humanitarian crisis in Syria and, in that regard, thanks
the border countries for the multifaceted assistance
provided to 5.6 million Syrian refugees.
20/24

27/07/2018

Côte d’Ivoire, aware of the impact that that influx
of refugees can have on the economy and stability of
host countries, urges the international community to
consider the question of the return of Syrian refugees
to their homes of origin with the utmost attention.
That return must take place in accordance with current
international standards, which prescribe a voluntary
and sustainable return of refugees under safe and
dignified conditions to enable them to fully contribute
to the national reconciliation process and the overall
political settlement of the crisis in Syria.
My delegation believes that the international
community’s efforts to provide a satisfactory
humanitarian response to the needs of the Syrian
people must be part of the overall framework of our
collective efforts to find a political solution to the crisis.
Only a credible and inclusive peace process, based on
the relevant provisions of resolution 2254 (2015), can
provide a definitive solution to the crisis in that country.
With that in mind, my country welcomes the
various initiatives aimed at relaunching the inter-Syrian
dialogue process and encourages Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
political process in Syria, to take the necessary steps,
within the framework of the Geneva process, to set up
a committee charged with drafting the new constitution
of Syria, as was decided at the Sochi meeting in Russia.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire urges the Syrian
parties to embrace dialogue and to advance the political
process with a view to achieving a lasting solution to
the crisis, in accordance with the road map of resolution
2254 (2015). We commend the Special Envoy’s personal
commitment to seeking a political settlement to the
Syrian crisis and assure him of our full support.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We would also like to
join others in thanking Under-Secretary-General
Mark Lowcock and Under-Secretary-General Virginia
Gamba for their briefings.
The humanitarian situation in different parts of
Syria remains dire due to military operations, including
in the south-west. Civilian casualties, destruction
of humanitarian facilities and displacement remain
alarming, as the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/724) of 20 July explained. We reiterate our call
for an end to the hostilities, which are worsening the
humanitarian crisis. While we express our appreciation
to the United Nations and its humanitarian partners
for continuing to reach millions of Syrians, as stated
18-24158

27/07/2018

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8320

by Under-Secretary-General Lowcock, it is critical to
ensure quality access, in particular in some areas that
have seen a change of control, in order to provide aid
to all Syrians on the basis of their humanitarian needs.
Access challenges — including the curtailment of crossborder operations due to lack of security assurances in
south-west Syria, as stated in the most recent report of
the Secretary-General — should be addressed so that
safe, unimpeded and sustained humanitarian access
can be ensured.

our action is urgently needed. Time is running out
for a generation of Syrian children. Syria is the most
dangerous conflict-affected country for children. Last
year was the deadliest yet, and unthinkably, the plight of
Syria’s children continues to worsen, with the number
of children killed and injured in the first two months of
2018 almost surpassing last year’s total. The Council,
the parties to the conflict and all Member States
listening today must now act to improve the situation
of children trapped in the nightmare of the Syrian war.

Furthermore, the protection of civilians and civilian
infrastructure is indispensable to alleviate the suffering
of civilians, including children. While it is known that
all Syrians have been suffering because of the ongoing
humanitarian tragedy, children have been among
the most vulnerable groups. They have been killed,
injured and displaced and have experienced enormous
emotional, psychological and physical suffering.

To that end, I want to highlight four areas of the
humanitarian response where we can and must do better.
Acting to protect children in Syria today in these four
areas will not only improve their lives, but will help
build peace in Syria and prevent a relapse into conflict.

We all agree that the future of Syria will be in
the hands of today’s children. Hence, they should be
protected from any violence and be allowed to get
humanitarian aid. In that regard, we thank the United
Nations and its humanitarian partners for providing
children with targeted assistance. However, ultimately
it is the restoration of peace that can save and protect
Syrian children from their unspeakable agony and
allow them to realize their potential.
As we have been repeatedly stressing, ultimately
it is a Syrian-led comprehensive political dialogue
facilitated by resolution 2254 (2015) that can address
the humanitarian tragedy in Syria.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Sweden.
We are meeting once again to discuss a report
of the Secretary-General (S/2018/724) that clearly
outlines how the principles and rules of humanitarian
law are repeatedly and systematically violated.
International calls for an end to the violence in Syria,
for humanitarian access and the protection of civilians
are ignored, and the resolutions of this very Council are
disregarded. Yet we must continue our efforts to push
for a political solution to the conflict and to alleviate
the suffering of the Syrian people. In our response to
the plight of the Syrian crisis on children, we should be
able to come together.
As we have heard today from Under-SecretaryGeneral Lowcock and Special Representative Gamba,

First is access. Over 5 million children are in need
of humanitarian assistance. Resolution 2427 (2018)
calls on all parties to allow and facilitate safe and
unhindered humanitarian access to children, and it
condemns unlawful denial of humanitarian access and
depriving civilians, particularly children, of objects
indispensable to their survival. Under-SecretaryGeneral Lowcock has reported to us today, and indeed
every month, on the unlawful denial of humanitarian
access. That is also having far-reaching indirect
consequences that are not always understood, but
include negative coping mechanisms such as increased
child labour, the recruitment of children to armed
groups and an increase in child marriage. Aid workers
report that 14-year-old girls are mothers to more than
one child.
We call on all parties to immediately grant access
to all those in need, keeping all options open for the
United Nations to reach as many people as possible,
including cross-border options,increased United
Nations cross-line access, including to areas that have
recently changed control, and to protect humanitarian
workers so that they can continue to do their job.
Secondly, with regard to education, as we have heard
today from the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Virginia Gamba, one in three schools in Syria
is closed. The result is that over 2 million children are
denied their right to education. School should offer
a place of stability and safety for children. However,
attacks on schools have been systematic and rampant.
Last year 67 attacks were reported, most of which
inflicted by air strikes. Children who have been

18-2415821/24

S/PV.8320

The situation in the Middle East

besieged, such as those in eastern Ghouta, have often
been robbed of several years of schooling.
Resolution 2427 (2018) again urges all parties to
refrain from actions that impede children’s access to
education and strongly condemns attacks on schools.
All parties to the conflict must cease all attacks on
schools and give all children, including those without
civil documentation, access to schools. We call for the
deconfliction of schools to be stepped up, particularly
in Idlib province. All attacks against schools, in
contravention of international humanitarian law, must
be investigated and the perpetrators brought to justice.
We also call on all of us donors to step up funding for
education as part of the emergency response.
The third area is mental health. The stress of war
is often too much for adults; the effects on children
can be profound and lifelong. Resolution 2427 (2018)
stresses the importance of funding mental health and
psychosocial programming in humanitarian contexts
and ensuring that all affected children receive the
support they need. The war in Syria has created a
mental health crisis among children, with children
exhibiting frequent symptoms of post-traumatic stress
disorder. Two thirds of children have lost a loved
one, had their homes bombed or suffered war-related
injuries. The situation is further exacerbated by sexual
violence, forced marriages, sexual enslavement and
trafficking of both girls and boys. Less than 5 per cent
of humanitarian funding in Syria is channelled towards
protection, mental health, psychosocial services or
education in emergencies. We therefore encourage
donors and the humanitarian community to help us
change that today.
Fourth is protection. The year 2017 saw the highest
number to date of grave violations against children in
Syria. The majority of the children killed and injured are
victims of air strikes, with systematic attacks against
hospitals and medical facilities contributing to the high
numbers of child casualties. Many have been separated
from their families. Girls in internally displaced person
camps are particularly vulnerable to sexual violence.
Children with a perceived association with the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant or Da’esh have unique
protection concerns. Resolution 2427 (2018) emphasizes
that children that have been recruited by armed groups
should be treated primarily as victims of violations of
international law, and it urges a focus on rehabilitation
and reintegration for children formerly associated with
armed groups. Syria should be no exception.
22/24

27/07/2018

I reiterate our call on all parties to immediately
implement resolution 2401 (2018) and existing deescalation agreements in Idlib and the south and to
fully respect their obligations under international
law, including international humanitarian law. We
specifically call on Syria to implement the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict, which
it has ratified, and to immediately cease committing
the six grave violations listed.
Accountability for all violations and abuses against
children and others must be ensured. We will not relent
in our demands for justice at the international and
national levels, We continue to believe that the situation
in Syria should be referred to the International Criminal
Court. Until that time, we support the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011 and other relevant mechanisms in their efforts
to bring about justice for crimes committed in Syria.
We also call on our humanitarian partners to integrate
protection earlier into the first response, and on
donors to step up funding to protection efforts. That is
particularly urgent in the south.
We will not stop calling for full respect for
international law, including international humanitarian
law and humanitarian principles, not least with regard
to access. Together we must shoulder the responsibility
entrusted to us. I want to voice my support for the three
very concrete asks made just now by the representative
of the United Kingdom. In particular, we are deeply
concerned about the safety of humanitarian and medical
personnel, civil defence workers, civil society, human
rights activists and journalists who are at particular
risk of being targeted by the Syrian forces We will
follow developments closely until our next meeting,
when we will take stock of the implementation of those
three requests.
Were it not for the brave and determined efforts of
humanitarian, health and child protection workers, the
situation of children in Syria would be even worse. I
want to commend the United Nations and its partner
organizations for all the work that is being done to
assist children in Syria. On a monthly basis, UNICEF
alone reaches 3 million people in Syria. I hope that
today’s meeting can help to renew our efforts to help
18-24158

27/07/2018

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8320

and protect those children, to avoid losing an entire
generation that deserves and needs our support.

terrorist groups that were besieging them and had used
them for many years as human shields.

I now resume my functions as President of
Security Council.

The day before yesterday, we sent out an official
letter responding to the content of the fifty-third report
of the Secretary-General on the humanitarian situation
in Syria, and I should like to make the following
comments in that regard.

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Hallak (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I am surprised by the logic of
representatives of some delegations who have described
the liberation of Syrian territories from terrorist groups
by saying that the Syrian Government is continuing
to seize territories. The Syrian Army and its allies are
liberating territories that were under the control of
armed terrorist groups, which for many years had used
children, women and the elderly as human shields. I
should like to underscore from this seat that the day will
come when all the aggressive military forces, without
exception, will leave Syrian territory. There will be no
one to carry illegal arms against the Syrian people and
the Syrian State.
We had hoped to hear a collective reaction from the
Security Council to the bloody massacre perpetrated
by the terrorist organization Da’esh in the Al-Suwayda
city two days ago.
As we are discussing the fifty-third report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/724) on the humanitarian
situation in Syria, I should like to assure members of
the Council once again that the Syrian Government is
eager to provide all kinds of humanitarian assistance
to all its citizens throughout Syrian territory. That is
a duty to which it remains committed. It is also keen
on cooperating and coordinating with its humanitarian
partners and the United Nations, in compliance
with the guiding principles of General Assembly
resolution 46/182, on coordinating and strengthening
humanitarian aid. The resolution also calls for respect
for the sovereignty and independence of States and
underlines the role of the State involved to supervise
the distribution of humanitarian aid on its territories
and the need to respect the principles of neutrality,
integrity and non-politicization.
The constitutional and legal duties enshrined in
all international instruments, including the relevant
Security Council resolutions on combating terrorism,
require the Syrian Government to carry out military
operations in order to liberate civilians from the armed

First, day after day, the Syrian State — thanks to
its institutions and the support of the Syrian people and
with international support from Syria’s real friends,
who believe in the principles of international law — is
making important progress on the ground in liberating
Syrian territory from the armed terrorist organizations
that were spread among civilians while using them
as human shields. They exploited and recruited their
children and seized the humanitarian assistance that
was sent to them. Those achievements and significant
efforts of the Syrian national institutions have ensured
support for the Syrian people and the delivery of United
Nations humanitarian aid to them.
Secondly, the counter-terrorism operations carried
out by the Syrian State are in line with its constitutional
mandate and consistent with the principles of
international humanitarian law and the relevant United
Nations resolutions. For its part, the United Nations
should step up its support to the Syrians, in accordance
with humanitarian principles, especially in coordinating
with the Syrian national institutions, rather than with
the so-called local councils, which are in fact unreal
entities affiliated with terrorist organizations and
secession bodies. The authors of the report have been
trying to promote these entities in an unprofessional
way, and make up allegations on their important
humanitarian role in the delivery of humanitarian aid.
Thirdly, contrary to what certain people have
advocated, the successful military operations carried
out by the Syrian Arab Army and its allies against
armed terrorist groups that controlled certain regions
classified by the United Nations as besieged or hardto-reach, in addition to achieving compromises or
reconciliation agreements in other regions, have
alleviated the suffering of civilians and lowered
the number of such regions, while to a great extent
facilitating the delivery of humanitarian aid to them.
Fourthly, the Syrian Arab Republic stresses
once again the fact that unilateral coercive economic
measures imposed by the European Union, the United
States and others against the Syrian Arab Republic

18-2415823/24

S/PV.8320

The situation in the Middle East

significantly hamper our ability to meet the basic needs
of the Syrian people and to improve their means of
subsistence. We note the latest United Nations report
on the negative effects of those measures, which hinder
humanitarian efforts at the national and international
levels. This is the report of the Human Rights Special
Rapporteur on the negative impact of unilateral coercive
measures on the enjoyment of human rights (A/72/370)
and his latest briefing to the International Syria Support
Group, in which he underscored the seriousness of
the continuation of such measures with regard to the
humanitarian situation of Syrians, particularly in terms
of health, education, electricity, water and remittances.
Fifthly, the operations led by the Syrian State to
liberate Syrians from terrorism in the south of the
country have unveiled the true motivations of some
parties and Governments that were concerned not about
meeting the needs of the Syrians who were displaced
to the Syrian border with Jordan, but rather about
protecting the armed terrorist groups in the region,
particularly members of the White Helmets terrorist
organization. This terrorist organization was and
continues to be the logistical and operational hand of
the terrorist Al-Nusra Front and other terrorist groups,
such as Al-Qaida. Those terrorist organizations carry
out attacks against Syrians and destabilize Syria and
the region. The White Helmets, under orders from their
sponsors, fabricate insidious information and falsify
evidence to mislead the international public opinion
with regard to Syria’s use of chemical weapons with
the aim of justifying aggressive action against Syria by
certain permanent members of the Security Council.
My country stresses that the humanitarian system of
the United Nations must make serious efforts to regain
the confidence of the Syrian Government through a new
approach to responding to the humanitarian situation
in the Syrian Arab Republic, based on the principles
of objectivity, transparency and impartiality. However,
that cannot happen if a shadow continues to be cast on
the achievements of the Syrian State and its efforts to
meet the needs of its people, and if a blind eye continues
to be turned to certain States that support terrorists in
Syria and exploit the humanitarian situation for their
narrow political agendas.
My country’s delegation listened carefully to
the briefing of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict.
My delegation had sent an official response on the
annual report contained in document S/2018/465. We

24/24

27/07/2018

confirm once again that the accusations made during
the briefing against the Syrian Government totally and
deliberately ignored the information that the Syrian
Government has provided to the Secretariat, as well
as the fact that the suffering of Syrian children is the
result of the practices of armed terrorist groups.
The briefing and the report of the Special
Representative are predicated on a false premise based
on incredible information provided by suspicious
sources linked to the armed terrorist groups. All the
allegations made are refuted by the testimony of civilians
protected by the Syrian Arab Army after having been
evacuated from the areas under the control of armed
terrorist groups for many years. Their testimony tells
about injustice, exploitation and starvation inflicted
on civilians and their children by those groups, whose
crimes do not spare women, children or the elderly.
The Syrian Government has provided the Office
of the Special Representative with documented
information on child recruitment by armed terrorist
groups. We deny and totally reject what is stated in
the report and characterized as proof of recruitment of
children by the Syrian Government. If that were true,
why have we not received any detailed information on
that issue despite our repeated requests?
The Syrian Government asks the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-general to launch
an investigation into the fate of the children who were
kidnapped following the terrorist bombing that targeted
buses meant for the evacuation of civilians leaving
the villages of Fo’ah and Kafraya in the Al-Rashidin
area of Aleppo province on 15 April. According to the
information held by the Syrian Government, 32 of these
kidnapped children are currently at a care refuge called
DAR RAF in the Reyhanlı region of southern Turkey,
while the rest of the kidnapped children are in the Atma
refugee camp.
Finally, I want to comment on the allegations
concerning Law No. 10. I would like to inform the
Council that two days ago, my delegation sent a letter
to the Secretary-General and the President of the
Security Council in response to the false and deceptive
allegations regarding the nature of this Law and its
ends. My delegation’s letter clearly defines the Law and
explains its legal nature, which is to protect properties.
We reject all allegations claiming that the objective of
the Law is to confiscate properties.
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.

18-24158
