148

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

composition of the Secretariat and resolution 3416
(XXX) on the employment of women in the Secretariat
has been limited,
Reaffirming that the considerations of efficiency, competence and integrity in the employment of staff, as
laid down in Article 101, paragraph 3, of the Charter
of the United Nations, do not conflict with the principle
of an equitable geographical distribution in the composition of the Secretariat,
Concerned that the reforms of personnel policy approved by the General Assembly are proceeding too
slowly,
Recognizing that the highest standards of efficiency,
competence and integrity are not exclusively restricted
to nationals of any particular Member State or group
of Member States,
Reaffirming that the principle of equitable geographical distribution should be applied to the Secretariat as
a whole and that, to this end, no post, individual department, division or unit in the Secretariat should be
considered as the exclusive preserve of any individual
Member State or any region,
Desirous of strengthening the role of the Office of
Personnel Services of the Secretariat in the implementation of the numerous resolutions adopted on this
rmbject,
Convinced that to achieve the objectives and goals
of the United Nations, especially with regard to the
new international economic order, the developing countries should be adequately represented at all levels in
the Secretariat and, in particular, at the senior levels,
1. Adopts:
(a) The new method of establishing the desirable
ranges of posts for Member States as described in paragraph 11 of the report of the Secretary-General on
the composition of the Secretariat;35
( b) The new desirable range of 2 to 7, as proposed
by the Secretary-General in paragraph 14 of his report,
for Member States with the minimum assessment in
the apportionment of United Nations expenses, thus
providing for a wider distribution of posts in the Secretariat;
2. Reaffirms its resolution 3417 A (XXX) and
requests the Secretary-General, in the implementation
of that resolution, to take effective measures, either by
recruitment or promotion, or both, to increase the
number of staff from all developing countries in senior
and policy-making posts in the Secretariat so as to
ensure their appropriate representation at those levels;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to give priority
to the recruitment of candidates from among nationals
of unrepresented and under-represented Member 1States;
4. Urges the Secretary-General to increase his
efforts to attract younger people to the service of the
United Nations, thus increasing the proportion of youth
and achieving a better age balance in the Secretariat;
5. Urges Member States to intensify their efforts
to seek and to put forward for consideration qualified
women candidates for Professional positions, particularly
at the policy-making level, within the United Nations
and specialized agencies, in order to improve the proportion of women in senior positions within the context
of equitable geographical distribution;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure,
through all appropriate measures, equal opportunity

for the promotion of women in the Secretariat, without any discrimination based on sex;
7. Also requests the Secretary-General to appoint
as soon as possible a panel to investigate allegations of
discriminatory treatment and to recommend appropriate
action;
8. Further requests the Secretary-General to provide the General Assembly at its thirty-third session
with precise data showing the result of his efforts to
realize the objectives of the present resolution.
81st plenary meeting
29 November 1976
31/27.

Implementation of personnel policy reforms

The General Assembly,
Recalling its decision at the twenty-ninth session
authorizing the Secretary-General to proceed with the
implementation of the proposals for the improvement
of the personnel policies and practices of the United
Nations contained in his report and requesting him to
report to the General Assembly at its thirty-first session
on the progress made in the implementation of those
proposals, 89
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the progress made up to 30 June 1976•0 and
the report of the Joint Inspection Unit on the implementation of the personnel policy reforms approved by the
General Assembly in 1974/1
Concerned about the slow pace of the implementation of those reforms,
Taking note of the statement that, in the opinion of
the Secretary-General, the reforms should be substantially put into effect in 1977 and 1978,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary steps to accelerate the implementation of the
above-mentioned reforms;
2. Invites the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-third session a report
on the application of his proposals, drawing attention
in particular to any of those proposals that may not
yet have been fully implemented.
81 st plenary meeting
29 November 1976
31/93.

Medium-term plan

The General Assembly,
Recalling the relevant recommendations of the Ad
Hoe Committee of Experts to Examine the Finances of
the United Nations and the Specialized Agencies/2
Recalling also its resolutions 3199 (XXVIII) of
18 December 1973, 3392 (XXX) of 20 November
1975 and 3534 (XXX) of 17 December 1975,
Bearing in mind Economic and Social Council resolutions 2008 (LX) of 14 May 1976 and 2019 (LXI)
of 3 August 1976,
39 Ibid.,

Twenty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 31 (A/9631),

p. 139, item 81, para. (c) (i) and (ii).
40 A/C.5/31/9.
41 A/31/264 and Corr. I.
42 Official Records of the

General Assembly, Twenty-first
Session, Annexes. agenda item 80, document A/6343.
