United Nations

S/PV.6416

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6416th meeting
Friday, 5 November 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Sir Mark Lyall Grant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Ebner
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Briens
Mr. Onanga Ndiaye
Mr. Kodama
Mr. Salam
Mr. Heller
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Mugoya
Ms. Anderson

Agenda
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau and on the
activities of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in that country
(S/2010/550)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-62182 (E)

*1062182*

S/PV.6416

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on
developments in Guinea-Bissau and on the
activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in that country
(S/2010/550)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Guinea-Bissau, in which he requests
to be invited to participate in the consideration of the
item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in
the consideration of the item, without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Da Gama
(Guinea-Bissau) took a seat at the Council table.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Joseph Mutaboba,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
head of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Mutaboba to take a seat at the
Council table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall also take it
that the Security Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Her Excellency Mrs. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti,
Permanent Representative of Brazil, in her capacity as
Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
It is so decided.

2

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from the Permanent Representative of
Gabon to the United Nations, in which he requests that
the Special Representative of the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission for Guinea-Bissau, His
Excellency Mr. Sebastião Isata, be invited to
participate in accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure. If I hear no objection, I
shall take it that the Council agrees to extend an
invitation to him under rule 39.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Isata to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
I wish to draw the attention of members to
document S/2010/550, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau
and on the activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in that country.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Joseph Mutaboba, Her Excellency
Mrs. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti and His Excellency
Mr. Sebastião Isata. I would like to remind the briefers
to keep their remarks to 10 minutes, and I shall hold
them to that time limit.
I now give the floor to Mr. Joseph Mutaboba.
Mr. Mutaboba: In my presentation today, I will
focus mainly on the most recent political and security
developments, as well as on efforts by the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in GuineaBissau (UNIOGBIS) and partners to help materialize
ongoing plans by the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP), in addition to
bilateral and other multilateral partners, in support of
the nationally-owned holistic approach to security
sector reform and efforts to protect and stabilize key
State institutions and sustain a genuine and inclusive
political dialogue among and within the leadership and
opposition in Guinea-Bissau.
Following the seventh working session of the
International Contact Group on Guinea-Bissau, held on
24 September in New York, and the subsequent

10-62182

S/PV.6416

publication of the letter addressed by President Malam
Bacai Sanhá to the Chairman of ECOWAS, President
Goodluck Jonathan of Nigeria, intensive consultations
have taken place in the subregion with a view to
reaching consensus on the scope, modalities and timing
for the finalization and implementation of the joint
CPLP-ECOWAS partnership. The Secretary of State
for External Relations of Angola, Mr. George Chikoti,
undertook a visit to Abuja, Nigeria, in mid-October for
consultations with the ECOWAS Commission on the
way forward. He subsequently visited several capitals
in the subregion to further discuss practical
arrangements for assisting the Government of GuineaBissau within the framework of the joint CPLPECOWAS partnership.
In that context, I met last week in Luanda with
President José Eduardo dos Santos of Angola, who
informed me of his support for the activation of a joint
technical security sector reform task force, comprising
ECOWAS, CPLP, the African Union and the United
Nations, in order to enhance coordination and facilitate
resource mobilization efforts for priority security
sector reform activities. The work of such an
inter-agency task force would fit naturally within
ongoing initiatives, such as the continuous and
multidimensional support that UNIOGBIS is providing
to the nationally-owned security sector reform
coordination mechanisms. That move is consistent with
the recommendations made in the last communiqué of
the International Contact Group on Guinea-Bissau and
with the views expressed by the national authorities of
Guinea-Bissau, who insist that the proposed
partnership between CPLP and ECOWAS should be
closely coordinated and supported by the United
Nations.
Under current plans, the proposed road map put
together in August by the Chiefs of Defence Staff of
ECOWAS and Angola — in the name of CPLP — is
aligned with the existing national strategic framework
for security sector reform of Guinea-Bissau and
provides for the protection of members of key national
institutions, as well for training and mentoring of
defence forces and members of police institutions. It
should be recalled that police institutions are already
supported bilaterally by partners such as Portugal and
Brazil, as well as by UNIOGBIS. Angola has, for its
part, prepared plans to also assist with further training
activities and the rehabilitation of some of the
infrastructure of the defence forces and security

10-62182

institutions, including the training academy of Cumere,
where the training of the elements to be retained in the
armed forces will be carried out.
Once the endorsement of the joint CPLPECOWAS framework of assistance to Guinea-Bissau is
finalized by national and regional partners, UNIOGBIS
will be prepared to present a comprehensive briefing to
the Security Council detailing the proposed modalities,
timing and resources related to the implementation of
the framework. The national authorities of GuineaBissau are of the view that formal support from the
Security Council for that initiative would be crucial.
That position is shared by the leadership of CPLP,
ECOWAS and the African Union. However, it is
crucial to ensure that the political, technical and
financial support extended by regional partners and the
United Nations to Guinea-Bissau authorities produces
tangible results within a defined timeline and is not
perceived as an open-ended commitment. In other
words, such support should be based on clear
benchmarks to measure progress. In addition, the
authorities should show clear signs of commitment to
restructuring the armed forces and revitalizing their
leadership.
In that context, support for the security sector
reform priorities, including the pension fund and
capacity-building initiatives, is urgent. I therefore
strongly encourage all interested partners to boost their
support to security sector reform priorities in GuineaBissau within a multilateral and/or bilateral framework,
as an urgent means to help consolidate peace and
stability in the country and promote good governance
and sustainable development.
The non-implementation of the recent decision by
the Supreme Military Court to release from detention
the former Chief of Defense Staff, Vice Admiral
Zamora
Induta,
demonstrates
the
continued
predominance of the military leadership over the
judiciary, and to some extent the executive. It will
undoubtedly increase the reluctance of some
international partners to engage with the authorities of
Guinea-Bissau, as it underlines the lack of civilian
oversight over the armed forces and the existing
environment of impunity in the country. Urgent actions
should therefore be taken by the national authorities of
Guinea-Bissau to demonstrate their resolve to fight
impunity and promote national reconciliation.

3

S/PV.6416

With regard to the establishment of a genuine
political dialogue within the leadership of GuineaBissau, I am pleased to report that, on 14 October,
President Malam Bacai Sanhá and Prime Minister
Carlos Gomes Júnior met with the diplomatic
community in Bissau as part of our efforts on the
ground to engage the two leaders on issues of crucial
interest for the stability of the country and to help them
overcome alleged mistrust between them. Furthermore,
in recent weeks, divisions within the ruling African
Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde
have continued to deepen. Against that background, I
will continue to use my good offices, with the support
of international partners in Bissau, to ensure that the
two leaders stay the course in fulfilling their
commitment to the stabilization of the country.
Meanwhile, with regard to the investigations into
the March and June 2009 political assassinations,
UNIOGBIS has continued to insist, along with the
Office of the Prosecutor General, that any assistance
from international partners to complete the
investigations had to be linked to a commitment by
national institutions to jointly assess the credibility and
transparency of the investigation process conducted so
far.
Let me now turn to the issue of the fight against
drug trafficking and organized crime. The Council will
recall that in recent months I strongly advocated for a
holistic response, involving not only transit countries
like Guinea-Bissau but also countries of origin and
destination. I am encouraged to note that in recent
weeks, and in particular during a visit I undertook to
Europe in September, a number of partners have
demonstrated interest in engaging in more robust
strategies to tackle illicit drug trafficking and
organized crime.
We are also exploring with the national
authorities a memorandum of understanding that would
allow vessels from international partners to conduct
policing activities in the territorial waters of GuineaBissau — similar to those conducted in Cape Verde and
Senegal — with the collaboration of trained police
officers and including the strengthening and
enhancement of national structures to counter
transnational crime, notably drug trafficking and
organized crime.
Lastly, I continue to advocate for interested
partners to extend their assistance to Guinea-Bissau in

4

terms of equipment for airports, ports and borders, to
enhance control and deterrence in the fight against
drug trafficking and organized crime. Let me stress,
however, that regional actors face significant
difficulties in collecting reliable statistics and evidence
of drug trafficking activities. Hopefully, with the
establishment of transnational crime units in support of
ECOWAS plans to curb drug trafficking, the
implementation of the West Africa Coast Initiative will
help improve such a situation.
I am pleased to confirm that in Guinea-Bissau the
legal, political and operational conditions for the
establishment of a transnational crime unit have been
met. UNIOGBIS has the capacity to follow up on this
process, in close collaboration with international and
national partners. However, more robust action from
the international community is still needed — for
example, to name and shame entities involved in those
activities and to pass legislation to allow the freeze or
confiscation of assets and bank accounts, which could
help deter and combat such destabilizing phenomena.
Other mechanisms to further enhance data collection
and information-sharing at regional and international
levels could possibly be considered.
Although Guinea-Bissau has seen a series of
setbacks, which have contributed to the increased
feeling of frustration among some international
partners, there have nevertheless been some positive
steps and developments that are worth mentioning
without going into detail. The national authorities were
able to flush out ghost civil servants by adopting a new
salary payment method. Salaries are paid regularly.
The national reconciliation and dialogue conference
process was launched on 19 August. The national
justice system policy was adopted. The national
Security Sector Reform Steering Committee has
resumed its work. And our offices have co-located with
the Secretariat, which is a boost.
An understanding between the President and the
Prime Minister led to an official request for assistance
in the fight against drug trafficking in a letter that the
Secretary-General has received and that I trust will be
forwarded to the Council. The pension fund legislative
framework has been finalized and security sector
reform legislative packages approved. Progress has
been made on police reform, including the vetting of
police officers and the construction of a model police
station. And the African Union has established a

10-62182

S/PV.6416

permanent presence in Bissau, whose representative is
here today.
In closing, and as stated in the report before the
Council, if endorsed, the CPLP-ECOWAS road map,
together with the pledges already made by CPLP
member States for assistance in the areas of holistic
security sector reform, should contribute to enhancing
the protection of State institutions and increased
civilian oversight over military structures. This
partnership should also help create conditions for the
implementation of critical aspects of the security sector
reform programme, including the retirement,
reinsertion and reintegration of military personnel,
including former combatants, and the fight against
impunity, drug trafficking and organized crime.
Hopefully, if well articulated and coordinated, it should
create conditions for the renewed commitment of
donors and other key partners to continue to support
the economic reforms and debt relief programmes for
Guinea-Bissau.
This emerging momentum has reopened a
window of opportunity for enhanced collaboration
between the international community and the
leadership of Guinea-Bissau following months of
impasse. UNIOGBIS, under my leadership, will
continue to ensure that this opportunity is not missed.
The President: I thank Mr. Mutaboba for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Viotti.
Mrs. Viotti: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
invitation to brief the Security Council in my capacity
as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). I extend a warm
welcome to the Permanent Representative of GuineaBissau to the United Nations. I also thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Joseph
Mutaboba for his remarks and his work as head of the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau. I also extend a very warm welcome to
the representative of the African Union to GuineaBissau.
The events of 1 April and the Government’s
response to them raised concerns in the international
community. Guinea-Bissau’s partners believe that it is
important for the country to show stronger commitment
to the principle of civilian control of the military, the
fight against drug trafficking and effective reform of

10-62182

the security sector. At the same time, there seems to be
consensus that continued engagement with GuineaBissau is necessary to assist the country in building
democratic governance and effectively addressing key
challenges. What is needed now is to identify the kind
of support that the international community can
provide under the current circumstances to help
enhance
national
political
stability,
promote
reconciliation and combat impunity and organized
crime.
During the past few months, the Peacebuilding
Commission has sought to remain engaged with
Guinea-Bissau on the basis of the principle of mutual
accountability. We have attempted to clearly convey to
the authorities the need to effectively and promptly
address some issues of grave concern to the
international community, while reiterating our
willingness to continue to support the country in its
efforts towards political stability and socioeconomic
development.
On 16 July, the country-specific configuration
held a meeting in New York with the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Guinea-Bissau, Mr. Adelino Mano
Queta. On that occasion, he reiterated that security
sector reform was his Government’s top priority and
the only way to achieve stability in the country. He
also deplored the scourge of drug trafficking. He
indicated that his country cannot address these
problems by itself and requested the continued support
of the international community. Members of the
configuration expressed their concern with the events
of 1 April, the continued detention of Admiral Zamora
Induta and other officers, as well as with subsequent
appointments in the military. They stressed the need for
civilian control of the armed forces. Members also
emphasized the need to stay engaged with GuineaBissau and extend to it the necessary support in an
atmosphere of mutual accountability.
Other initiatives are also noteworthy. Bilateral
meetings, consultations with the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) and the Community
of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP) and a
meeting of the International Contact Group have
discussed the situation in Guinea-Bissau and possible
avenues for international engagement.
Security sector reform continues to be critical to
addressing the recurrent political instability in the
country and strengthening civilian control over the

5

S/PV.6416

armed forces. At the same time, efforts in this area
cannot ignore the current circumstances. A reflection is
currently under way as to how we can best help
Guinea-Bissau move forward in security sector reform
at this juncture. In any case, it will be important to
continue to support regional efforts conducted by
ECOWAS and CPLP, as was just described by
Mr. Mutaboba.
Another issue of grave concern to the members of
the PBC is drug trafficking. An effective fight against
illegal drugs requires functioning State institutions,
especially in the areas of justice and security, as well as
firm political will. The latter is key to securing the
international assistance that Guinea-Bissau needs to
increase its national capacity in this domain. Those
efforts must be reinforced by a regional approach. We
therefore emphasize the importance of the role played
by ECOWAS. Also, in this regard, both as individual
Governments and collectively, we must all do more and
better to support the implementation of the ECOWAS
regional action plan and the West Africa Coast
Initiative.
International efforts to help consolidate peace in
Guinea-Bissau should not rest solely on securityrelated cooperation. In order for peace to take hold, the
foundations for socio-economic development must be
strengthened. We need to support capacity-building and
help the country revitalize its economy. At the end of
the day, it is a dynamic economy and the creation of
job opportunities that will generate the revenues
needed to provide basic services to the population and
allow the State to function in a sustainable manner.
In spite of the challenges remaining, GuineaBissau has made significant progress in managing its
economy and promoting development. In 2008 and
2009, export revenues increased and the Government
was able to pay civil service salaries on time. As
indicated by the Secretary-General in his latest report
(S/2010/550), tax revenues increased by an impressive
46.9 per cent in the first quarter of 2010. Important
infrastructure was completed. With the support of the
International Monetary Fund, Guinea-Bissau has
advanced fiscal management in a way that is expected
to lead the country towards the Heavily Indebted Poor
Countries Initiative (HIPC) completion point. I invite
all concerned parties, including the Peacebuilding
Fund, to reaffirm, in concrete terms, their support for
that goal.

6

Despite the recurring challenges, we must
persevere in our collective efforts to support GuineaBissau. That requires that international partners look
beyond current setbacks and support long-term
political and economic stability. It also means that the
national authorities, including the military, must fully
restore international confidence.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Sebastiao Isata.
Mr. Isata: I would like, first of all, to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council and to express, on behalf
of the African Union (AU), my sincere gratitude for the
opportunity given us to join this important meeting on
Guinea-Bissau. Personally, I am honoured to address
the Council for the first time in my present capacity.
We attach great significance to this engagement within
the context of the growing partnership between the
African Union and the Security Council, and with the
United Nations as a whole.
Once again, the Security Council is called on to
assume the responsibility for which it was established:
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Today, we gather to continue our efforts on the
situation in Guinea-Bissau, a country that has been
living in a cycle of political instability for decades, a
result of the weakness of the State institutions and
legal system, particularly the administration of
criminal justice.
We are grateful for the comprehensive briefing
provided by the colleagues who preceded me. I will be
very brief in discussing just a few points, from our
point of view, concerning the situation on the ground.
As a result of the absence of the effective rule of
law and the spread of drug trafficking, corruption and
poverty — which have been pervasive there for many
years — Guinea-Bissau has experienced decades of
instability. The African Union, to strengthen its efforts
to help bring an end to that chronic problem and
restore constitutional normality, decided to open a
permanent office in Guinea-Bissau, as a first step in the
development of a joint stabilization mission of the AU
and the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), pursuant to the decision of the Assembly
of the African Union at its special session held in
August 2009 in Tripoli, Libya.

10-62182

S/PV.6416

We are pleased to note at this juncture that,
despite all the difficulties it faces, Guinea-Bissau has
shown encouraging signs regarding the implementation
of the decisions and recommendations of the African
Union and the international community. Those signs
can be summarized as follows.
President Malam Bacai Sanhá and Prime Minister
Carlos Gomes Júnior made a commitment to end their
differences, expressed on 14 October before the
diplomatic corps following AU-United Nations efforts
on the ground. On that same occasion, an official
announcement was made of their decision to accept
deployment of a joint AU-ECOWAS stabilization
mission, with a mandate for further peacebuilding and
stability, as well as post-conflict reconstruction and
development, in conformity with the Tripoli Plan of
Action adopted by the African Union Assembly on
21 August 2009. Guinea-Bissau’s Parliament accepted
the African Union proposal aimed at passing legislation
criminalizing the trafficking, possession, transfer and
processing of drugs. The judicial branch showed its
determination to continue and effectively conclude the
criminal investigation into the murders perpetrated in
March and June 2009. The Guinea-Bissau authorities
accepted the African Union proposal for the creation of
a truth and national reconciliation commission as the
last stage of the forthcoming National Reconciliation
Conference.
And
Guinea-Bissau’s
Government
obtained positive results in its implementation of the
recommendations of the Bretton Woods institutions.
On the issue of drug trafficking, despite the legal
measures to be adopted, the creation and training of a
special rapid-deployment police force with modern
equipment is imperative. The Truth and National
Reconciliation Commission is intended to bring moral
reparation for the injury done to the relatives of victims
of the various crimes that occurred in recent years in
Guinea-Bissau, and to launch genuine national
reconciliation among the people of Guinea-Bissau.
However, it is important to point out that the
Commission must not be seen as a substitute for the
legal measures already in progress.
Considering the positive signs that the authorities
of Guinea-Bissau have shown, the African Union
believes that holding a donors conference for the
country will constitute an incentive for efforts to
reform the defence and security sectors — a
cornerstone in promoting democracy, the rule of law
and good governance. The conference will also

10-62182

contribute to alleviating the pervasive poverty that
Guinea Bissau-faces, another cause and source of
instability.
In the interdependent world of today, prosperity
and stability are indivisible concepts. Today, we are
confronted with the choice of continuing our
commitment to supporting the Government and people
of Guinea-Bissau, a nation in despair, or abandoning it
to an unknown fate. However, it is important to note
that the path we choose to follow will constitute the
standard by which the future will assess our efforts. We
are confident that the Security Council’s more than
60-year
experience,
coupled
with
increasing
mobilization of other actors for international peace and
security around the world, will provide a rich and solid
base from which we can draw innovative ideas for
supporting the efforts of the people and Government of
Guinea-Bissau to restore lasting peace and security in
their country.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guinea-Bissau.
Mr. Da Gama (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in
French): Since this is the first time that I take the floor
in the Security Council in my capacity as Permanent
Representative of Guinea-Bissau to the United Nations,
I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of November. I would also like to express our
gratitude to Council members for the understanding
they have shown towards my country, which has been
on the Council’s agenda for a little more than 12 years.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
warmly thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2010/550) and the particular attention he has been
devoting to my country, Guinea-Bissau. I also thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Mutaboba; the Special Representative of
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
Guinea-Bissau, Mr. Sebastião da Silva Isata; and the
Permanent Representative of Brazil and Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission’s configuration for GuineaBissau, Ambassador Maria Luiza Viotti, for their
presentations and the excellent work they have been
carrying out for Guinea-Bissau.
Guinea-Bissau has experienced some difficult
times over the past 12 years as a result, among other
things, of our now-concluded struggle for liberation
and the lack of adequate means to support those men

7

S/PV.6416

and women who, through their great determination,
ensured our country’s sovereignty. Because of them,
we can stand before you today as representatives of a
legitimate State.
Many of those men and women, our former
freedom fighters, are fearful of being abandoned, as
happened in the past, and are thus still active as
soldiers, despite their advanced age that prevents them
from serving effectively in the army.
This situation is compounded by the country’s
enormous economic and financial difficulties and by
the lack of adequate infrastructure and factories, in
particular for processing commodities such as cashew
nuts, for which there is significant global demand.
These nuts are mostly processed in India without any
added value for my country, thus depriving our youth,
who make up over 60 per cent of the population, of
employment opportunities.
To remedy the situation, our State institutions are
trying to reform the national army and adapt it to the
requirements for a modern army, one that is entirely
subservient to political authority, in conformity with
the rule of law. That was stated by our President, His
Excellency Mr. Malam Bacai Sanhá, during his speech
on 25 September 2010 at the open debate of the
General Assembly, as follows:
“The reform that we desire in our defence
and security sector, for which we have sought
international assistance, has become a matter of
prime urgency and extreme sensitivity.”
(A/65/PV.16)
Despite the events of 1 April, which were
promptly condemned by the legitimate authorities of
the country and by the entire international community,
Guinea-Bissau continues to seek a path towards
political stability.
In this respect, we are planning an international
reconciliation conference, to be held next year, which
should allow all political and military stakeholders, as
well as civil society, in Guinea-Bissau to explore ways
to build peace in the country. We must note here that
that initiative is supported by the main political,
military and religious leaders and by civil society.
I would also like to mention that the Government
has undertaken substantial work to continue to
strengthen its credibility with the international
financial institutions through appropriate reforms and

8

by demonstrating great budgetary discipline, in order
to achieve, by the end of 2010, the completion point of
the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative.
Thanks to improvements in the management of
public finances, which have brought about positive
economic results, salaries are being paid on a regular
basis, thus defusing the social tensions that prevailed
previously.
Guinea-Bissau remains determined to fight drug
trafficking relentlessly, including by adopting laws that
criminalize the possession, transfer and processing of
drugs and that strengthen the capacities of the police
and judiciary, while recalling that this effort must be a
regional undertaking. In that connection, we would not
deny that substantial progress has been made, despite
the very limited logistical means and the geography of
the country, which is an isolated area that includes over
80 islands in the Bijagós Archipelago.
In this regard, we welcome the decision taken at
the summit of heads of State and Government of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), held in Praia, Cape Verde, in July 2010.
That decision called on the Community’s Commission
to study, together with the European Union and other
relevant partners, all of the synergies that would enable
an immediate implementation of the ECOWAS
regional plan of action to combat the scourge of drug
trafficking.
I must also highlight the visits undertaken by the
civilian and military leaders of the country to Brazil to
seek technical military assistance; to Angola to
strengthen relations in the economic, defence and
security areas; and to Cuba, to strengthen bilateral
relations.
In that context and as the Secretary-General did
in his report, we would like to commend the joint
efforts by ECOWAS, under the Nigerian presidency,
and by the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries (CPLP), under the Angolan presidency,
aimed at adopting a common plan of action to provide
assistance to our country, as recently requested by our
President.
We are very confident that, with the new
ECOWAS/CPLP partnerships and the implementation
of the road map recently adopted by the ECOWAS
Chiefs of Defence Staff, which will shortly be endorsed
by the ECOWAS Council of Ministers, the stabilization

10-62182

S/PV.6416

mission that will be sent primarily to provide training
and support peacebuilding and stability, and efforts to
promote reconstruction and post-conflict development,
it will become possible for the country to be
definitively stabilized and for it to be able to focus on
sustainable development.
We are aware that the primary responsibility for
development and stability in the country falls on the
people of Guinea-Bissau themselves, but, despite the
Government’s efforts, our country remains dependent
on international solidarity, assistance and cooperation.
We find ourselves faced with the inescapable and
urgent need to reform our defence and security sectors.
A pension fund is needed for those sectors in order to
adequately compensate those who fought for our
freedom and enable them to return home once and for
all.
Beyond that reform, we also need a wider reform,
in particular one targeting the public administration
aimed at providing our public services with the means
to deal with the many challenges we face in terms of
development and stability. In that regard, the
Government remains committed to holding a high-level
meeting and a roundtable discussion for donors. This
was initially planned for 2010 but unfortunately could
not be held, given the tragic events of 1 April.
Our country has an area of a little over 36,000
square kilometres and a population of approximately
1.6 million. If our partners wake up tomorrow and
decide to bolster the work of the United Nations, the
African Union, ECOWAS, CPLP and other partners on
the ground, Guinea-Bissau will soon become a stable
and developed country that no longer needs to be on
the agenda of the Council.
We thank our development partners, including the
European Union, ECOWAS, CPLP, the African Union,

10-62182

the United Nations, Angola, Brazil, Portugal, Spain,
the People’s Republic of China and others, for
everything they have been doing to help us. Now is the
time to help us more, so that we can hope to achieve
the Millennium Development Goals.
We would therefore like to reiterate our call to all
our partners to continue in the same spirit of
friendship, solidarity and cooperation with the people
and democratic institutions of Guinea-Bissau. Just as
President Sanhá stated during the general debate of the
General Assembly, “it is now, in our current
circumstances, that our country most needs such
support.” (A/65/PV.16) This is indeed the time when
Guinea-Bissau needs sustainable investment and work
in the political, development and security areas, and
stronger commitments by the entire international
community to be able to fulfil the aspirations of its
people and its legitimate authorities.
To conclude, I would like to once again take this
opportunity to thank all the members of the Council for
their continuing interest in and commitment to GuineaBissau and convey to them once again my country’s
gratitude for resolution 1876 (2009), which established
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau, under the wise leadership of
Ambassador Joseph Mutaboba, enabling our country to
benefit from the focused assistance and support of the
United Nations.
The President: I thank Ambassador Da Gama for
his contribution this morning.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I now invite Council
members to informal consultations to continue our
discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.50 a.m.

9
