Resolutions adopted ou the rep01·ts of the Second Connnilt{'('

the set of recommendations of the Conference pertaining
to development and environment, 56
Recalling further paragraphs 2 (e) and 5 (d) of
Conference resolution l (1) of 15 June 1972 57 on
institutional and financial arrangements,
Bearing in mind Economic and Social Council resolution 1718 (LIII) of 28 July 1972,
I. Stresses the importance of action at the national
level for protecting and enhancing the environment;
2. Calls upon the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme 58 to explore at its
first session ways and means of promoting effective
regional programmes in the field of the environment;
3. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme, in formulating environmental programmes, to ensure the compatibility
of the implementation of these programmes with:
(a) The policy measures and objectives of the International Development Strategy for the Second United
Nations Development Decade•• 0 relating to science and
technology;
( b) Policy measures and objectives that are to be
recommended by the Committee on Science and Technology for Development upon consideration of the
World Plan of Action for the Application of Science
and Technology to Development; 60
4. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme and the Committee
on Review and Appraisal to keep this matter under
review and to report to the General Assembly at its
twenty-ninth session, through the Economic and Social
Council, on the steps taken with regard to paragraph 3
above.
2 I 12th 11le11arv m<'eting
I 5 December I 972

3001 (XXVII). United Nations ConfereneeExposition on Human Settlements

The General Assembly,
Recalling resolution 2718 (XXV) of 15 December
1970, in which it recommended broad directions and
measures essential for the improvement of human settlements,
Noting the urgency of the world-wide human settlement problems, present and future,
Taking into account the World Plan of Action for the
Application of Science and Technology to Development,61
Considering the important role assigned to housing
as part of the International Development Strategy for
the Second United Nations Development Decade, 62
Recognizing the need for international efforts to
develop new and additional approaches to these problems, especially in the developing countries,
Desiring to maintain the momentum of the United
Nations Conference on the Human Environment in this
chap. II, sect. B.
chap. III. Paragraphs 2 (e) and 5 (d) were incorporated in resolution 2997 (XXVII) without change (see
sect'. I, para. 2 (e), and sect. TI. para. 2 (d), of that resolution).
5 s See resolution 2997 (XXVII), sect. I.
r,u Resolution 2626 (XXV).
r.o United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.71.II.A.18.
6t Jbid.
G~ Resolution 2626 (XXV).
0 6 Ibid.,
57 Ibid.,

47

area through a conference-exposition on human settlements, the preparation for which should generate a
review of policies and programmes for human settlements, national and international, and should result
in the selection and suppor: of a series of demonstration projects on human settlements sponsNed by individual countries and the United Nations,
Taking into account recommendation 2.2 of the
Action Plan for the Human Environment 03 adopted by
the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment,
l. Decides tn hold a United Nations ConferenceExposition on Human Settlements;
2. Accepts the offer of the Government of Canada
to act as host to the Conference~Exposition in 1975;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare and
submit to the Governing Council of the United Nations
Environment Programme 04 at its first session a report
containing a plan for, and anticipated costs of, the
Conference-Exposition.
21 I 2th plenary meeting
15 December I 972

3002 (XXVII).

Development and environment

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2849 (XXVI) of 20 December 1971 entitled "Development and environment",
Considering its resolution 2997 (XXVII) of I 5 December 1972 on institutional and financial arrangements
for international environmental co-operation,
Noting the set of recommendations of the United
Nations Conference on the Human Environment per-·
taining to development and environment, 65
Reaffirming the importance of implementing the
objectives and policy measures of the International
Development Strategy for the Second United Nations
Development r ecade 66 and the need to provide adequate
resources for their fulfilment,
Bearing in mind that the funds available to the international community for research and action in the
fields of the protection and enhancement of the environment will tend to be scarce in relation to the
needs,
1. Stresses that, in the implementation and financing
of the objectives set forth in section III, paragraphs 2
and 3, of General Assembly resolution 2997 (XXVII).
such environmental measures and programmes as may
also constitute a necessary part of the process of
accelerating the economic development of developing
countries should receive special consideration in the
formulation of programmes and priorities by the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme;
2. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme in formulating environmental programmes to ensure, in accordance with
the principles set forth in General Assembly resolution 2849 (XXVI), the compatibility of these programmes with the objectives and policy measures of
global strategies and sectoral guidelines for the economic
6 :1 See A/CONF.48/14 and Corr.I, chap. II.

See resolution 2997 (XXVII), sect. I.
o;; See A/CONF.48/14 and Corr.l, chap. II, sect. B.
GG Resolution 2626 (XXV).

H
