S/PRST/2011/18

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
22 September 2011
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6621st meeting of the Security Council, held on 22 September 2011, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Maintenance of
international peace and security”, the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council recalls its previous relevant resolutions and
presidential statements on preventive diplomacy, prevention of armed conflict,
and mediation and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
“The Security Council welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on
‘Preventive Diplomacy: delivering results’ (S/2011/552), and takes note of the
recommendations contained therein.
“The Security Council reaffirms its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, acting in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. The Council
further expresses its determination to enhance the effectiveness of the United
Nations in preventing the eruption of armed conflicts, their escalation or
spread when they occur, and their resurgence once they end.
“The Security Council underlines the overriding political, humanitarian
and moral imperatives as well as the economic advantages of preventing the
outbreak, escalation or relapse into conflicts.
“The Security Council recalls that the prevention of conflict remains a
primary responsibility of States, and further recalls their primary responsibility
to respect and ensure the human rights of all individuals within their territory
and subject to their jurisdiction, as provided for by relevant international law,
and also reaffirms the responsibility of each individual State to protect its
populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing, and crimes against
humanity.
“The Security Council reaffirms that actions undertaken within the
framework of conflict prevention by the United Nations should support and
complement, as appropriate, the conflict prevention roles of national
governments.
“The Security Council pays tribute to the efforts undertaken by the
Secretary-General in using his good offices, and dispatching Representatives,
Special Envoys and mediators, to help facilitate durable and comprehensive

11-50935 (E) 220911

*1150935*

S/PRST/2011/18

settlements. The Council encourages the Secretary-General to increasingly and
effectively use all the modalities and diplomatic tools at his disposal under the
Charter for the purpose of enhancing mediation and its support activities, and
recalls in this regard resolution A/RES/65/283 of 28 July 2011, as well as the
report of the Secretary-General of 8 April 2009 (S/2009/189). The Council
further encourages concerned parties to act in good faith when engaging with
prevention and mediation efforts, including those undertaken by the
United Nations.
“The Security Council encourages the Secretary-General to continue
improving coherence and consolidation within the United Nations system, with
a view to maximizing the impact of swift and timely preventive efforts
undertaken by the Organization. The Council underlines the importance of the
regular briefings it receives on such efforts and further calls on the
Secretary-General to continue this good practice.
“The Security Council recalls that a comprehensive conflict prevention
strategy should include, inter alia, early warning, preventive deployment,
mediation, peacekeeping, practical disarmament, accountability measures as
well as post-conflict peacebuilding, and recognizes that these components are
interdependent, complementary, and non-sequential.
“The Security Council recognizes that conflict prevention strategies
should address the root causes of armed conflict, and political and social crises
in a comprehensive manner, including by promoting sustainable development,
poverty eradication, national reconciliation, good governance, democracy,
gender equality, end of impunity, rule of law, and respect for and protection of
human rights.
“The Security Council encourages the peaceful settlement of local
disputes through regional arrangements in accordance with Chapter VIII of the
Charter. The Council acknowledges the efforts undertaken to strengthen
operational and institutional cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and sub-regional organizations for conflict prevention, and in this
regard reiterates the need to continue strengthening strategic dialogue,
partnerships, and more regular exchange of views and information at the
working level, with the aim of building national and regional capacities in
relation to the preventive diplomacy tools of, inter alia, mediation, information
gathering and analysis, early warning, prevention and peacemaking.
“The Security Council intends to continue to strengthen its partnerships
with all other relevant players at both the strategic level and on the ground, in
particular the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council, the
Peacebuilding Commission, and international financial institutions, such as the
World Bank. The Council further intends to continue to strengthen its
partnership with the United Nations regional offices.
“The Security Council emphasizes that an effective preventive diplomacy
framework requires the active involvement of civil society, especially youth,
and other relevant actors, such as academia and media. The Council also
reaffirms the important role of women in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts and in peacebuilding, and reiterates its call to increase the equal
participation, representation and full involvement of women in preventive

2

11-50935

S/PRST/2011/18

diplomacy efforts in line with resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820 (2008), 1888
(2009), 1889 (2009), and the statements of its President S/PRST/2010/20 and
S/PRST/2010/22.
“The Security Council recognizes the importance of enhancing efforts,
including coordination among relevant bilateral and multilateral donors, to
ensure predictable, coherent and timely financial support to optimize the use of
preventive diplomacy tools, including mediation, throughout the conflict cycle.
“The Security Council looks forward to further consideration of the
report of the Secretary General on ‘Preventive Diplomacy: delivering results’
by the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council, as well as
other actors including international financial institutions, and supports
strengthening the capacity of the United Nations and its partners in the field of
preventive diplomacy.”

11-50935

3
