S/2021/707

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
5 August 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 4 August 2021 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
In a letter dated 24 June 2021 addressed to me, the Acting Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Emigrants of Lebanon requested that the Security Council extend the
mandate of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) for a further
period of one year, “without amendment to its mandate, its concept of operations and
its rules of engagement”. In this regard, and further to my report to the Security
Council of 13 July 2021 on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006)
(S/2021/650), I hereby request the Council to consider the renewal of the mandate of
UNIFIL, which is due to expire on 31 August 2021.
While I commend the continued commitment of both the Lebanese Armed
Forces and the Israel Defense Forces to maintaining the cessation of hostilities and
for their close cooperation and coordination with UNIFIL, there has been no tangible
progress towards a permanent ceasefire and a long-term solution to the conflict, as
called for in resolution 1701 (2006).
Fifteen years have now passed since the war between Israel and Lebanon, which
ended on the basis of the measures outlined in resolution 1701 (2006). While the
underlying drivers of conflict and the dynamics between the parties have not
significantly changed since 2006, UNIFIL does face renewed challenges in the way
that it is able to conduct its operations, including continued restrictions to its freedom
of movement and an undiminished risk of a resumption of hostilities between the
parties, even if accidentally triggered.
Both parties have yet to fulfil their respective obligations under the resolution.
Israel must withdraw its forces from northern Ghajar and an adjacent area north of
the Blue Line, and it must cease violations of Lebanese airspace. The Government of
Lebanon must exercise effective authority over all Lebanese territory, preven t hostile
actions from its territory and ensure that there are no unauthorized armed personnel,
assets or weapons in the area between the Blue Line and the Litani River other than
those of the Lebanese State and UNIFIL. UNIFIL, in close coordination with t he
Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon, continues to work with
the parties in supporting the fulfilment of these outstanding obligations.
The past 12 months have seen a number of incidents of serious concern,
including several breaches in the cessation of hostilities. In May and July, rocket fire
across the Blue Line from Lebanon and response fire from Israel led to a dangerous
risk of escalation, and the role of UNIFIL in calming the situation proved crucial
again. Large-scale demonstrations were also held along the Blue Line in the context
of the conflict between Israel and Gaza in May, with protesters crossing south of the

21-10771 (E)

090821

*2110771*

S/2021/707

Blue Line and damaging Israeli security infrastructure and a protester killed by Israel
Defense Forces fire.
The incidents in May and July demonstrate the possession of unauthorized
weapons in the UNIFIL area of operations, in clear violations of resolution 1701
(2006), and continuing to present a risk of large-scale conflict. It is the responsibility
of the Government of Lebanon to take appropriate actions to prevent a recurrence of
such incidents.
The stability of Lebanon has been further challenged by the continued
deterioration of the country’s economic situation, compounded by the impact of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. While all State institutions are
overstretched in the country’s current political and economic situation, the Lebanese
Armed Forces and other State security institutions are especially critical for its
stability and require renewed political and material support.
The presence of the Lebanese Armed Forces in the UNIFIL area of operations
has been reduced as they carried out security responsibilities elsewhere in the count ry.
Over the past four months, 16 per cent of all UNIFIL operational activities were
conducted in close coordination with the Lebanese Armed Forces. This is down from
over 22 per cent in 2019, prior to the onset of the political and economic crisis. The
Lebanese Armed Forces have recently informed UNIFIL that they will need to reduce
operational activities with UNIFIL to around 10 per cent towards the end of July,
owing to the lack of fuel, spare parts and personnel.
Against this backdrop, I would like to underscore the importance of
international support to the Lebanese Armed Forces, which are called upon to respond
to a growing number of demonstrations and roadblocks in the country related to the
sweeping economic crisis. The centrality of the UNIFIL par tnership with the
Lebanese Armed Forces to the mission’s mandated efforts cannot be overstated. It is
of utmost importance that the Lebanese Armed Forces remain able to continue
performing critical operations in the south and work alongside UNIFIL, so that the
authority of the State is effectively extended in the area. The integrity and
effectiveness of the Lebanese Armed Forces, a UNIFIL strategic partner, remain vital
for the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006). The Lebanese Armed Forces can
fulfil the competing demands placed on them only if they receive the support they
need.
The liaison and coordination arrangements UNIFIL has established with the
Lebanese Armed Forces and the Israel Defense Forces, bilaterally and through the
tripartite forum, remain vital to mitigate tensions in sensitive areas along the Blue
Line. I encourage the parties to continue to engage in the process to mark the Blue
Line visibly on the ground, without prejudice to future border negotiations, as a
confidence-building measure, as well as to assist with the monitoring of violations
and prevent inadvertent crossings. I urge the parties to continue to make effective use
of the UNIFIL liaison and coordination structures to lower tension and resolve
disputes peacefully and avoid escalation.
To the extent possible given the current dramatic economic situation in the
country, the Government of Lebanon continues to express its commitment to the
expansion of Lebanese Armed Forces capacity on land and at sea, which remains vital
for enhancing State presence in southern Lebanon. Mobilizing additional
international support to build this capacity is fundamentally necessary if we are to see
continued progress in this regard, including towards the deployment of a model
regiment to southern Lebanon.
The freedom of movement of UNIFIL in its entire area of operations and along
the full length of the Blue Line remains critical. It is the responsibility of the Lebanese
2/4

21-10771

S/2021/707

authorities, including the Lebanese Armed Forces, to enable UNIFIL to carry out its
mandated activities unhindered. UNIFIL has yet to gain full access to several sites of
interest, including several Green without Borders sites, as well as some patrol routes.
The incidents involving restrictions of UNIFIL freedom of movement have been
detailed in my reports on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006).
I reiterate my call to the Lebanese authorities to fulfil their obl igations to ensure
the safety of UNIFIL personnel and full accountability for those who attack
peacekeepers, including with respect to the incidents in Bar’ashit on 10 February and
Blida on 25 May 2020, as well as in Majdal Zun on 4 August 2018. I note the verdict
of 24 March by the Permanent Military Court of Lebanon sentencing the perpetrator
of an attack on UNIFIL peacekeepers in July 2011 as well as the verdict by the
Permanent Military Court of December 2020 in the case of the killing of two
peacekeepers in 1980. I welcome these developments and urge the timely conduct and
completion of judicial processes into all outstanding cases of attacks against United
Nations personnel. This remains critical for preventing future incidents and retaining
the confidence of troop-contributing countries. In relation to tunnels confirmed by
UNIFIL to cross the Blue Line, it is also essential that Lebanese authorities undertake
a thorough investigation on the Lebanese side and that UNIFIL gain access to relevant
sites.
It is also important to note the urgent need for progress on the responsibility of
Israel to cease all violations of Lebanese sovereignty and airspace. The overflights
cause distress to Lebanese civilians, run counter to the efforts of UNIFIL to reduce
tensions and have a negative impact on the credibility of the Lebanese Armed Forces
and UNIFIL.
Throughout the past year, and despite the impact of the COVID -19 epidemic,
UNIFIL has maintained a high operational tempo and continued to enhance the
visibility and effectiveness of its operations in accordance with resolutions 2373
(2017), 2433 (2018), 2485 (2019) and 2539 (2020), including through foot patrols;
increased night patrols along the Blue Line; and utilizing air assets more effectively,
including by increasing the number of operational flights, such as reconnaissance of
sensitive areas, and undertaking night flights over rugged and difficult terrain. From
1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021, the mission conducted an average of 13,882 activities
per month, which included 7,444 patrols. Some 45 per cent of all operational activities
were conducted at night.
In the aftermath of the devastating 4 August 2020 explosion at the Beirut port,
a UNIFIL engineering task force was deployed to the port in accordance with
resolution 2539 (2020). During its three-week deployment from 27 September to
23 October, the task force, consisting of 150 peacekeepers from 13 contingents,
cleared 12,000 tons of debris and dismantled four damaged warehouses. The task
force also assisted in restoring damaged buildings of cultural a nd historical
importance.
The total number of UNIFIL military personnel as at 21 July 2021 was 10,101
personnel, including 635 women. The UNIFIL Maritime Task Force comprises five
vessels, one helicopter and 559 military personnel. The UNIFIL civilian co mponent
numbers 241 international and 557 national staff. I am grateful to the 45 troop contributing countries and continue to encourage them to increase the number of
women deployed to UNIFIL.
According to the assessment report (S/2020/473), UNIFIL has been optimizing
its configuration and operations. To date, this has included the optimization of the
civilian staffing of the mission (civilian staffing review of October 2020) and greater
reliance on lighter vehicles for monitoring and reconnaissance rather than heavy
infantry patrols, in addition to a further strengthening of liaison and coordination
21-10771

3/4

S/2021/707

capabilities by deploying a third liaison team south of the Blue Line. The
reconfiguration of UNIFIL operations towards the Blue Line has also begun. Two of
the five positions identified for consolidation have been closed, with infrastructure
handed over to the Lebanese Armed Forces. Three more positions are scheduled to be
closed in the coming year. In order to achieve a gradual transition of UNIFIL Maritime
Task Force responsibilities to the Government of Lebanon, the Lebanese Armed
Forces Navy continues advanced training activities and exercises with a view to
enhancing its preparedness to partially take over Maritime Task Force responsibilities
in one sector of the area of maritime operations. The Lebanese Navy also maintains a
100 per cent inspection rate of ships referred by UNIFIL.
Pending final agreement on the boundary between Lebanon and Israel, and as
long as the Lebanese Armed Forces are not able to deploy to southern Lebanon in
significantly larger numbers, UNIFIL operational and liaison activities continue to
provide valuable deterrence and a critical de-escalation mechanism in a context where
escalation has been a reality. In the absence of progress towards a permanent
ceasefire, the ability of UNIFIL to deter, prevent and deconflict remains crucial. The
priority remains for the parties to take the necessary steps towards a permanent
ceasefire and a long-term solution to the conflict. UNIFIL, in close coordination with
the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon, is ready to lend its
full support to the parties in this process.
I would like to express my appreciation to the Head of Mission and Force
Commander of UNIFIL, Major General Stefano Del Col, and to all the military and
civilian personnel of UNIFIL, for the work they are carrying out in southern Lebanon
and for their commitment in the service of peace.
The General Assembly, by its resolution 75/250 B of 30 June 2021, appropriated
the amount of $476.8 million for the maintenance of the Force for the period from
1 July 2021 to 30 June 2022.
As at 22 July 2021, unpaid assessed contributions to the special account for
UNIFIL amounted to $190.5 million. The total outstanding assessed contributions for
all peacekeeping operations as at that date amounted to $4,219.2 million.
Reimbursement of troop costs and contingent-owned equipment have been made for
the period up to 31 March 2021 in accordance with the quarterly payment schedule.
I would like to express my appreciation for the continued united and steadfast
support of the Security Council to UNIFIL and its mandated activi ties. With the
information above in mind, I recommend that the Council extend the mandate of
UNIFIL for a further period of 12 months, until 31 August 2022.
I would be grateful if you could bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

4/4

21-10771
