Resolutions adopted without reference to a Commiltee

Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to Malta, 9
Noting that constitutional progress has been achieved
in the Territory of Malta,
1. Notes with satisfaction that Malta will attain
independence not later than 31 May 1964;
2. Expresses the hope that no new obstacle will
hinder Malta's accession to independence and that the
Territory will become an independent State not later
than the date referred to in paragraph 1 above ;
3. Invites the administering Power to take the necessary measures for the transfer of powers, not later
than 31 May 1964, to the people of Malta, in accordance
with their will and desire ;
4. Congratulates the Governments of Malta and the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
on the steps taken towards the achievement of the aims
set out in the Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples.
1277th plenary meeting,
11 December 1963.

1951 (XVIII). Question of Fiji
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, 1654 (XVI) of 27 November 1961 and 1810
(XVII) of 17 December 1962, and in particular paragraph 5 of the Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples, contained
in resolution 1514 (XV), which provides that:
"Immediate steps shall be taken, in Trust and NonSelf-Governing Territories or all other territories
which have not yet attained independence, to transfer
all powers to the peoples of those territories, without
any conditions or reservations, in accordance with
their freely expressed will and desire, without any
distinction as to race, creed or colour, in order to
enable them to enjoy complete independence and
freedom",
Having considered the part of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to Fiji, 10
Having heard a statement by the representative of the
administering Power,
Noting with regret that the administering Power has
still taken no effective steps to transfer all powers to
the people of Fiji in conformity with paragraph 5 of
resolution 1514 (XV),
Noting further that the Constitution of Fiji, in particular those sections governing the electoral system
and the composition and functions of the Legislative
and Executive Councils of Fiji, is not based on generally
accepted democratic principles,
1. Affirms the inalienable right of the people of Fiji
to self-determination and national independence in conformity with the provisions of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Invites the administering Power :
(a) To work out, together with the representatives
of the people of Fiji, a new constitution providing for
t Ibid., chapter VI.
10 Ibid.,

chapter VII.

7

free elections conducted on the principle of "one man,
one vote" and the creation of representative institutions;
( b) To take immediate steps for the transfer of all
power to the people of the Territory, in accordance with
their freely expressed will and desire and without any
conditions or reservations;
( c) To endeavour, with the co-operation of the
people of Fiji, to achieve the political, economic and
social integration of the various communities.
1277th plenary meeting,
11 December 1963.

1952 (XVIll). Question of Northern Rhodesia
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960,
Having considered the part of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to Northern Rhodesia, 11
Noting the statement on recent constitutional developments in Northern Rhodesia made by the administering
Power on 4 December 1963,12
l. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Northern Rhodesia to self-determination and independence;
·
2. Notes with satisfaction that elections for the new
Legislative Council will be held in January 1964;
3. Expresses the hope that Northern Rhodesia will
achieve its independence in the nearest possible future,
a~d requests the administering Power, in consultation
with the newly elected Government of Northern Rhodesia, to fix a date for the independence of the Territory;
4. Expresses the hope that no new obstacle will
hinder Northern Rhodesia's accession to independence
and that the Territory will become an independent
State not later than thP. date referred to in paragraph 3
above.
1277th plenary meeting,
11 December 1963.

1953 (XVIll). Question of Nyasaland
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960,
Having considered the part of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to Nyasaland, 13
Noting that constitutional progress has been achieved
in Nyasaland,
1. Notes with satisfaction that Nyasaland will attain
independence not later than 6 July 1964;
2. Expresses the hope that no new obstacle will
hinder Nyasaland's accession to independence and that
the Territory will become an independent State not
later than the date referred to in paragraph 1 above;
11 lbid.,

12 !bid.,

chapter VIII, section A.
Eighteenth Session, Plenary

Meetings, 1273rd
meetmg.
. 13 Ibid., Eighteenth Session, Annexes, addendum to agenda
item 23, document A/5446/Rev.1, chapter VIII, section B.

General Assembly-Eighteenth Session

8

3. Invites the administering Power to take the necessary measures for the transfer of powers, not later
than 6 July 1964, to the people of Nyasaland, in accordance with their will and desire ;
4. Congratulates the Governments of Nyasaland and
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
· Ireland on the steps taken towards the achievement of
the aims set out in the Declaration on the granting of
independence to colonial countries and peoples.
1277th plenary meeting,
11 December 1963.

1954 (XVIII). Question of Basutoland, Bechuanaland and Swaziland
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1817 (XVII) of 18 December
1%2 regarding the Territories of Basutoland, Bechuanaland and Swaziland, which was adopted in accordance
with the terms of its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 Decemher 1%0, 1654 (XVI) of 27 November 1%1 and
1810 (XVII) of 17 December 1962,
Having considered the part of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on tr.e Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to Basutoland, Bechuanaland and Swaziland, 14
Regretting that the administering Power has not
taken effective steps to implement the provisions of
resolutions 1514 (XV) and 1817 (XVII),
Beinq cogni::ant of the fact that the claim and the
demand of the Government of the Republic of South
Africa that these Territories should be transferred to
South Africa remain unchanged,
Recalling the declaration contained in General Assembly resolution 1817 (XVII) to the effect that any
attempt to annex Basutoland, Bechuanaland or Swaziland, or to encroach upon their territorial integrity
in any way, will be regarded by the United Nations
as an act of aggression violating the Charter of the
United Nations,
Mindful of the unsatisfactory economic, financial and
social conditions in these three Territories and their
dire need for external assistance,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
Basutoland, Bechuanaland and Swaziland to selfdetermination and independence;
2. Reiterates its request that the administering
Power take immediate steps to return to the indigenous
inhabitants all the land taken from them, whatever the
form or pretext for such alienation;
3. Once more requests the administering Power to
convene immediately a constitutional conference for
each of the three Territories, in which all groups representing all opinions will participate with a view
to devising democratic constitutional arrangements
which will lead to general elections based on universal
suffrage and, thereafter, to immediate independence;
4. Solemnly warns the Government of the Republic
of South Africa that any attempt to annex or encroach
upon the territorial integrity of these three Territories
shall be considered an act of aggression ;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to provide economic, financial and technical assistance commensurate
with the special needs of the Territories through the
H

Ibid., chapter IX.

United Nations programmes of technical co-operation
and the specialited agencies.
1277 th plenary meeting,
11 December 1963.
1955 (XVIII). Question of British Guiana
The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1%0. 1654 (;~VI) of 27 November 1961 and 1810
( XVII) of 17 December 1962,
. Having c_onsidercd the part of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
I mlependence to Colo!iial Countries and Peoples relating
to British Guiana, 15
N otinq with drep reqret that the Government of the
United Kingdom of Great B,itain and Northern Ireland
has not permitted the visit to British Guiana of the
c;ub-Committee established on the suggestion of both the
Go".e_rnment of British Guiana and the principal opposi_tion party with a view to seeking, together with
the mterrstrd parties. the most suitable ways and means
of enahlmg Briti~h Cuian;1 to accede to indenendence
without delay.
·
Brarrn,1 in mind th;it the leaders of British Guiana
who have appe:ued b<'fore the Special Committee have
expressed the desire of the people of British Guiana
for independence without delay,
N otinq parag-raph 65 of the report of the SubCommittee C?n British_ Guiana, 16 which was approved
hy the Spec1a 1 Committee and which invited the Government of the United Kingdom to do its utmost so
that Bri_tish Guiana might achieve independence as soon
as possible ""'.ithout any conditions or reservations, in
;iccordance with paragraph 5 of resolution 1514 (XV),
R cqrettin_<7 that at the recent constitutional conference
on British Guiana no date for independence was set,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable tight of the people of
British Guiana to independence:
2. Calls upon the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to fix without delay the date for the independence of British
Guiana in accordance with the wishes of the people of
the Territory.
1277th plenary meeting,
11 December 1963.

1956 _(XVIII). Th_e situation with regard to the
1mplementat10n of the Declaration on the
granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples
The General Assembly,
Recalling the J?eclaratio!l on the granting of independence to colomal countries and peoples contained in
its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 and
resolutions 1654 (XVI) of 27 November 1961' and
1_810 (XVII) of 17 D~cember 1962 by which the
C,eneral ~sse_mbly . established the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee,17
15 Ibid.,
16 Ibid.,

chapter X.
chapter X, appen<lix.
17 Ibid., docun cnt A/5446/Rev .1.
