S/PV.8364

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8364

th meeting
Wednesday, 3 October 2018, 9.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Llorentty Solíz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bolivia (Plurinational State of))

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mr. Amde
Mr. Melki
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Vaverka
Mr. Allen
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-30202 (E)
*1830202*

S/PV.8364

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

The meeting was called to order at 9.35 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President (spoke in Spanish): As this is the
first public meeting of the Security Council for the
month of October, I should like to take this opportunity
to pay sincere tribute, on behalf of the Council, to
Her Excellency Mrs. Nikki Haley, Ambassador and
Permanent Representative of the United States of
America, for her service as President of the Council
for the month of September. I am sure that I speak
for all the members of the Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Haley and her delegation
for the excellent diplomatic skill with which they
conducted the Council’s business last month.
Expression of sympathy for the victims of the
earthquake and tsunami in Sulawesi, Indonesia
The President (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the
Council, I would like to remember all those who lost
their lives on Friday in the devastating earthquake and
tsunami that struck Sulawesi, Indonesia. The members
of the Council offer our deepest condolences to the
families and loved ones of the victims, as well as to the
people and the Government of Indonesia.
I request members to stand and observe a minute of
silence in solemn memory of those who lost their lives
in that natural disaster.
The members of the Council observed a minute
of silence.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
At the outset, I will make a joint statement on behalf
of the Committees established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), 1373 (2001)
and 1540 (2004). Following that joint statement, the
Council will hear briefings by the Chairs of those
three Committees.
2/24

03/10/2018

I shall now make a joint statement on behalf of the
1267, 1373 and 1540 Committees.
On behalf of the Chairs of the Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities;
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism; and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), I have the honour to brief the Security Council
on the work of the three Committees, including the
ongoing cooperation between the three Committees
and their respective Groups of Experts.
The three Committees carry out their work in a
strategic context in which the global security landscape
has become significantly more complex, volatile and
challenging. Terrorism continues to pose a grave threat
to international peace and security. Terrorists, terrorist
organizations and their affiliates and cells continue
to adapt their tactics and methods, including by using
modern means of communication to recruit followers,
finance, plan and execute attacks against soft targets,
and incite the commission of such acts.
Returning and relocating foreign terrorist
fighters pose new threats and challenges to their
countries of origin and nationality and third
countries. Globalization, rapid advances in science
and technology and the continuously evolving trading
environment bring not only great benefits, but also
new risks, including with respect to the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and terrorism. The
three Committees highlight the importance of bearing
in mind the potentially devastating effects that nuclear,
chemical or biological weapons could exert in the hands
of non-State actors, including terrorists.
The three Committees are aware that terrorist
groups and their supporters are ready to commit
extreme violence on a wide scale, which could have
catastrophic humanitarian, economic, social and
political consequences. The three Committees and
their respective Groups of Experts strive, within the
limits of their respective mandates, to promote the
most updated and effective measures based on human
rights, the rule of law and gender issues in the areas of
non-proliferation, sanctions, countering the financing
of terrorism, border management and law enforcement,
international judicial cooperation, prosecution,
18-30202

03/10/2018

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

S/PV. 8364

rehabilitation and reintegration, countering terrorist
narratives and engaging communities.

capacity-building activities in the areas of countering
the financing of terrorism and proliferation.

In the light of that broad spectrum of measures,
the three subsidiary bodies continue to attach great
importance to coordination and cooperation among
their respective Groups of Experts, the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team establihed
pursuant to paragraph 7 of resolutions 1526 (2004); the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED); and the Group of Experts of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). The
three Committees are maintaining their efforts to
enhance information-sharing through joint meetings
and encourage their associated Groups of Experts to
further step up their cooperation.

The three Committees have maintained close
cooperation with the United Nations counter-terrorism
bodies. On 28 September 2017, the Chairs of the 1267
Committee and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
addressed the Council, together with the UnderSecretary-General of the United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism and the Officer-in-Charge of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
at a briefing on “Threats to international peace and
security caused by terrorist acts” (see S/PV.8059). On
28 June, the Chairs of the 1267 Committee and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee addressed the United
Nations High-level Conference of Heads of CounterTerrorism Agencies of Member States, convened by
the Secretary-General. Furthermore, the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the
Monitoring Team continue to work closely in drafting
the Secretary-General’s reports on the threat posed by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.

Pursuant to resolution 2368 (2017), the 1267
Committee and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) have undertaken a series of coordinated and
more targeted outreach activities. The Committees
convened a joint briefing on Central Asia on 2 July.
The three Committees continue to believe that
those coordinated activities are very important tools for
strengthening their dialogue with Member States, for
helping to improve the overall understanding of their
distinct yet complementary mandates, and for assisting
Member States in implementing the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
The expert bodies associated with the three
Committees continue to cooperate closely in working
with Member States by exchanging information,
coordinating visits in the context of their respective
mandates, when appropriate, and facilitating and
monitoring the technical assistance provided to
Member States to implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions. In that context, I would like
to highlight that the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate and the Group of Experts of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) participated in two joint visits to Armenia
and to Georgia in July. The Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team established pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1526 (2004) participated
in the Executive Directorate’s visit to Ethiopia and to
the Niger in July and will also take part in the visit
to Mali in October. This month, the Monitoring Team
and the Group of Experts of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) will participate in
a joint workshop to be held in Zimbabwe to support

The three expert bodies continue to work with
and reach out to various international and regional
organizations of common interest in order to explore
ways to further enhance the implementation of
their respective mandates in a coordinated and
complementary way. The three expert bodies continue
to participate in platforms of common interest, such as
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force and
its working groups and the Financial Action Task Force
(FATF). The Executive Directorate and the Monitoring
Team took part in missions on an in-depth review of the
Advance Passenger Information System and will do the
same with regard to passenger name records.
The Executive Directorate also acts as the FATF
focal point for the United Nations expert bodies based in
New York and coordinates the preparation of reports on
joint activities three times a year, which are presented
at each FATF plenary. The Executive Directorate also
plans and coordinates annual meetings between the
FATF secretariat and the expert bodies in New York.
The Executive Directorate is a United Nations focal
point for the Asia/Pacific Group on Money Laundering
and collects relevant information from the other United
Nations entities, such as the 1267 Monitoring Team
and the Expert Group of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), in order to draft and
to present a United Nations observer report to the Asia/
Pacific Group annually. The Executive Directorate

18-302023/24

S/PV.8364

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

actively facilitated the dialogue between the Eurasian
Group on Combating Money Laundering and Financing
of Terrorism and the Monitoring Team, which resulted
in granting the Monitoring Team observer status within
the Eurasian Group in May.
When two or more groups participate in the
same event, particularly the FATF and FATF-style
regional body plenary meetings, they usually exchange
information. In May 2017, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate involved the
Monitoring Team in a regional workshop on counterterrorism financing, held jointly by the Eurasian
Group International Training and Methodology Centre
for Financial Monitoring and the Commonwealth
of Independent States Anti-Terrorism Center. The
Executive Directorate and the Monitoring Team
jointly contributed to the United Nations inputs into
the final declaration of the conference on combating
the financing of Da’esh and Al-Qaida, held in Paris
in April.
The three expert bodies continue to hold regular
informal meetings. The Counter-Terrorism Committee
also regularly invites the other two expert bodies to its
thematic briefings and official meetings. The Committee
invited the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and
associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities to take part in joint open briefings, such as that
on challenges in countering terrorism in West Africa
and that held together with the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya
on challenges in countering terrorism in Libya, both of
which took place in June 2017. In addition, the CounterTerrorism Committee invited the other two Committee
expert bodies to its briefings on the role of financial
institutions in combating terrorism, in October 2017,
and on virtual currencies and the misuse of new
technologies to finance terrorism, in December 2017.
In its presidential statement S/PRST/2018/9 of
8 May, the Security Council requested the CounterTerrorism Committee, the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015),
and the Committee pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011)
to hold a special joint meeting within 12 months on
addressing the issue of the nexus between international
terrorism and transnational organized crime. The
expert bodies also shared their up-to-date expertise and
experience at a number of internal thematic professional
4/24

03/10/2018

training activities and briefings by external partners
and interlocutors.
The three Committees and their respective expert
bodies will continue to cooperate and to coordinate
their work in line with their respective mandates, with a
view to ensuring an effective and efficient approach to
countering terrorism and the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction by and to non-State actors. The
three Committees reaffirm their continued engagement
in supporting Member States in those global efforts.
The Chairs of the three Committee are committed to
meeting on a regular basis, at least twice a year, to
improve coordination and to discuss the main priority
areas for possible joint actions. The three Committees
look forward to receiving further guidance from the
Security Council on areas of common interest and to
further strengthening their joint activities.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Kairat Umarov,
Chair of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings
and entities.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Since this is the first
official meeting under your presidency, Mr. President, I
would like to congratulate Bolivia on its assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October and to wish you successful work. Likewise, we
would like to commend the United States delegation for
its very capable stewardship of the work of the Security
Council during the month of September.
On behalf of the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings
and entities, I would like to give a brief overview
of developments in the work of the Committee, as
requested in paragraph 46 of resolution 2368 (2017).
Since the previous joint briefing to the Council
in May 2017 (see S/PV.7936), the Committee has
continued to devote special focus to the evolving threat
to international peace and security posed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/Da’esh), Al-Qaida
and affiliates. The response to the threat must be
comprehensive and coordinated, and employ a range of
18-30202

03/10/2018

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

tools. The 1267 sanctions regime is an important part
of the toolbox and the Committee stays engaged with
Member States to ensure its effective implementation.
According to the latest report (see S/2018/705)
of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team, the threat posed by ISIL/Da’esh, Al-Qaida
and affiliates has further evolved over the past year.
Despite having been defeated militarily in Iraq and the
Syrian Arab Republic in 2017, ISIL rallied in early 2018
and still controls small pockets of territory in Syria.
The group was able to extract some oil and to mount
attacks, including across the Iraqi border.
Meanwhile, Al-Qaida remains resilient in the
Syrian Arab Republic, where the Al-Nusra Front for the
People of the Levant may now be the strongest terrorist
group. Al-Qaida and its affiliates are stronger than ISIL
in Yemen, Somalia and parts of West Africa, while its
alliance with the Taliban and other terrorist groups in
Afghanistan is firm, despite rivalry from the local ISIL
affiliate. The sustained coalition of terrorist groups in
Mali and the Sahel is a source of concern and could
supply a model for future cooperation and exchange
among terrorists in other regions.
As of June, the strength of ISIL in Iraq and the
Syrian Arab Republic is assessed to be between 20,000
and 30,000 members, roughly equally distributed
between the two countries. Foreign terrorist fighters
represent a significant component of the group.
Returnees and relocating fighters pose a threat in
several regions, including Iraq, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Central Asia and North Africa. Therefore,
enhanced information-sharing among Member States
is required.
At the same time, in Afghanistan ISIL is estimated
to number between 3,500 and 4,000 fighters. The group
is trying to expand its presence, despite pressure from
the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces and
the international coalition. Against that background,
neighbouring countries have expressed concern over the
ongoing terrorist threat emanating from Afghanistan
and increasing numbers of ISIL fighters relocating to
Afghanistan from Syria and Iraq.
The evolving threat is also reflected in the adoption
of a number of new resolutions by the Council that have
expanded the work of the Committee and the Monitoring
Team. In July 2017, the Council adopted resolution
2368 (2017) to renew the assets freeze, travel ban and
arms embargo affecting all individuals and entities

S/PV. 8364

on the ISIL and Al-Qaida sanctions list. In the same
resolution, the Council extended the mandates of the
Monitoring Team and the Office of the Ombudsperson
until 17 December 2021.
In resolution 2379 (2017) of September 2017, the
Council requested the creation of an investigative
team, headed by a special adviser, to support domestic
efforts or investigations carried out by authorities in
third countries, at their request, in order to hold ISIL
accountable for acts that may amount to war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide committed by the
terrorist group in Iraq. The Council further requested
the Investigative Team to cooperate with the Monitoring
Team and with any other relevant monitoring bodies. I
met with the Special Adviser, Mr. Karim Asad Ahmad
Khan, to discuss ways in which the Committee can
assist the Investigative Team with its mandate.
In resolution 2388 (2017), adopted in November
2017, the Council reiterated its condemnation of all acts
of trafficking, particularly the sale or trade in persons
undertaken by ISIL, and underscored the importance of
collecting and preserving evidence relating to such acts
in order to ensure that those responsible can be held
accountable. The Council also requested the Monitoring
Team to continue including in its discussions the issue
of trafficking in persons in areas of armed conflict
and the use of sexual violence in armed conflict, as it
relates to ISIL and Al-Qaida, and to report to the 1267
(1999) Committee on those discussions, as appropriate.
On 21 December 2017, the Security Council
adopted resolution 2396 (2017), which underscored
the threat posed by returning and relocating foreign
terrorist fighters, created new obligations for Member
States to help detect terrorists’ travels and directed the
Committee to devote special focus on the threat posed
by foreign terrorist fighters.
For all of those resolutions, it is crucial that Member
States engage with and provide updated information
to the Committee and the Monitoring Team on the
evolving nature of the threat, including foreign terrorist
fighters, listed individuals and entities, and the status
of the implementation of the sanctions measures. In
order to enhance the full and effective implementation
of the sanctions, the Committee also undertakes visits
to selected countries.
In that context, in my capacity as Chair of both
the 1267 Committee and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), I visited

18-302025/24

S/PV.8364

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

Afghanistan last year on 29 and 30 October. I was
accompanied by representatives from the Committee
and the Monitoring Team. The visit was facilitated by
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
with the objective of obtaining first-hand accounts
regarding the implementation and effectiveness of
sanctions measures, and to promote enhanced dialogue
and the engagement of Afghan interlocutors with the
Committees. I also conducted visits to Singapore and
Malaysia in August 2017 and to the Philippines in March
this year to exchange information on the ISIL threat
in the region, as well as to explore how the sanctions
regime can support the South-East Asian countries
dealing with ISIL, Al-Qaida and their affiliates.
The Committee maintains its sanctions list, updated
to facilitate the implementation of the sanctions measures.
Since the last joint briefing in May 2017, 13 individuals
and 7 entities have been listed. Five individuals have
been delisted. The Committee approved amendments to
the existing list entries of 16 individuals and 6 entities.
As of today, there are 263 individuals and 82 entities on
the ISIL and Al-Qaida sanctions list. Since the last joint
briefing to the Council, the Committee has decided to
delist three individuals and retain three individuals on
the basis of reports submitted by the Ombudsperson.
Currently, three requests for delisting are pending
with the Office of the Ombudsperson; two cases are
in the information-gathering period and one case is
being discussed.
The Committee welcomes the fact that Mr. Daniel
Kipfer Fasciati has recently taken up his duties as
Ombudsperson of the ISIL/Da’esh and Al-Qaida
Sanctions Committee. The Committee looks forward to
cooperating with the Ombudsperson, considering the
important role of his Office.
In the reporting period, I held two briefings to
interested Member States, on 17 October 2017 and on
2 August 2018, respectively. The last briefing was a
joint event for both the 1267 and the 1988 Committees.
I encourage Member States that are not members of the
Security Council to share any queries and concerns
with the Committee, the Monitoring Team and the
Office of the Ombudsperson.
I would like to take this opportunity to call upon
Member States to continue their engagement with
the Committee and the Monitoring Team, as this is
essential to maintaining an up-to-date and dynamic
sanctions list and fundamental to effective cooperation
6/24

03/10/2018

with the sanctions regime. In that regard, I would like
to note that the Committee is conducting its annual
review for 2017. The purpose of that exercise is to keep
the sanctions list updated by reviewing the names of
individuals and entities that lack identifiers, individuals
who are reportedly deceased and entities that are
reportedly defunct, as well as any other names that
have not been reviewed in three or more years. I thank
the Member States that have provided information, as
it has proven challenging to obtain responses from all
relevant Member States.
In addition to the regular reviews, the Monitoring
Team updates list entries based on information provided
by Member States. We encourage Member States to keep
the Team informed. I also urge those Member States
that have not done so to submit the implementation
reports mandated under the relevant resolutions.
As Chair, I would like to thank all Member States for
their cooperation with the Committee, its Monitoring
Team and the Office of the Ombudsperson.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ambassador Umarov for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Gustavo
Meza-Cuadra of Peru, in his capacity as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
and Bolivia on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council. I also want to thank Ambassador Nikki Haley
and her team for the exceptional guiding of our work
for the month of September.
(spoke in English)
I thank you, Mr. President for this opportunity to
brief the Security Council on the work of the CounterTerrorism Committee and its Executive Directorate
(CTED).
Terrorist groups, including the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL), Al-Qaida and their affiliates,
continue to pose a grave threat to peace and security
around the world. ISIL has suffered significant losses,
but has transformed itself into a global network that
continues to motivate its supporters and followers
around the globe to commit attacks. The growing
sophistication of the methods used by terrorists requires
18-30202

03/10/2018

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

innovation in our responses, while ensuring that those
in place are both effective and sustainable.
Not long ago, we were concerned with the flow of
foreign terrorist fighters to the conflict zones in Iraq
and Syria. Our concerns now include not only the
activities of those foreign terrorist fighters who remain
in the conflict zones, but also returning and relocating
foreign terrorist fighters and their family members and
the potential risk posed by the forthcoming release of
imprisoned foreign terrorist fighters and other persons
convicted on terrorism-related charges. In this regard,
the Committee is currently preparing a special meeting
to update its 2015 Madrid guiding principles on
stemming the flow of foreign terrorist fighters.
Pursuant to resolution 2396 (2017), CTED is
engaging with Member States, in cooperation with the
relevant organizations, including the International Civil
Aviation Organization, to assist with the implementation
of the Advanced Passenger Information and Passenger
Name Record systems and the use of biometric data to
identify terrorists, in compliance with domestic law
and international human rights law. I would note in
connection with this the recent issuance of the United
Nations compendium of recommended practices
for the responsible use and sharing of biometrics in
counter-terrorism, developed by the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force.
CTED is also supporting the development of
comprehensive and tailored prosecution, rehabilitation
and reintegration strategies for former members of
terrorist groups, including in the Lake Chad basin.
Similarly, the Committee and CTED continue to focus
on the main evidentiary and jurisdictional challenges
that hinder attempts to prosecute returning foreign
terrorist fighters.
Since our previous briefing (see S/PV.8127), the
Council has also adopted resolution 2395 (2017), which
renews the mandate of CTED and reaffirms its role
as a special political mission acting under the policy
guidance of the Committee. Pursuant to the same
resolution, CTED has reported to the Committee on
ways to strengthen its assessment tools and improve the
utility of its assessment to Member States, technical
assistance providers, implementing partners, the
Office of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT), other relevant
agencies, and international and regional organizations.
Since the beginning of 2018, CTED has concluded
13 country-assessment visits on the Committee’s

S/PV. 8364

behalf, in cooperation with international and regional
organizations. I wish to note that the Committee recently
obtained consent to visit Mali and Saudi Arabia, and
that Finland, the United Kingdom and the United States
of America have invited assessment visits for 2019.
We are concerned about the impact of terrorism
on children and on the role played within terrorist
groups by women. While women are often victims of
terrorism, they also can be perpetrators and facilitators.
In June, the Committee held a briefing on children
and terrorism, with the participation of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and representatives of United
Nations University. In the same vein, in September the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
and the UNOCT joined the Committee for a briefing on
the human right aspects of counter-terrorism, including
the rights of victims and survivors. Human rights and
gender issues have also been streamlined throughout all
Committee and CTED activities, including within the
framework of assessment visits and thematic briefings.
As Council members are aware, cooperation with
and among international and regional organizations and
among the relevant United Nations entities is essential.
In March, CTED organized a subregional consultation
with the Governments of Afghanistan, Maldives and Sri
Lanka on promoting the adoption and implementation
of national strategies to counter violent extremism.
Last July, the Committee held an open briefing on
Central Asia, focusing on the current counter-terrorism
situation in the region, the progress achieved by the
five States of the region and the remaining challenges.
Just last week, CTED, the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and the International
Association of Prosecutors jointly launched a practical
guide for requesting electronic evidence across borders
for investigators, prosecutors and central authorities.
CTED also continues to promote and facilitate
cooperation with other major actors and partners in the
private sector, civil society and the research community,
including through the CTED Global Counter-Terrorism
Research Network. Participants in the Asia Information
and Communications Technology and Counter-Terrorism
Dialogue have discussed counter-terrorism, countering
incitement and violent extremism leading to terrorism,
the development of counter-narratives, enhancing the
practice of private online communications, service
providers and empowering online communities. In this
regard, in May the Committee held an open meeting on

18-302027/24

S/PV.8364

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

countering terrorist narratives and preventing terrorist
use of the Internet.
Countering terrorist financing also continues to be
a major focus of our attention. The CTED Executive
Director notably played an active role in the No Money
For Terror international conference, held in Paris in
April. Pursuant to resolutions 2331 (2016) and 2388
(2017), CTED continues to investigate the possible
links between transnational organized crime and
terrorism, particularly human trafficking and terrorism.
In cooperation with UNODC and the United Nations
Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute, the
Committee will hold an open briefing on the nexus
between international terrorism and transnational
organized crime in October, and will also hold a joint
special meeting on this topic, in accordance with the
statement by the President of the Security Council of
May 2018 (S/PRST/2018/9).
Acting under the guidance of the Committee and
in accordance with resolution 2395 (2017), CTED has
also continued to strengthen its cooperation with the
Office of Counter Terrorism. A joint CTED/UNOCT
report on enhanced coordination and cooperation was
issued as a Security Council document (S/2018/435)
and as an addendum to the Secretary-General’s report
to the General Assembly on the biennial review of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
(A/72/840, annex IV). Moreover, CTED and UNOCT
have conducted joint high-level consultations with
Iraq, Kenya, Nigeria, Tajikistan and Turkmenistan.
Continued efforts have also been made to match the
activities of UNOCT with a technical assistance need
and recommendations set forth in the Committee
visit reports.
In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm the determination
of the Committee and CTED to develop and implement
comprehensive responses to the evolving terrorism
threat, in close cooperation with other relevant
United Nations entities and with our international and
regional partners.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Meza-Cuadra for his briefing.
I shall now provide a briefing in my capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004).
8/24

03/10/2018

(spoke in English)
On behalf of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), I am pleased to report on the
progress made since our last report, in April 2018. We
fully endorse the joint statement delivered on behalf
of the Committees established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities, as well as of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
and the 1540 Committee.
The key concern for the 1540 Committee is
preventing the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons, their means of delivery and related
materials to non-State actors, in particular for terrorist
purposes. While the mandates of the three committees
differ, there are important areas of complementarity.
Cooperation among the three committees and their
supporting experts is important to promoting the
effective implementation by States of their obligations
under the respective Security Council resolutions.
However, the 1540 Committee continues to be
concerned by the potentially devastating effects and
catastrophic consequences of nuclear, chemical or
biological weapons proliferation by and to non-State
actors, and the use of such weapons for terrorist
purposes. Given the global nature of the challenges
posed by the proliferation of the capabilities and
technologies that can be used by non-State actors for
weapons of mass destruction programmes, no State
is exempt from making every effort to prevent such
proliferation from happening. The obligations under
resolution 1540 (2004) are designed precisely for
that purpose.
The full and effective implementation of
obligations under resolution 1540 (2004) involves a
wide range of activities beyond the requisite adoption
and enforcement of measures to prohibit non-State
actors from manufacturing, acquiring, possessing,
transporting, transferring or using nuclear, chemical
and biological weapons and their means of delivery. In
that sense, I am pleased to report that the overwhelming
majority of States have demonstrated their commitment
to resolution 1540 (2004), and through their reporting
to the 1540 Committee have provided valuable
information on the measures they have taken, or
plan to take, to comply with their obligations under
the resolution. It is worthy of note that to date 181
18-30202

03/10/2018

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

countries — more than 90 per cent of all United Nations
Member States — have submitted initial reports. To that
end, two experts will be assisting Mali in preparing its
initial report on the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) during an upcoming visit this month. Regular
additional reporting and updating are also important so
that the status of implementation can be reflected and
assessed accurately.
While reporting is important, what also matters
is the effectiveness of the practical steps taken at the
national level to implement the resolution 1540 (2004).
One helpful step in that regard is for States to develop
voluntary national implementation action plans as
encouraged by paragraph 5 of resolution 2325 (2016).
In the implementation of such action plans, and in order
for the process to work, all key national stakeholders
must be engaged with the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). The voluntary national implementation
action plans also help to identify actions to close any
gaps and vulnerabilities in legislation, regulation and
national control frameworks, and to identify areas
where assistance may be required
Exchanges and the sharing of information by
Member States are among the Committee’s core
activities. The Member States are in the best position
to identify effective national practices and to share
them with the 1540 Committee and other partners.
As one example, the Committee had an opportunity
to hear about the peer review meetings between Chile
and Colombia, held in each country in 2017, in relation
to the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). That
was the third peer review to take place globally and
the first in the western hemisphere. The discussions
highlighted the value of the peer review process for
promoting Member States’ confidence in sharing
information about the challenges of the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) and generating ideas about
effective national implementation practices.
The 1540 Committee recognizes the key role of
the 1540 national points of contact in support of the
resolution’s implementation. The Committee has
developed regional training courses for national points
of contact, including the most recent ones in Addis
Ababa for French-speaking African States, hosted by
the African Union, and in Rostov-on-Don, with the
support of the Russian Federation and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe. The regional
national points of contact training courses, not only
aim to enhance the capacity and coordination role

S/PV. 8364

of points of contact, but also seek to create a living
network of points of contact to strengthen cooperation
and coordination with the Committee and among points
of contact in the respective regions.
One of the priority areas the committee is
focused on is improving the system of assistance to
facilitate Member States’ capacity to implement their
obligations under resolution 1540 (2004). In particular,
the Committee seeks to match assistance requests
from States with offers from States or international,
regional or subregional organizations in a position to
provide assistance. By doing so, an assisting State or
organization can respond effectively to requests for
assistance. Pending assistance requests are displayed
on the home page of the 1540 Committee website and
date back to 2010. As of today, 21 assistance requests
are still open and further assistance is needed. The 1540
Committee website also includes lists of States and
international, regional and subregional organizations
that have offered assistance in general.
As of 30 May, 47 States and 16 organizations
had informed the Committee about general
assistance programmes that could help facilitate the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Assistance
providers are always welcome to update the Committee
about their assistance programmes. The Committee
stands ready to add to its website new programmes or
information on available assistance.
The Committee and its Group of Experts have
maintained the momentum of outreach events in the
course of fulfilling the Committee’s programme of
work. A top priority is direct engagement with States
through visits and national round tables, at their
invitation. In the course of that process, increased use
has been made of the support that can be offered by
regional organizations, including the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs and its regional centres.
We have also intensified our engagement with
international organizations whose mandates are
directly related to resolution 1540 (2004), such as the
International Atomic Energy Agency, the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, the Biological
Weapons Convention Implementation Support Unit,
the United Nations Office for Drugs and Crime,
INTERPOL, the World Customs Organization, as
well as those bodies that support related committees,
such as the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate.
I would like to acknowledge the cooperation between

18-302029/24

S/PV.8364

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

the 1540 Committee, its Group of Experts and these
international organizations.
Transparency and outreach are vital to the effective
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). With that in
mind, the Committee is seeking ways to make better
use of its website. For example, we have continued to
publish a quarterly message from the Chair that goes
out to the wider 1540 network, including civil society. A
special effort is being made to engage parliamentarians
through, for example, the Inter-Parliamentary Union
(IPU). In that regard, I will have the honour to deliver
a video message to an upcoming meeting of the IPU.
I should stress that the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) is the responsibility of States. However,
effective implementation is more than simply ensuring
that legislation or regulations are in place. Among other
things, it also requires active engagement between the
State and relevant sectors of society, including industry,
academia and professional associations. An effective
partnership between States and industry is also vital
to successful non-proliferation efforts. The Wiesbaden
process conferences foster such a dialogue between
States and industry.
In conclusion, I would like to highlight that the spirit
of cooperation and dialogue with the Member States
continues to inform the 1540 Committee’s activities.
(spoken in Spanish)
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): Let us
first congratulate Bolivia on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council. We wish you every success in
the month ahead, Mr. President. Let me also thank the
Chairs of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida, and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities; the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004); and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) for the
strong cooperation of their committees and Groups
of Experts.
We have come a long way at the United Nations
in helping to defeat the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria
(ISIS), Al-Qaeda and other terrorist organizations. But
10/24

03/10/2018

ISIS is evolving, moving away from being an overt
organization to being a networked covert organization
cultivating growing numbers of affiliates around
the world. This year the 1267 Committee designated
ISIS facilitators in South-East Asia and an ISIS leader
in the Sahel, among others. Such affiliates can bring
the scourge of ISIS to new hotspots. It is important
that the 1267 Committee expeditiously designate ISIS
affiliates to prevent them from taking up the mantle of
a diminished ISIS core. We welcome the appointment
of Daniel Kipfer Fasciati as the new Ombudsperson
for the 1267 Committee and look forward to working
with him.
The threat of the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (WMDs) is increasingly relevant today.
This year has seen the devastating consequences of
chemical-weapons use by State and non-State actors
in Syria and the United Kingdom, and last year we
witnessed a horrific murder in Malaysia by VX. We
collectively cannot allow the international norm
against the use of such dangerous weapons to break
down, especially when non-State actors are becoming
increasingly violent and desirous of obtaining WMDs.
The three Committees and other relevant parts
of the United Nations system, including the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism (OCT), must
work together more closely to better synchronize
their activities and cut down on duplication. Last year
we updated the mandate of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) to strengthen
coordination between the Counter-Terrorism Committee
and the General Assembly counter-terrorism bodies
on counter-terrorism issues. In response, CTED and
the OCT released a joint report (S/2018/435, annex)
setting out practical steps to ensure the incorporation
of CTED’s recommendations and analysis into the
work of the OCT. The report is a model to improve
cooperation and ensure that expert country assessments
define United Nations counter-terrorism technical
assistance. Given the diverse threats we face around the
world, ongoing collaboration and information-sharing
between the Committee’s expert bodies remain integral
to minimizing overlap and ensuring accurate threat
assessments that lead to action.
The Secretariat and many Member States often
do not have the localized knowledge necessary for
adequately addressing the terrorist threat in all parts
of the world. That is why we continue to advocate
for a whole-of-society approach, meaning stronger
18-30202

03/10/2018

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

engagement with civil society and non-governmental
organizations. Working with both United Nations and
non-United Nations actors, including non-governmental
organizations and civil society actors, helps the United
Nations and Member States leverage the full array of
expertise and perspectives needed to better identify
and address fast-changing and diverse terrorist threats.
Our counter-terrorism Committees must ensure that
our counter-terrorism analysis and efforts are not
counterproductive to our international commitments
to human rights and to the rule of law. Enhancing
Committee engagement with human rights bodies is a
step in the right direction.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Let me to
congratulate you, Sir, on your country’s presidency of
the Security Council. We wish you and your team good
luck. You can count on our full support for your work
in the weeks ahead. Let me also thank Ambassador
Nikki Haley and Ambassador Jonathan Cohen and their
teams for their excellent and transparent stewardship
of the Council over the past — and may I say, rather
hectic — month.
We last met in August to discuss counter-terrorism
(see S/PV.8330). It was then that I stressed that the
terrorist threat had changed but had not diminished.
That was proved once again last week in my country,
when authorities foiled a major terrorist attack. Seven
men were arrested. They had planned to carry out a
terrorist attack that would claim the lives of as many
victims as possible at a large event in the Netherlands.
In our view, that incident underlines that we cannot
be complacent. We cannot let our guard down. In that
light, we welcome our discussion today.

S/PV. 8364

on that foundation by adopting various subsequent
resolutions, most recently resolution 2396 (2017), on
returning and relocating foreign terrorist fighters. One
could look at those resolutions and compare them to
the structure of a house with several rooms. Together
with the foundation and structure, the rooms are part
of a sturdy, solid house. But for the house to weather
heavy storms, maintenance is crucial. Therefore,
implementing the resolutions is key. The work of the
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) 1540 (2004) and their expert bodies
is indispensable in that regard. However, the success
of their work depends on us — all the States Members
of the United Nations. We must take responsibility
in fulfilling the Commitments prescribed by the
resolutions. It is for that reason that last week my Prime
Minister handed over a full operational Passenger Name
Record (PNR) system to Secretary-General Guterres.
The system was developed in the Netherlands and can
now be used by the United Nations to support Member
States in meeting their PNR obligations, as stipulated
in resolution 2396 (2017). To that end, we call upon
Member States to join us and others in financing the
United Nations PNR outreach project.

I would like to focus on three issues in my
intervention:
implementation,
transparency
and accountability.

Secondly, on the issue of transparency — if the Council
will allow, I will continue with my metaphor — there is
no use building a house with rooms if the doors in those
rooms stay closed. The three Committees and their
expert bodies, which we are discussing today, have to
be transparent. The doors must be open. We therefore
encourage the Chairs of the Committees and the experts
to continue their joint briefings, travel and workshops.
We encourage them to share more information with
other parts of the United Nations, such as the Office
of Counter-Terrorism, the International, Impartial
and Independent Mechanism for Syria and the United
Nations Investigative Team for the Accountability of
Da’esh. We also encourage them to open the front door
and intensify their outreach to non-Council members
and non-United Nations organizations. In that context,
let me mention the Global Counterterrorism Forum,
which met here in New York last week. The Forum
has two co-Chairs, Morocco and the Kingdom of the
Netherlands. It is our joint ambition, as co-Chairs, to
work as closely as possible with the United Nations.

First, with regard to implementation, resolutions
1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004) are the
foundation of the Council’s work on countering terrorism
and weapons of mass destruction. The Council has built

Lastly, with regard to accountability, as in any house,
some rooms are used more frequently, and therefore
require more maintenance than others. In the complex
fight against terrorism and the proliferation of weapons

I would like to thank Ambassador Llorentty
Solíz, Ambassador Umarov and Ambassador MezaCuadra for their briefings and excellent work as the
Chairs of the Committees. I believe that all of us in
the Council acknowledge the special responsibilities
and the additional workload of the Chairs involved. We
appreciate their important work to counter terrorism
and commend the efforts of their teams.

18-3020211/24

S/PV.8364

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

of mass destruction, we have to establish priorities.
Accountability should be the overarching driver of our
efforts. Terrorists should be held accountable for the
atrocities they commit, in particular war crimes, crimes
against humanity and genocide. In particular, we need
accountability for the mass atrocities committed by the
fighters of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham. The
security of our societies and the dignity of the victims
depend on it. That also applies in particular to sexual
violence in conflict, and we welcome the statement just
made by our Kazakh colleague on that important aspect.
In conclusion, the counter-terrorism house we have
built over the years is strong. But we cannot sit back
and relax. We have to maintain our common house.
And we have to be willing to renovate and expand,
where necessary, to address new threats. The Kingdom
of the Netherlands will continue to roll up our sleeves,
together with our landlords — the 1267, 1373 and 1540
Committees, their Chairs and expert bodies.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your presidency of the Security Council and wish
your country’s delegation all the best. I also thank
the delegation of the United States for its presidency
of the Council last month. I want as well to thank our
colleagues the Chairs of the three Committees — the
Permanent Representatives of Kazakhstan, Peru and
Bolivia — for their detailed briefings on the activities
of those Committees concerning counter-terrorism
and non-proliferation. We also thank the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED),
the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
of the Committee concerning Da’esh and Al-Qaida,
the Panel of Experts of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and the Office of
the Ombudsperson for carrying out their activities in
accordance with their respective mandates.

03/10/2018

States, joint briefings, comprehensive assessments
and analytical work concerning emerging issues,
trends and developments in supporting Member States
and United Nations entities so that they can take the
necessary measures under international law. All those
activities are helpful to Member States and other
subsidiary bodies.
We reaffirm what the Chair of the CounterTerrorism Committee said earlier with regard to the
need to focus on women and children as victims of
terrorist groups. In that regard, we note resolution
2396 (2017), which stressed the need to pay attention to
women and children in those specific situations.
Pertaining to the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), we
commend the role played by the Committee and its
Panel of Experts in helping countries to implement
the provisions of that important resolution. We have
witnessed the recent use of chemical weapons by
States and non-State actors throughout the world. We
therefore must recognize the urgent need to address
that disaster through the implementation of the relevant
international resolutions, especially resolution 1540
(2004). That would allow the international community
to continue its strenuous efforts in order to prevent
non-State actors, in particular terrorist groups, from
developing, possessing, manufacturing, acquiring,
transferring or using weapons of mass destruction in
all their forms, whether nuclear, chemical or biological.

We commend the role played by the three
Committees, including their cooperation with other
relevant United Nations entities, such as United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, INTERPOL, the
International Civil Aviation Organization and other
relevant United Nations entities, together with regional
organizations, to combat terrorism and the proliferation
of terrorist groups, as they pose a threat to international
peace and security.

In conclusion, we would like to underscore that the
State of Kuwait condemns terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations regardless of its motives. Terrorism
is a criminal act that cannot be justified and must not
be associated with any religion, nationality, culture or
ethnicity. In order to combat the criminal scourge of
terrorism, we must combine international efforts and
adopt the necessary measures to ensure respect for
human rights, the rule of law, good governance and
peaceful coexistence among religions, while respecting
their symbols and holy places. In addition, conditions
conducive to terrorism must be addressed along
with rejecting hatred and all forms of extremism and
violence. The State of Kuwait is firmly committed to
working actively to effectively implement the relevant
Security Council resolutions on counter-terrorism and
non-proliferation.

The State of Kuwait commends the efforts of
the three Chairs, including their visits to Member

Mr. Melki (France) (spoke in French): I join all those
who thanked the United States for its able leadership of

12/24

18-30202

03/10/2018

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

the Security Council during September, which is always
an exceptional month, and I congratulate Bolivia for its
accession to the presidency of the Council for October
and its very compact and relevant programme of work.
I would like to begin by thanking Ambassadors
Meza-Cuadra, Umarov and Llorentty Solíz for
their detailed briefings and committed leadership,
respectively, of the Committees established pursuant
to resolutions 1373 (2001), 1267 (1999) and 1540.
Terrorism and nuclear proliferation are today among
the greatest threats to international peace and security.
Let me touch briefly the activities of each Committee.
First, with regard to the 1267 Committee, which is
responsible for sanctions against Da’esh and Al-Qaida,
as its Chair pointed out, although Da’esh has suffered
major military defeats, the group continues to pose a
complex threat and inspire radicalized individuals to
act. The end of its territorial control does not signify
the end of the terrorist threat posed by Da’esh, but has
only made it more diffuse, as has been pointed out
more than once today. Its own autonomous capacities
for producing and using chemical weapons have not
vanished. Al-Qaida also remains very active in certain
areas, such as the Sahel and the Arabian peninsula. In
that regard, the 1267 Committee is carrying out two
critical missions. First of all, it is analysing the terrorist
threat through the reports of the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team, which serve as valuable
tools for Member States. France encourages all States to
cooperate with the Team in strengthening its analyses.
Secondly, concerning the implementation and rigorous
monitoring of the sanctions list, which is the largest of
all United Nations sanctions regimes, we encourage
every State to continue to submit listing requests. For
that regime to remain credible and effective, it is also
essential that its procedures respect the basic freedoms
of those on the list. France welcomes Mr. Daniel Kipfer
Fasciati, who assumed his functions as Ombudsperson
to the ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee
this summer, and encourages all States to continue to
cooperate with the Office of the Ombudsperson, whose
work is critical for the sanctions regime.
My second point concerns the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, which also carries out two major functions in
complementarity. The first is to raise States’ awareness
of new trends characterizing the constantly evolving
terrorist threat. The Committee’s special meetings — for
example, our meeting next week on the links between
terrorism and organized crime — provide an excellent

S/PV. 8364

means for sharing information and reflecting on specific
issues. The second function of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee is to consider how States are implementing
the relevant Security Council resolutions in the many
areas that fall under its purview, namely, monitoring
foreign terrorist fighters, countering the financing of
terrorism and combating propaganda and incitement to
commit terrorist acts. It is essential that States allow
visits by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate so that it can audit their counter-terrorism
systems and provide appropriate recommendations,
particularly with regard to technical assistance. France
also encourages pursuing joint meetings between the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and the 1267 Committee
so as to address analysis on the terrorist threat and assess
the implementation of Security Council resolutions.
Lastly, I would like to say a few words about the
important work being done by the 1540 Committee
under the chairmanship of Bolivia.
The risk that radiological, biological, chemical
and nuclear materials and vectors fall into the hands
of terrorists is, as I have said, a proven danger. We
have seen it in Syria and Iraq, and it has been clearly
established by the Joint Investigative Mechanism of the
United Nations and the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons that Da’esh has used yperite on
at least two occasions in Syria. Added to that are the
uncertainties that weigh on the comprehensiveness
of the Syrian declaration on its chemical programme
made to the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons, while the potential existence of
residual capabilities on Syrian territory only increases
those risks.
It is therefore more important than ever to adapt our
efforts to the evolution of the threat. We are particularly
concerned about transfers to the Middle East of goods
and technologies related to vectors designed to be
able to carry weapons of mass destruction. Progress
in the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and
subsequent resolutions is tangible at the national
and regional levels. The vast majority of United
Nation States Members have now adopted measures
incorporating the provisions of the resolution into
their national legislation. Whether it concerns securing
sensitive materials and goods, strengthening border
controls or even, where necessary, establishing exportcontrol mechanisms, the international community
aims to ensure that such sensitive materials and assets
cannot possibly fall into the hands of terrorists. The

18-3020213/24

S/PV.8364

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

adoption of resolution 2325 (2016) at the end of 2016
has made it possible to adapt and bolster our framework
for action in countering the threat. By strengthening
the approach to cooperation, assistance and interaction
we will be able to better prevent the risk of weapons of
mass destruction being acquired by non-State actors.
France will remain fully involved in that effort, starting
this month by submitting to the First Committee
a draft resolution on preventing the acquisition of
radioactive sources by terrorists and by supporting the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction at the
European Union and in the course of its forthcoming
chairmanship of the Group of Seven.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
country would like to congratulate Bolivia on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of October and wish it every success in
the conduct of our work. My delegation would also like
to express its deepest appreciation to the United States
of America for the relevance of the issues discussed
during its presidency in September.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes this meeting to consider
the joint report of the three subsidiary bodies that
make up the Council’s counter-terrorism framework.
We thank Ambassador Kairat Umarov, Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999); Ambassador Gustavo MezaCuadra, Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001); and you yourself, Ambassador
Sacha Llorentty Solíz, Chair of the Security Council
Committee pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), for the
quality of the respective briefings.
The reports of the subsidiary bodies provide us with
scope and extent of the evolving threat of terrorism,
the security risks associated with the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and the work done by the
various subsidiary bodies themselves. That analysis
compels my delegation to comment on the evolution of
the terrorism threat, the mandates of the Committees
and the challenges to overcome.
With regard to the evolution of the threat of
terrorism, my country remains concerned about new
forms of terrorist threats enhanced by globalization;
the resilience of Da’esh and its affiliated groups; and
the significant capabilities of the latter to adapt their
tactics and the ways in which their activities are
financed. In addition, the return and relocation of
terrorist fighters, attempts by non-State actors to gain
14/24

03/10/2018

access to weapons of mass destruction and the use of
the Internet for terrorist purposes also remain areas of
concern for the Council.
With regard to the mandates of the various
Committees, my delegation welcomes the close
cooperation between them. That makes it possible to
face current challenges, which include the constant
evolution of types of terrorist threats and the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. We also
commend the progress made by the Committees and
their expert groups in their assessment of the threat
of terrorism and their assistance in enabling Member
States to fulfil their obligations under United Nations
resolutions and international legal instruments in the
fight against terrorism and the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction.
In that regard, my delegation welcomes the
cooperation and coordination between the various
Committees in the planning and implementation
of their various activities, in accordance with their
respective mandates and Council resolutions. Regular
exchanges between the Committees and Member States
to raise their awareness of the threat of terrorism;
working visits to Afghanistan, Singapore, Malaysia,
the Philippines; and joint briefings in Africa and
Central Asia, are excellent examples of that coordinated
approach between the various Committees, which
should be strengthened.
My country also welcomes the efforts made by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
to rehabilitate and reintegrate former foreign terrorist
fighters, particularly those in the Lake Chad basin.
Given that information sharing is essential to the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), my
country appreciates the regional training sessions
organized for national focal points. Those sessions
have enabled the creation of an active network aimed
at strengthening cooperation and coordination, both
with the 1540 Committee and between the respective
regions. Information-sharing further encourages
the strengthening of cooperation between the 1540
Committee and international organizations such
as the International Atomic Energy Agency, the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
the Implementation Support Unit of the Chemical
Weapons Convention, the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime and INTERPOL. My delegation also
welcomes the actions initiated by the Committees and
their expert groups to update the sanctions lists in order
18-30202

03/10/2018

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

to facilitate the implementation of sanctions regimes
against individuals, groups and entities associated with
terrorist groups.
With regard to the challenges ahead, Côte d’Ivoire
stresses the need for the United Nations to favour an
integrated approach in its response strategy in order
to better adapt to current challenges. We also believe
that more attention should be paid to measures to ban
biological, chemical and bacteriological weapons;
the financing networks that enable proliferation;
and national controls on the export and transport of
such weapons.
My country urges the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate to continue its awareness-raising
activities in order to combat extremist discourse and
all other actions leading to violent extremism and
terrorism. We also call for the updating of the Madrid
principles on foreign terrorist fighters. My delegation
believes that the root causes of radicalization must be
addressed and that particular attention must be paid
to risk factors, including psycho-pathological factors
that can lead to terrorism. In that regard, we commend
the work of the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team of the Sanctions Committee and
we recommend that non-proliferation and terrorism
sanctions procedures respect fundamental freedoms.
Finally, given that assistance to Member States is useful
for the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), my
delegation urges the 1540 Committee to do everything
in its power to settle pending requests for assistance.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): My delegation would like to begin by
commending the United States on its successful
presidency in September. We also congratulate Bolivia
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of October and wish it luck
and success. My delegation thanks the Permanent
Representatives of Bolivia, Kazakhstan and Peru for
their respective comprehensive briefings on the fight
against terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction. We recognize their leadership and
that of their teams in heading up the three Committees,
which are doing vital and extremely complex work that
shapes the credibility and effectiveness of the Council.
Terrorism is one of the greatest threats to peace and
security in the world. Through the briefings that we have
just heard, we are aware of the progressive ability of
terrorist groups to join and assimilate into anti-terrorist

S/PV. 8364

cooperation initiatives, adapt technological innovations
and collaborate with international criminal networks
and armed groups, among others. In that regard, the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea commends the work
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001), on counter-terrorism, especially its
indispensable work as an informative and strategic
forum for Member States. We also highlight the role of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
in monitoring and supporting the implementation by
Member States of resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005)
and other relevant resolutions.
We urge that the role of the Committee be
strengthened through greater collaboration with regional
organizations by placing a sharper focus on building
the counter-terrorism capacity of Member States
and regions in need; as well as with a more inclusive
approach towards Member States, communities and
subregions that are affected by terrorism and run the
risk of becoming sanctuaries for those who practice it.
In that way, we can strengthen preventive efforts and
avoid blind spots in the global fight against terrorism.
For that reason, we also want to recognize the growing
work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate in the Central African region, among other
initiatives. We likewise recognize the growing work of
the Committees pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999),
1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant, Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups and entities, and the important
analytical and follow-up work of its Analytical Support
and Sanctions Monitoring Team.
Ambassador Kairat Umarov’s briefing and the
Secretary-General’s seventh report (S/2018/770) on the
D’aesh threat to international peace and security, which
we are analysing at this meeting, confirm the disruptive
potential of that group for international peace and
security, in particular through its global network
of regional affiliates, its 20,000 to 30,000 foreign
terrorist fighters, including women and children, and
its increasingly deplorable suicide attack methods. In
that regard, we commend the work of the Committee as
a cautious supervisor of the sanctions list its increasing
collaboration with other sanctions committees. We
also welcome the appointment of Mr. Daniel Kipfer
Fasciati as Ombudsperson of the Committee. We trust
—indeed, encourage — that the Monitoring Team and
the Ombudsperson will step up their collaboration

18-3020215/24

S/PV.8364

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

with Member States and regional initiatives through
sustainable strategies.
With respect to the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), on the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, I
would like to thank the Committee for the opportunity
they offer by briefing us on their contributions to the
implementation of the resolution. Since its establishment,
the 1540 Committee has endeavoured to raise awareness
of the need to eliminate nuclear, chemical, biological
weapons, their delivery systems and related materials.
The Committee assists States with legislation, training
and equipment and facilitates cooperation between
the various regional organizations and Member States
with a view to improving their practices and general
preparedness to prevent the risks of non-State actors,
specifically terrorists, illegally acquiring material or
dual-use technologies, or trafficking in them. Despite
all those efforts, the terrorist threat remains real, and the
mere idea of non-State actors having access to weapons
of mass destruction is a matter of great concern.
Scientific and technological progress, together with
the globalization of world trade, poses new challenges
for monitoring, including the financing, acquisition,
possession, development, transport, transfer or use
of nuclear, chemical or biological weapons and their
delivery systems, particularly for terrorism purposes.
In that context, the 1540 Committee is an ideal platform
for international cooperation to establish strong
international barriers that prevent proliferation and, in
particular, that prevent non-State actors from accessing
weapons of mass destruction.
To avoid proliferation, it is imperative that the
institutions in charge of enforcing local cross-border
controls have officials trained in the technical and
legal tools that govern the matter. In that context,
we highlight the work done by the Expert Group of
the 1540 Committee, which, through workshops and
seminars, has promoted the sharing of experiences
and practices according to the needs of each State
with respect to handling non-proliferation activities.
In the same vein, Malabo will host its first workshop
in December organized by the 1540 Committee, in
collaboration with the Government of Equatorial
Guinea and the Office for Disarmament Affairs, to
support improving the capabilities of our country’s
national institutions in the area of customs services
and border control on non-proliferation activities. We
reiterate the need for States with greater capabilities in
16/24

03/10/2018

the area of customs and border control to share their
experiences, technologies and best practices with the
States that are the least advanced in those areas. The
detonation of a nuclear, chemical or biological weapon
would have a global impact. Furthermore, terrorists can
take advantage of the deficiencies in the surveillance
capabilities of developing States to bring in such
weapons and attack the interests of developed States.
So far, 181 countries have submitted their national
implementation reports on resolution 1540 (2004).
We congratulate the Committee for its hard work and
encourage it to continue spreading the Committee’s
objectives so that the remaining States also comply
with the commitments and purposes of resolution 1540
(2004).
The fight against terrorism and for the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction are
the responsibility of all States, because no one can
face those scourges alone. The Republic of Equatorial
Guinea notes with concern the growth and evolution of
terrorist groups in the world, and especially in Africa,
where many countries are committed to sustainable
development and peace. For that reason, we encourage
States to continue investing in the implementation of the
resolutions of these three Security Council Sanctions
Committees. We also encourage States to commit to
sustainable development, which is the best prevention.
Lastely, Equatorial Guinea upholds its commitment
to continue fighting terrorism and working for the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, as
weall to collaborate on those goals insofar as possible.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
wishes to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month and will actively support your work.
China also expresses its appreciation to the United
States for the work it did as President during the month
of September.
I wish to thank Ambassadors Llorentty Solíz,
Umarov and Meza-Cuadra for their briefings. China
expresses its appreciation to the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999), concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities, the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism (CTC), and
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) for the work they have done
18-30202

03/10/2018

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

and the progress they have achieved under the able
leadership of the three Ambassadors.
Terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and their means of delivery pose a
grave threat to international peace and security. The
international community should therefore strengthen
cooperation and adopt an integrated approach to
effectively respond to the threat. In connection with the
work of the three Committees, China wishes to make
the following points.
First, the 1267 Committee plays an important
role in evaluating terror threats and strengthening
sanctions. Recently, on the basis of the Council’s
mandate, the Committee updated its rules of
procedure and conducted periodic review of the
sanctions list. The Committee has done something
positive in selecting a new Ombudsperson. It has also
strengthened cooperation with the Monitoring Team
and the Ombudsperson and has continued to improve
its working methods. China hopes that the Committee
will strengthen its communication with the countries
concerned and abide by the principles of objectivity,
neutrality and professionalism when it comes to listing,
exemptions and delisting. China also hopes that it will
make decisions on the basis of solid evidence and broad
consensus so as to preserve jointly the authority and the
effectiveness of the sanctions regime.
Secondly, the CTC plays an important role in
facilitating the full implementation of the Council’s
counter-terrorism resolutions by tracking new terror
threats and trends and by providing technical assistance
to the countries concerned. China is happy to see that
the CTC has strengthened its information-sharing and
coordination and cooperation with other United Nations
agencies through joint meetings and visits. China hopes
that the Committee will continue its dialogue with
Member States and engage in cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations, as well as assist Member
States with capacity-building on counter-terrorism so as
to jointly respond to new challenges posed by terrorist
organizations that incite, plan and execute terrorist
activities using the Internet and new technologies.
Thirdly, the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery is a real threat
to international peace and security. It is also a challenge
to be taken up jointly by the international community.
In order to effectively respond to the threat of
proliferation by non-State actors, the 1540 Committee

S/PV. 8364

should continue to work in a spirit of cooperation and
dialogue and carry out its activities under the purview
of the relevant Council resolutions and the Committee’s
programme of work. It is necessary to stress the primary
responsibility of Member States in non-proliferation
and to support them in designing their non-proliferation
policies on their own terms. It is necessary also to
adopt a balanced approach in the implementation
of the provisions of Council resolutions and to build
the capacity of Member States to implement those
resolutions. We must also ensure that the assistance
provided by the Committee to Member States is more
targeted and effective and that special attention is given
to the needs of developing countries.
Fourthly, the Committees’ Groups of Experts
should work within the framework of their respective
mandates and the Committees’ rules of procedure. It
is essential that they strengthen coordination, leverage
their respective advantages, improve their work and
enhance their professionalism. At the same time, they
should be more open to the views of Member States.
China opposes terrorism of all kinds and is
firmly against the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery. China has
adopted effective measures to implement Council
resolutions and supports the work of the Council’s
subsidiary organs. China, together with the rest of the
international community, will continue its efforts to
promote international counter-terrorism cooperation,
strengthen the international non-proliferation regime
and work jointly to maintain world peace and stability.
Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): I want to join others in
congratulating Bolivia on assuming the presidency
of the Council and assure it of our fullest support.
Let me also express our appreciation to United States
Ambassador Nikki Haley and her entire staff for their
successful presidency last month.
We thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this joint briefing, which we found very relevant and
useful in the light of the common objectives that the
three Committees share as important subsidiary organs
of the Security Council in countering terrorism. I
commend the Chairs of the three Committees and their
respective teams for their briefings, as well as for their
dedicated efforts.
On the work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), we recognize the indispensable role that it
plays in monitoring the implementation of resolution

18-3020217/24

S/PV.8364

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

1373 (2001) and other relevant resolutions on counterterrorism. Ethiopia also appreciates the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED) in
the implementation of the CTC’s decisions and the
expert assessments it provides, as well as its assistance
to Member States in the implementation of Security
Council resolutions on terrorism.
We believe that the promotion of regional
cooperation should be strengthened and should also
focus on those countries and regions that are most
affected. We continue to stress that assessment visits
to Member States should be followed by the facilitation
of capacity-building and technical assistance where
there is a need to fill existing gaps. In this regard,
we would like to commend the role of the Office of
Counter-Terrorism and other bilateral partners and
their continued engagement with the CTC and CTED.
The work of the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities is
critical in overseeing the sanctions measures imposed
by the Security Council on ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities in accordance with the relevant resolutions. We
recognize the important work of the Analytical Support
and Sanctions Monitoring Team of the Al-Qaida
Sanctions Committee in assisting the Committee’s
work and commend its expertise and professionalism.
We always welcome the continued engagement of the
Committee and the Monitoring Team.
We note with great concern the threat posed by
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
their means of delivery and related materials and the
possibility of such weapons falling into the hands of
non-State actors, particularly terrorists. The threat of
the proliferation risk of such weapons is alarming in the
light of recent incidents related to the use of chemical
weapons by non-State actors in different parts of
the world.
The objectives of Security Council resolution 1540
(2004) could best be achieved through gradual control
and the reduction of nuclear, biological or chemical
weapons, leading towards the total elimination of and
a ban on weapons of mass destruction. In this regard,
it is imperative for all of us to support the SecretaryGeneral’s Agenda for Disarmament. Equally important
18/24

03/10/2018

is the need to ensure the ratification of, accession to
and full implementation of multilateral agreements
on the prevention and elimination of weapons of
mass destruction.
The threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters and
returnees, terrorism financing risks and the exploitation
by terrorists of information and communication
technologies — coupled with the risk of the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction in the hands of
non-State actors, including terrorists — remains an
enormous challenge.
As you underscored, Mr. President, in your remarks
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), cooperation among the three
Committees is of the utmost importance. Strengthening
collaboration between the 1540 Committee Group of
Experts and members of the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team, the ISIL (Da’esh) and
Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee and the CTC, without
prejudice to their respective mandates, requires
attention from the Council.
We recognize that resolution 2368 (2017) provides
a framework for the cooperation between the CTED
and the 1540 Committee and their respective Groups of
Experts aimed at providing support to Member States
as well as avoiding duplication, creating synergies
and facilitating coordination. In this regard, while
welcoming the recent joint outreach activities and visits
by the three Committees, I would like to highlight three
areas that could be considered in efforts to further
strengthen cooperation among the three Committees
within the framework of resolution 2368 (2017).
First, as a follow-up to today’s joint briefing, the
Chairs of the Committees could envisage the convening
of a joint meeting among the three Committees at
the expert level to identify concrete measures or
mechanisms that could further enhance existing
cooperation, with a view to preventing the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and their falling into
the hands of terrorists.
Secondly, the three Committees could, in the
context of their outreach activities and technical
assistance and capacity-building provided to Member
States, consider the possibility of the joint planning and
implementation of their activities, as appropriate and
where feasible.
18-30202

03/10/2018

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

Thirdly, while welcoming the existing cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations, including
the African Union, the possibility of organizing joint
meetings and other activities in support of regional
efforts should be further explored. Such measures
will further strengthen regional efforts to prevent
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction by
non-State actors, as well as counter-terrorism measures.
Mr. Vaverka (Sweden): Allow me to join others
in welcoming you, Sir, to the presidency and assuring
you of my delegation’s full support and cooperation
throughout the month of October. I would also like to
congratulate the delegation of the United States for its
excellent stewardship of the Council during the month
of September.
I thank you very much, Mr. President, for your
briefing today, as well as for your important work
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004). Let me also thank the Permanent
Representatives of Kazakhstan and of Peru for their
presentations and for their leadership in chairing their
respective Committees.
Since we met in this format in May last year (see
S/PV.7936), there have been numerous encouraging
developments in global efforts to counter terrorism,
both inside and outside the Council. We have seen
that, through concerted efforts, our ability to fight this
scourge has improved. However, we are far from done;
acts of terrorism remain a serious threat to international
peace and security, and we must continue to develop
our tools to counter and prevent further terrorist acts.
One of the most notable developments within the
United Nations during the last year is of course the
establishment of the United Nations Office of Counter
Terrorism (UNOCT). We recognize and appreciate
that the Council Committees and the UNOCT are
now working together to strengthen their coordination
on a number of important aspects. The adoption of
several resolutions related to counter-terrorism, such
as resolution 2396 (2017), on returning foreign terrorist
fighters, is another significant development. The
effective implementation of those resolutions must now
be ensured.
The continued cooperation and unity of the
Council is a prerequisite for the further development of
our ability to combat terrorism. Sweden welcomes the
well-functioning cooperation and information-sharing
among the three Committees as well as their respective

S/PV. 8364

Groups of Experts. The sanctions regime of the Security
Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities remains a vital tool in our counter-terrorism
efforts. It is true that Da’esh has lost territory over the
past year. However, as many colleagues have observed
today, that network clearly remains a serious threat,
and there is also a surge in the threat from A1-Qaida.
Continued efforts to improve the functioning of the
regime is therefore key.
We welcome the appointment of the Ombudsperson,
Mr. Daniel Kipfer Fasciati. The Office of the
Ombudsperson is of crucial importance for due process
and therefore for the efficiency of and compliance with
the sanctions regime. In future, we should look at some
kind of procedure to ensure that longer vacancies in
that key post are avoided. Currently only individuals
and entities listed under the 1267 sanctions regime
have access to the Ombudsperson, while there are also
concerns over due process in other sanctions regimes.
We should consider the possibility of gradually
extending the mandate of the Ombudsperson to other
sanctions regimes, as appropriate.
The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism is a vital
venue for dialogue on counter-terrorism-related
challenges within the framework of the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC). Continued engagement
remains essential among the Committee, the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
and other relevant actors such as civil society, the
CTED Global Counter-Terrorism Research Network
and the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms
while countering terrorism. We recall the important
discussion held last week in the CTC on the impact of
counter-terrorism on human rights, and we welcome
the efforts made to streamline human rights and gender
issues throughout all the activities of the Committee and
CTED, including during assessment visits and thematic
briefings, as outlined by Ambassador Meza-Cuadra in
his earlier briefing. Both of those perspectives are key,
not least from the point of view of preventing terrorism.
Sweden welcomes the increased attention to issues
relating to the impact on children of terrorism and
counter-terrorism, which was made possible through
last year’s adoption of resolution 2395 (2017). We

18-3020219/24

S/PV.8364

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

thank the CTC Chair for highlighting the role of the
United Nations University (UNU) in that important
discussion. The UNU’s research briefs on children and
extreme violence fill an important void, and Sweden
is considering ways of deepening its cooperation with
the UNU, in particular on how to improve reintegration
interventions for individuals associated with groups
deemed as terrorists or violent extremists.
Resolution 1540 (2004) and the 1540 Committee
remain an important complement to the multilateral
disarmament and non-proliferation regime. The
threat from non-State actors is real. The fact that
181 States have submitted their initial reports on
national implementation is testimony to an increasing
commitment to address that urgent threat. This urgency
has become even more evident as the international
norm prohibiting the use of chemical weapons has been
repeatedly violated over the past few years. The evolving
nature of threats from non-State actors requires us to
stay one step ahead. We must take into account the
rapid advances in science and technology in order to
foresee potential risks. Sweden, together with Bolivia
and the 1540 Group of Experts, will co-host an event
later this month on emerging technologies in order to
share experiences on that topic among Member States
and national and international scientific societies.
The Council has repeatedly underscored in its
various resolutions that all counter-terrorism measures
undertaken by Member States must comply with their
obligations under international law and has made it clear
that failure to comply with international obligations is
one of the factors contributing to radicalization and
violence. There is no doubt that terrorists must be held
to account and that there cannot be impunity for the
atrocities they commit. Meanwhile, we must remember
that counter-terrorism efforts cannot come at the
expense of human rights.
If we are to succeed in eliminating terrorism,
we must also uphold respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms, both online and offline, as that
is the basis for an open society, critical thinking and
fostering resilience to terrorist propaganda. Let me
therefore conclude by reiterating the importance of
ensuring that all counter-terrorism measures are carried
out in accordance with international law, including
human rights law, humanitarian law and refugee law.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Allow me to join others
in congratulating you, Sir, on having assumed the
20/24

03/10/2018

presidency of the Council for October. I wish you
all the best and assure you that you can count on our
support. At the same time, I would like to express our
appreciation for the excellent work of the United States
presidency in September, and we thank Ambassador
Nikki Haley for her leadership and the United States
delegation for their professionalism.
Allow me to thank you once again, Mr. President,
as well as your colleagues Ambassadors Kairat Umarov
and Gustavo Meza-Cuadra, for their informative
briefings, tireless work and active leadership of the three
Committees. The results of the work of the subsidiary
bodies determine the effectiveness of the Security
Council, as the organ entrusted with maintaining
international peace and security. I would also like
to commend the ongoing cooperation among the
respective expert bodies of the three Committees — the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
and the Group of Experts of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).
First, I would like to stress that rapid technological
advances in the dual-use domain continue to outpace
national and international regulations. Non-State
actors have become more creative in weaponizing
new technologies. The use by terrorists of weapons
of mass destruction and their means of delivery and
related materials is a dreadful reality. For more than
a decade, Poland has had a record of fruitful and
substantial cooperation with the 1540 Committee and
its Group of Experts. With the support of those bodies,
we undertook a number of initiatives at the national,
regional and global levels. We call on all States to
fully implement resolution 1540 (2004) by taking
national and international measures to strengthen their
capacities in countering the threats posed by terrorists
acquiring weapons of mass destruction, including
through the development of national action plans under
that resolution.
Secondly, Poland welcomes the achievements
of the Security Council Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities. Despite having
been defeated in Iraq and confined to small pockets
of territory in the Syrian Arab Republic, ISIL still
poses a significant challenge to international peace and
security. Al-Qaida is relatively strong in many parts
18-30202

03/10/2018

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

of the world, posing a long-term threat to stability and
sustainable development. In that regard, it is of crucial
importance to keep the sanctions list updated and stay
focused on the current threat. The issue of weapons
reaching ISIL, Al-Qaida and their affiliates should be
dealt with through a holistic approach, including better
border control.
Global challenges such as the threat posed by
terrorists should be addressed by the international
community as a whole. The tenth meeting of the
Counter-ISIL Finance Group, hosted by Poland in
September and co-chaired by the United States, Italy and
Saudi Arabia, was a good example of that attitude. By
sharing specific information on funding mechanisms,
52 Member States explored how to mitigate the risks
posed by terrorist organizations and the potential
exploitation of stabilization and reconstruction funding
into Iraq and other affected countries.
We appreciate the efforts made by the Secretariat
to address the needs of the end users of the sanction list
through the development of a more accessible search
engine and a mobile application. We call on States to
cooperate in the annual review of the 1267 sanctions list.
Poland welcomes Mr. Daniel Kipfer Fasciati
as the new Ombudsperson to the ISIL (Da’esh) and
Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee. We look forward to a
productive cooperation given his important role in the
delisting process.
Lastly, I would like to express our appreciation for
the work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee. Thanks
to its efforts, we know better how to combat illicit
trafficking, abuse of the Internet and the financing
of terrorism. The Committee’s special meetings,
whether thematic or regional, such as the recent ones
on countering terrorist narratives, on human rights and
on Central Asia, are an excellent tool for keeping States
informed and a platform for galvanizing discussion.
In conclusion, I want to stress that beyond
States’ efforts to counter terrorism, we should not
underestimate the effectiveness of the engagement of
international, religious and civil-society organizations,
as well as academia and the private sector. Only by
working together, and with respect for the rule of law
and human rights, can we fight this scourge.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of

S/PV. 8364

your duties, and the United States on its presidency of
the Council last month.
I would like to begin by thanking all of the
Committees for their work, and their Chairs for
updating us on the implementation of these important
resolutions. I particularly want to welcome the
collaboration and joint work being done between the
Committees, as is evidenced here today. I would first
like to address the work of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, and of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee.
No country is immune to the threat of terrorism
and no region is exempt from the threat that flows
from the poisonous ideology that underpins it. Only
through collaboration between countries, within and
between regions, can we defeat it. We need a network
of willing and capable countries to tackle the terrorist
threat. While much is being done bilaterally, the United
Nations has a major role. A willingness to tackle this
threat should of course be a matter of self-interest, but it
also flows from binding Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions. And while capability flows
from the Committees, including the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, it also flows from the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED), the Office
of Counter-Terrorism and the United Nations CounterTerrorism Centre. I very much welcome the joint work
that we are seeing under the leadership of UnderSecretary-General Voronkov and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Coninsx.
The United Kingdom agrees with the assessment in
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/770) that Da’esh
has evolved from a territorial entity into a diffuse,
covert network that operates in a number of countries.
Al-Qaida and its affiliates remain a persistent threat and
challenge, and we are also facing threats to international
peace and security from terrorist groups that have been
inspired by Da’esh and Al-Qaida, in addition to others,
such as extreme right-wing groups. Terrorist groups
constantly change their methods and approaches, and
we must be flexible and adaptable in response. As the
Ambassador of Peru has said, a feature of the threat in
recent times has been the outflow of foreign terrorist
fighters from many countries represented around this
table. But as well as focusing on that, we must now
focus on returnees to our countries and relocators to
other theatres. Nor must we forget the foreign terrorist

18-3020221/24

S/PV.8364

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

fighters currently in prison, and others convicted of
terrorism-related offences who may pose a threat both
at home and abroad.
The United Kingdom wants to stress the important
role that the private sector, academic researchers and
civil society can play in supporting Member States
and United Nations bodies in countering terrorism
and violent extremism. During the United Kingdom’s
August presidency of the Security Council (see
S/PV.8330), we were pleased to invite a civil-society
briefer, Ms. Joana Cook of the International Centre for
the Study of Radicalisation and Political Violence, in
London, to share with the Council findings from her
recent report on Da’esh women and minors, which
enriched our understanding and discussion.
I would like to stress that sanctions remain a key
tool in combating terrorism. We welcome the continued
engagement and cooperation of all Council members in
our international efforts to counter this threat, and I also
welcome the appointment of Mr. Daniel Kipfer Fasciati
as Ombudsperson. The United Kingdom welcomes the
ongoing efforts of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
and the Committee’s Executive Directorate to address a
broad spectrum of issues raised by recent resolutions, in
particular resolution 2396 (2017). As others have said, a
global passenger name record standard is needed, and we
welcome the International Civil Aviation Organization
project of the Office of Counter-Terrorism to promote
its responsible use, and recognize the generous support
of the Government of the Netherlands in that regard.
Furthermore, we continue to encourage States to move
towards the implementation of the Global Aviation
Security Plan.
In line with resolution 2395 (2017), it is important
that CTED assessment and analytical tools are updated
and made fit for purpose, and that they inform the
capacity-building activities of the United Nations,
including the Office of Counter-Terrorism and its
partners. We are pleased to invite CTED to conduct a
visit to the United Kingdom in 2019, and look forward
to working with the Committee in order to share
good practices and technical-assistance needs. I also
encourage other States to work with CTED to facilitate
similar visits to their own countries. We can all learn.
Moving on to the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), I would like to acknowledge
the Committee’s achievements, particularly regarding
the completion of initial reports and the engagement
22/24

03/10/2018

of the Committee’s Working Groups. We support the
Chair and Committee’s focus on practical steps to
support the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004),
such as voluntary national action plans. We welcome
the example set by Chile and Colombia in conducting
a peer review of the resolution’s implementation, and
suggest that the Committee encourage other countries
to do likewise.
We acknowledge that the Committee has played
a crucial role in enabling the meaningful exchange
of information between States, improving the
matchmaking processes that better meet assistance
needs and help to build long-term capacity. It is now
time for the Committee to become more active and to
strategically consider new and emerging threats. In
particular, we encourage the Committee to consider
responses to topical counter-proliferation issues
affecting the implementation of resolutions 1540
(2004) and 2325 (2016), such as emerging technologies
and proliferation financing, and to consider the role
of international organizations and multilateral forums
in raising awareness of those issues. We hope the
Committee will meet more often going forward. We
encourage the ongoing work aimed at raising awareness
and the profile of resolution 1540 (2004).
The effective implementation of these resolutions
is vital to protecting hard-fought global norms and
the rules-based international system. Let us step up
our efforts.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to congratulate the delegation
of Bolivia on the start of its presidency of the Security
Council and to note the timeliness of today’s joint
briefing on three of its important subsidiary bodies.
We thank the briefers, all of whom clearly identified
the tasks facing the Council and the entire international
community in combating the threat of terrorism.
We are grateful to the Permanent Representative
of Peru for his detailed report on the activities of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and its Executive
Directorate (CTED). The core of the CTC’s mandate
should continue to be the professional and impartial
assessment of States’ anti-terrorism efforts. We
recognize that the number of monitoring missions,
including those carried out jointly with other Security
Council bodies and the Office of Counter-Terrorism,
has increased significantly, and we have taken positive
18-30202

03/10/2018

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

S/PV. 8364

note of the efforts of Under-Secretary-General Vladimir
Voronkov and Executive Director Michèle Coninsx.

practices developed over the years and will continue to
be a unifying platform.

We would like to remind the Council that paragraph
12 of resolution 2395 (2017) directs the leadership of
the Committee to report to the Council on problems
in obtaining the consent of States to country visits
and concluding reports, as well as on how the CTC’s
recommendations are being implemented. We hope
to see a detailed analysis of the situation in this area.
We agree that providing information on current threats
and best practices in the fight against terrorism is an
extremely important aspect of the CTC’s activities.
However, it is very clear that the Executive Directorate’s
attention has frequently been concerned with topics
such as rehabilitating and reintegrating terrorists,
strengthening the role of women, protecting human
rights and collaborating with civil society at the expense
of its counter-terrorism tasks. Those are all important
issues, of course, but they are not directly related to
the Committee’s basic mandate, and it is important to
ensure that it continues to focus on the area of counterterrorism or run the risk of losing key reference points.

We note the work of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities and consider it one of the
Council’s most effective mechanisms on the counterterrorism front. We are pleased to note that this is
Kazakhstan is in large part responsible for this, as is
Ambassador Umarov personally as the Committee’s
current Chair.

We believe that it is counterproductive to attempt
to transform the CTC and its Executive Directorate,
with their unique tools, into a quasi-human rights
protection mechanism. Introducing individual ways
of working with some violent extremists and violent
extremist groups into the Committee’s agenda is even
less acceptable, and in our view is a targeted approach
to undermining the international legal base of counterterrorism with the aim of exempting tame terrorists from
responsibility. Instead, we propose that the Committee
and Executive Directorate confine their focus to
genuinely topical issues of countering incitement to
terrorism and terrorist propaganda, in accordance with
resolutions 1624 (2005) and 2354 (2017), as well as
suppressing the supply of arms to terrorists, in line with
resolution 2370 (2017). There is still much to be done
in those areas.
Speaking of the unique nature of the CTC and
CTED mandate, we would like to draw attention to
the depoliticization and professionalism that have
distinguished both bodies since their establishment. We
believe that the attempts of some Committee members
to pressure the Executive Directorate into limiting its
collaboration with international organizations working
on counter-terror issues are unacceptable. We hope that
CTED itself will strictly follow its own procedures and

We believe it is crucial to ensure the effective
implementation of Council resolutions on the counterterrorism sanctions regime with regard to the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and Al-Qaida. Given
the growing presence of ISIL in Afghanistan and the
threat of the further expansion of jihadists into the
countries of Central Asia, we believe that one of our
priorities should be expanding the Security Council’s
counter-terrorism sanctions regime to individuals and
organizations that are part of or directly connected
to the Afghan wing of the Islamic State’s extremist
organization. It makes sense to continue to concentrate
on the problem of foreign terrorist fighters on the
counter-terrorism sanctions lists who are actively
moving to States of origin or to third countries from
Syria and Iraq, in order to prevent and suppress their
criminal activities.
We support the effective work of the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team pursuant to
resolutions 1526 (2004) and 2253 (2015) concerning
ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities, whose reports are an important
tool for our joint work, and we urge Member States
to work closely with their experts. We expect the
Monitoring Team’s reports to be as objective as possible
and rely only on verified sources of information. The
Monitoring Team’s country visits are a significant
factor in its work, and we hope that it will focus on
trips to countries that are in armed confrontations
with international terrorism and States that are dealing
directly with terrorist efforts. That is critical to
obtaining first-hand information.
Resolution 1540 (2004) is a key, universal, legally
binding instrument in the area of the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs), requiring
all countries to adopt effective measures to prevent

18-3020223/24

S/PV.8364

Briefings by Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

weapons of mass destruction, their means of delivery
and related materials from falling into the hands of
non-State actors. On the whole, we are satisfied with
the implementation of the resolution. We commend
the efforts of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) under the chairmanship of
Bolivia, and of its Group of Experts, for organizing
courses for national focal points, conducting country
visits to develop voluntary national action plans,
providing assistance to countries that need it and
maintaining contacts with relevant specialized
international, regional and subregional organizations.
However, much remains to be done to achieve the
main goal, the full implementation of the resolution by
all countries.
Russia is working actively not only to implement
the resolution but also to provide appropriate assistance
to other States. With the support of the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), we
have held courses on resolution 1540 (2004) issues for

24/24

03/10/2018

OSCE member States in Rostov-on-Don. In a few days’
time, Russia’s Federal Service for Technical and Export
Control is organizing a seminar in Moscow on export
control issues for member States of the Commonwealth
of Independent States.
The Security Council must respond robustly to
any violations of resolution 1540 (2004) and actions
to help non-State actors to gain access to weapons
of mass destruction, particularly chemical weapons.
The challenges in that area demand that we unite
international efforts and reject double standards. In
that regard, we would like to remind the Council of
the initiative by the Russian Federation to develop
and adopt a convention for the suppression of acts of
chemical and biological terrorism.
Today’s discussion confirms that eradicating
terrorism is possible only with broad international
cooperation. We urge that practical steps be taken to
establish an international counter-terrorism coalition.
The meeting rose at 11.35 a.m.

18-30202
