UNITED NATIONS

THIRT,Y-SEVENTH

YEAR

th
MEETING:

2 APRIL

1982

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2347)

. ,. . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . ,

1

Adoption of the agenda ,,,.,,,....,........,.,,.I........,...........,.

1

Letter dated 19 March 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Nicaragua
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/ 14913) . . . . . .

1

S/PV.2347

” ‘Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
: f; F
Documents of the Security Council (symbol SI. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Slr,~&ments
of the OfJicial Records of the Seclkty COWIC~I. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resoluiions
and
Decisions
of’ the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2347th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 2 April 1982, at 12.10 p.m.
President:

Mr. KAMANDA

wa KAMANDA

(Zaire).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Ireland,
Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2347)

I.

Adoption

of the agenda

2.

Letter dated 19 March 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Nicaragua to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/14913)

Adoption of the agenda

Letter dated 19 March 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Nicaragua to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/14913)
I. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
In accordance with decisions taken at the previous
meetings on this item [2335th, 2337th, 233&h, 234lst,
2342nd rend 2343rd meetings], I invite the representative of Nicaragua to take a place at the Council table.
I invite the representatives of Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Benin, Chile, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica,
Cuba, El Salvador, the German Democratic Republic,
Grenada, Honduras, India, Iran, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Madagascar,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Mozambique,
Nigeria, Seychelles, Sri Lanka, the Syrian Arab Republic, the United Republic of Tanzania, Wet Nam,
Yugoslavia, Zambia and Zimbabwe to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber,
At the invitation of the President,
Mr. D’Escoto
Brockmann
(Nicaragua)
took N place at the Council
table; Mr. Ourabah (Algeria),
Mr. de Figueiredo
(Atzgotu), Mr. Row (Argrntina),
Mr. Soglo (Benin),
Mr. Trueco (Chile), Mr. Sanz de Santamaria (Colombia), Mr. Mondjo (Congo), Mr. Piza Escakantc) (Costa
Ricer), Mr. Ldpcjz de1 Amo (Cuba), Mr. Resales Rivera

(El Salvador),
Mr. Ott (German Democratic
Repuhlit), Mr. Taylor (Grenada),
Mr. Corias (Honduras),
Mr. Krishnrrn (India), Mr. RNjaic~-Khorcrssani
(Iran),
Mr. Srithirath (Lao People’s Democratic
Republic),
Mr. Muntasser
(Libyan Arab Jamahisiya),
Mr. Rahettrfikrr
(Madagascar),
Mr.
Ramphul
(Mauritius),
Mr. Muiioz Ledo (Mexico), Mr. Lobo (Mozambique),
Mr. Mtritama-Sole
(Nigeria),
Ms. Gonthier (Scychelles),
Mr. Fonseka
(Sri Lanka),
Mr. El-Fattal
(Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. Rupia (United Republic
t?f Tanzania), Mrs. Nguyen Ngoc Dung (Viet Nam),
Mr. Kotnatina
(Yugoslavia),
Mr. Lusaka (Zambia)
and Mr. Mashaire (Zimbabwe)
took the plaws wso-vcdd.for thetn at the side of the Council chumher.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
fiotn French):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received a letter from the representative of Iraq
in which he requests to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.
At the invitation of the President,
Mr. Mohammad
(Iraq) took the plaw reserved $jr him at the side of the
Council chamber.

3. The PRESIDENT
(interprctofion
fiorn French):
Members of the Council have before them document
S/14941, which contains the text of a draft resolution
su;;mitted by Panama, and now co-sponsored by
Guyana.
4. Mrs. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America): I should like to begin, Sir, by warmly congratulating you on your accession to the presidency and
expressing my personal conviction
and that of my
Government that you will manage the affairs of this
Council with skill, subtlety, flexibility and judgement,
which we know characterize the conduct of the Zairian
Mission and your own professional duties. We are
pleased to have so judicious a President at an hour
when the Council is considering so many and such
important questions.
5. As this discussion of Commander Ortega’s letter
to the Council draws to a close, I should like to make

several observations concerning his complaint against
the United States, and also concerning the debate
that has taken place in this chamber in the past days.

from among so many who have expressed solidarity
with these principles in the last few days. Neither
Angola nor the Congo, nor Cuba, nor the German
Democratic Republic, nor Grenada, nor the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, nor Libya, nor Mozambique, nor Seychelles, nor the Soviet Union, nor Viet
Nam, Algeria, Benin, India, Madagascar, Mexico,
Panama, Uganda, Tanzania or Zimbabwe was moved
by these principles to support the call for an end to the
continuing military occupation of Kampuchea.?

6. First, I desire to reiterate that the great fear cited
by Commander Ortega that the United States is about
to invade Nicaragua is groundless. The United States
has no intention of invading Nicaragua or anyone else.
I have already emphasized the Sandinista leadership’s past misunderstanding
of the attitudes of the
United States Government.
I desire to reiterate once
again that the United States Government
did not
attempt to prevent the Sandinistas’
accession to
power; it helped them. The United States Government
did not attempt to prevent their consolidation of power:
we helped them. The United States did not oppose
their efforts to reconstruct Nicaragua’s
economy;
we helped them. The record concerning United States
economic assistance-direct
and indirect-to
the Government of Nicaragua is clear. There is no need to
labour it. I shall not do so.

12. Will members of the Council be surprised to be
reminded that the Government of Nicaragua was itself
not prepared to extend to the people of Afghanistan
and Kampuchea the rights to peace, national independence and territorial integrity it seeks for itself
now? Nicaragua supported neither the resolution
calling for an end to the occupation of Afghanistan
nor the resolution regarding Kampuchea.
13. This sort of selective invocation and application
of universal principles does not strengthen either the
principles or the organizations
dedicated to their
realization and implementation.
It breeds cynicism. It
harms the United Nations. It mocks the search for
peace.

7. Secondly, I have also reiterated the attachment
of my Government to the principles of non-intervention in the internal affairs of other States, our respect
for territorial
integrity and national independence,
the peaceful settlement of disputes and those principles
of the Charter of the United Nations that govern the
use and non-use of force. Obviously,
none of this
means that the United States renounces the right to
defend itself, nor that we will not assist others to
defend themselves
under circumstances
consistent
with our legal and political obligations
and with the
Charter.

14. Thirdly, I desire to clarify the position of my
Government with regard to the jurisdiction and role of
the United Nations and of regional organizations.
Despite efforts by the Government of Nicaragua to
indicate otherwise, it should be perfectly clear that the
United States Government believes that any Member State has the right under the Charter to bring an
issue before the Security Council which seriously
threatens international peace and security. As members of the Council all know, the United States did not
oppose Commander Ortega’s request to present an
exposition to this Council, even though we were the
object of that complaint. But while the Charter grants
that right to all Members, it is equally clear that the
Charter encourages the resolution of disputes through
regional arrangements.

8. Unfortunately,
not all Governments
which have
participated in this debate are equally attached to the
principles of the non-use of force, respect for territorial integrity or national independence.
There is an
interesting correlation between the nations that have
supported Nicaragua’s
complaint against the United
States and those that opposed or abstained on the
resolutions calling for the withdrawal of Soviet troops
from Afghanistan or Vietnamese troops from Kampuchea.

13. The Charter contains a chapter, chapter VIII,
relating expressly to regional organizations.
Paragraphs 2 and 3 of Article 52 contain the explicit provisions designed to encourage resolution of regional
disputes in the relevant regional organization. Those
paragraphs read as follows:

9. The principles of non-intervention
and respect
for national independence cited in this debate did not
lead Angola, Cuba, the German Democratic Republic,
Grenada, the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic,
Libya, Madagascar,
Mozambique,
Seychelles, the
Syrian Arab Republic, the Soviet Union or Viet Nam
to join 116 other nations in calling for an end to the
occupation of Afghanistan. All those nations opposed
the Afghanistan resolution. 1

“The Members of the United Nations entering
into such arrangements or constituting such agencies
shall make every effort to achieve pacific settlement of local disputes through such regional arrangements or by such regional agencies before
referring them to the Security Council.

10. Zeal for national independence
and non-interference did not move the Governments
of Algeria,
Benin, the Congo, India or Uganda to seek an end to
the occupation of Afghanistan. All abstained.

“The Security Council shall encourage the development of pacific settlement
of local disputes
through such . . , regional agencies either on the
initiative of the States concerned or by reference
from the Security Council.”

1I. It is not, moreover, only the national independence of Afghanistan which inspires so little response
2

16. Those who attempt, as the Government of Nicaragua has attempted, to describe the legal obligations of members of the regional organizations without
reference to these provisions ignore, Intel n&r, fundamental provisions of the Charter. It is an elementary
rule of interpretation
of treaties that effect must be
given to all provisions of the Charter. In this context,
it is worth recalling Article 2, paragraph 2 of the Charter, which requires good-faith fulfilment of the obligations assumed by each and every Member. Ignoring
the existence of undeniably relevant provisions of the
Charter would appear to raise serious questions.

25. The Government
of Nicaragua
espouses and
practises a very particular conception of non-intervention, a very particular conception of non-alignment
-the kind that, in the end, saps the meaning and the
power of both.
26. The letter of Mr. Daniel Ortega Saavedra and
the Council debate that it has prompted remind me of
a statement by the late French philosopher Georges
Bernanos, who once said that “the worst, the most
corrupting,
of lies are problems
poorly stated”.
Mr. Ortega states that “the problem” has to do with
the danger posed by the United States to the independence and sovereignty of the countries of Central
America. This definition of “the problem”
merely
obfuscates the real issue that is at stake in Central
America, which is a conflict between two concepts of
organizing society, two ideologies if you will-the one
democratic, the other totalitarian.

17. Nicaragua’s studied avoidance of those provisions in a long communication ostensibly devoted to an
analysis of the subject demonstrates not only that its
concern is less with law than with politics but that it
is prepared to seek political advantages even at the
price of serious legal distortions,

27. The elections held on Sunday in El Salvador
symbohze one of these approaches-the
democratic
one-while
the Nicaraguan regime’s systematic refusal to hold elections symbolizes the other-the
totalitarian-approach.
That election, the Salvadoran
election, with its enormous turn-out of voters, was a
tribute to the Salvadoran people and to the vitality of
the democratic idea.

18. Unfortunately,
there have been other evidences,
inside this chamber and outside it as well, that the
Government of Nicaragua is less concerned with rights
than with advantages.
19. Its failure to support the national independence
of the peoples of Afghanistan and Kampuchea,
its
continuing efforts to undermine and overthrow neighbouring Governments,
especially El Salvador, its
importation of heavy offensive arms, its militarization
of Nicaraguan society-all
establish that we are dealing
here with a Government that seeks for itself rights
it is not willing to grant others,

28. What a stolid, courageous, unflinching people
these Salvadorans are. Despite the possibility
of
massive violence at the polling places and threats of
retaliation by guerrilla forces against voters, they still
voted in huge, unprecedented
numbers. Why did
they do so?

20. Nicaragua invokes the principle of non-intervention but claims the right to intervene in the internal
affairs of neighbouring States,

29. In Monday’s Wdl Street Journal there was an
interview with one of these voters, Ana Maria de
Martinez, who

21. Nicaragua demands that others respect its national independence but does not respect the sovereignty or right to national self-determination
of its
neighbours,

“was typical of some voters who thought they
would beat the crowds by showing up early at the
polling stations. This mother of two children got to
the National Technical Institute,
a polling place,
around 5 a.m. But so did a lot of other people, and
by 9 a.m. she was still two blocks from the gate
entrance. ‘I’11 wait here all day if I have to,’ she
said, fanning her face with her wallet. ‘The rest of
the world seems to have made decisions about El
Salvador. Now it’s my turn.’ ”

22. Nicaragua claims the right to seek advisers and
arms wherever it chooses-as an exercise of its sovereignty-but
would deny its neighbours the same
right.
23. Nicaragua claims the right to live in peace while
fomenting internal war in neighbouring countries.

30. Some people said that free and fair elections
could not be held in El Salvador. They were wrong.

24. The facts, as I stated last week [2335th meeting],
are that the Government of Nicaragua is an active
party to a massive intervention in the affairs of its
neighbours. The Government of Nicaragua is engaged
in training guerrillas and directing command-andcontrol centres. It is involved in infiltrating arms and
guerrillas, destroying electric power stations, blowing
UP bridges, terrorizing
civilians. Its leaders come
before the Security Council seeking international protection for these activities.

31. But there were others who have been against
elections in principle regarding them as a tool of the
bourgeoisie and a misrepresentation
of the popular will,
which can best be expressed, they believe, through
armed struggle. In Salvador, this view, preferring the
bullet to the ballot, is held by the various guerrilla
factions whose co-ordinating
front is appropriately
named after Farabundo Marti, the Salvadoran Com3

munist. One of these guerrillas,
Cornandante Ana
Guadalupe Martinez, is quoted in this week’s issue of
The Economist of London as saying that elections
“are there to ratify a popular government . . . If laws
exist which represent the people, elections are not
very important.”
32. The idea that the will of the people can be better
expressed through a revolutionary
hlite than through
free elections is, of course, a fundamental
tenet of
Leninism. It is, 1 need hardly point out in this forum,
fundamentally
at variance with article 21 of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, which states
that

36. All the while, vigilante mobs have been encouraged to intimidate the opposition to Nicaragua’s Government. The MDN [Drmocrrrtic
Nutionnl
Mowmerit] and the Social Democrats, two of Nicaragua’s
principal opposition parties, have repeatedly been
the victims of semi-official mob violence. In a speech
delivered last fall, Humberto Ortega stated that the
Sandinista rCgime is “guided by scientific doctrine,
by Marxism-Leninism”,
and threatened to hang dissenters against the rCgime’s policies “along the streets
and highways of the country”. Shortly thereafter, four
Nicaraguan business leaders who signed a letter protesting against this speech were arrested and sentenced
to seven months in prison.

“The will of the people shall be the basis of the
authority of government; this will shall be expressed
in periodic and genuine elections which shall be
by universal and equal suffrage and shall be held
by secret vote or ‘by equivalent free voting procedures” .z

37. The Sandinistas’ description concerning elections is part of a larger policy of revolution by obfuscation. They have pretended to be democrats. For a
long time they pretended not to be Marxist-Leninists,
Today, they pretend there is no contradiction
between Sandinism and Marxism-Leninism.

33. The Farabundo Marti Front for National Liberation is not the only element in Central American
politics that opposes free elections as defined in article 21 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
The Sandinista leadership also opposes such elections. Indeed, they have called the Salvadoran election “an absolute denial of democracy
and civilization”. They did not always speak thus. One month
before achieving power, in June 1979, when they were
still seeking supporters, the Sandinistas promised the
Organization
of American States (OAS) that they
would hold free elections when they assumed power.
Once in power, however, they quickly reneged on that
promise.

38. As those familiar with the history of August0
Cesar Sandino know, his nationalism provoked suspicion and criticism from those who supported submission to Moscow’s so-called internationalism.
His
desire for “absolute sovereignty”
for a “free country” and for leaving the solution of economic and
social problems to democratic decision was naturally
rejected by Communists as bourgeois and counterrevolutionary.
The Communist
attack against Sandino, therefore, began when he was in Mexico. Because he refused to adjust his fight for “Country and
Liberty” to the plans of the Mexican Communists,
the Secretary-General
of the Mexican Communist
Party called him a traitor and denounced him upon
his death.

34. In the spring of 1980, the Sandinistas consolidated their control over the Council of State, enlarging
it and packing it with their own supporters to ensure
a permanent
majority.
In July of 1980, Sandinista
Defence Minister Humberto
Ortega announced that
there would be no need for elections since the people
had already “voted” during the revolution. Elections
could not be held, it was said, until the people had
been “I-e-educated”.

39. It is particularly instructive, in the light of the
different attitudes toward free elections today in El
Salvador and Nicaragua, to contrast Sandino’s views
with those of Jo& Augustin Farabundo Marti, the
leader of the Salvadoran Communist
Party, who
joined Sandino’s struggle for a time but was eventually
sent home because of his Communist ideology.
40. Marti wrote: “My break with Sandino came
about because he did not wish to embrace the Communist programme which I supported. His banner was
only for independence, a banner of emancipation, and
he did not pursue the ends of social rebellion.” Years
later, this account was confirmed by Sandino himself,
who wrote: “On various occasions attempts were
made to distort this movement of national defence,
converting it rather into a battle of a social character,
I opposed this with all my strength.”

35. The following month, in August 1980, Humberto
Ortega announced that elections would be put off until
1985. Even then, it was stated that these would not be
“bourgeois”
elections-the
kind of elections, that is
to say, called for in the Universal Declaration
of
Human Rights-but
rather “people’s
elections”
in
which, in the words of Interior Minister Tomas Borge,
power “will not be raffled off ‘. Meanwhile, no “proselytizing activities”
on behalf of any candidate, no
discussion of candidacies, would be permitted before
candidates were officially designated by an official
electoral agency which would itself not be created
until 1984. Violations would be punished by terms of
three months to three years in prison.

41. In its efforts to consolidate totalitarian power at
home and mortgage the national independence of
Nicaragua, the Nicaraguan rCgime stands squarely
in the tradition of Farabundo Marti, whose descendants, acting in that tradition, tried unsuccessfully to
4

sabotage through violence the free elections in El
Salvador and who, if they came to power, would
adopt the same contemptuous
attitude towards free
elections that those who call themselves Sandinistas
have adopted in Nicaragua.

bat troops to subdue and occupy the country. But, of
course, my Government has no intention of doing any
such thing.
47. We desire to live at peace with all our neighbours. We shall continue our efforts to develop a
constructive
relationship
with the Government
of
Nicaragua. Secretary of State Alexander Haig has
made clear that we are prepared to work and talk on
the basis of mutual respect to that end.

42, It is hardly a coincidence, I suppose, that many
of the countries that have supported Comandante
Qrtega’s letter in the course of this debate share his
regime’s principled opposition to free elections. These
countries include Cuba, Viet Nam, Angola, the Soviet
Union, Laos, Mozambique,
Grenada, Iran and the
German Democratic Republic. None of these regimes,
which call themselves “people’s democracies”,
are
Governments chosen by or accountable to their people.
All of them oppose, because they fear, the free expression of the will of their people through free elections,
as called for in article 21 of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights.

48. Various proposals have been offered for conciliation among the nations of the region and the
hemisphere. The United States, interested in the
constructive resolution of tension and conflict, remains ready to do its part to ensure peace in the region
and to enhance the prospects for democracy and
development for all our people.
49. The PRESIDENT
(intcrpwtrrtion .fkom Fwnch):
The next speaker is the representative of Costa Rica.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make a statement.

43. I have already expressed to the Council my Government’s surprise at Nicaragua’s decision to bring
its complaint to the Council at precisely the moment
when there seemed to be progress toward direct negotiations among the nations most directly involved. We
have noted as well that this is not the first time that
United States initiatives aimed at resolving disputes
have been met by deliberate escalations.

50. Mr. PIZA ESCALANTE
(Costa Rica) (intwprrtcrtion fiorn Sprrnish): In thanking you for the opportunity afforded me to take part in this meeting, I should
also like to convey to you, Mr. President, my best
wishes for success during your term of office, and to
the representative of the United States my gratitude
for the manner in ,which she guided the proceedings
of the Council during the month of March in circumstances that were particularly difficult for her.

44, Why did the Nicaraguans come at this time to
this forum with their harsh rhetoric and wild charges?
To distract attention from El Salvador’s elections? If
that was their purpose, then they failed.
45. Was it, rather, to distract attention from the
intensified repression going on in Nicaragua itself,
since the Government
declared an “emergency”?
If this was their purpose, then they have largely succeeded. Not much note has been taken here of the new
repressive measures aimed above all at Nicaragua’s
press. Yet strict prior censorship has prevented the
appearance for several days of La Prensa, which not
only is prohibited now from printing news on a great
many subjects, but has also been forbidden to print
blank spaces. Even the pro-Sandinista
El Nuevo
Diario ran afoul of the censors’ vague standards and
strict enforcement. A 24-hour suspension was imposed
after it announced that the Government had declared
a state of siege.

51. The delegation of Costa Rica has been following
the development of this debate with special interest,
but also with justified concern, because in it two
American States, one of them a sister Central American neighbour, have been pitted one against the other;
because from the original bilateral situation formally
brought before the Council, it entails the risk of spilling
over into a larger-scale conflict that would affect the
entire Central American area, of which my country is
a part; and, lastly, because it involves other States
that are or should be alien to it and because it is the
first dispute between member States of the OAS to
be brought directly to the Security Council, thus bypassing the pre-emptive procedures established by the
inter-American
regional system to which both parties
to this situation belong.

46. It has been suggested, too, that Nicaragua’s
complaint here merely reflects a not unwholesome
desire to let off steam and express its frustrations at
having a super-Power for a neighbour. But this is a
serious international forum, not a Turkish bath. It has
been suggested that being the object of such a complaint is a kind of occupational hazard of super-Powers,
that this complaint is analogous to that made against
the Soviet Union on Afghanistan. An analogy would
exist, we are quick to note, only if the United States
had forcibly eliminated the Government of Nicaragua,
shot its chief of State and then moved in 100,000 com-

52. Despite our interest and our concern, we have
been witnessing this debate in prudent silence, in the
hope that the discussion would be, as it should be,
limited to an objective reflection of the sincere concern of one of the parties and of the sincere explanation of the other and that, with the help of the Council, a peaceful settlement, which both sides claim to
favour, might be reached. We also nurtured the hope
that this time the Council would be spared the barrage
of statements which unfortunately
have flooded its
meetings, many of which have not been exactly likely
S

to expedite its work but rather have been aimed at
using the Council as a forum for political propaganda;
statements which, far from reducing tensions, have
increased them, and far from permitting the fulfilment
of the high mission entrusted to this body of guaranteeing international
peace and security, have hindered it.

vention took place against it, and even before then,
from the very moment when the existence of concrete
threats of aggression or intervention were proved.
58. We have waited and continue to wait for that
proof, which in our view is essential for the Council
to be able to take any direct action in the conflict and
for States Members of the United Nations to proffer
seriously their solidarity and help. In the meantime,
we can only express our interest in having the cornplaint by the Government of Nicaragua considered
and our satisfaction at the guarantees offered by the
Government of the United States to respect the security and independence of Nicaragua.

53. However, once again we feel that discussion in
this forum has become a display of political rhetoric
on the part of some delegations which lack sufficient
knowledge of the situation in Central America and do
not seem much interested in really helping our peoples to resolve it. They do not realize that, or, if they
do, they do so deliberately, and their rhetoric prevents
us from knowing and judging the true dimensions of
this problem, since they are denying Nicaragua an
opportunity to present its case with concrete proof
of the imminent dangers of aggression or intervention
it charges, and denying the United States the opportunity of adequately answering the charges and presenting its countercharges.
Both Nicaragua and the
United States are being denied the opportunity
of
honouring their wishes for dialogue, seeking and
finding a peaceful solution that would justify the very
existence of this body.

59. Actually, we have felt compelled to abandon our
silence and to take part in this debate before its conclusion because the barrage of statements, we fear,
has led to distortions which not only prejudge the
specific complaint brought by the Government of Nicaragua against the Government of the United States,
but seek to involve in general all the Central American
nations and harm the whole Inter-American
System
-that regional system which our peoples and Governments have been laboriously
building from 1812,
when the Liberator Sim6n Bolivar convened the
Amphyctionic
Congress of Panama; a system that
was consolidated even before the birth of the United
Nations-indeed,
it served as an important inspiration to it-and that even includes its own system of
collective security, which was used as a model for that
of this world Organization.

54. Nicaragua knows that it does not take speeches
in the Security Council for Costa Rica to offer its friendship, its understanding and its backing in the independent and legitimate search for its destiny. Nicaragua
also knows that Costa Rica need not reaffirm its readiness to condemn and fight, by all means available
to it, ,any attempt of aggression or oppression against
it, because it has given proof of this many times, since
1856, when it even went to war to expel from Central
America the adventurers who had taken over that
sister country.

60. With regard to Central America, once again we
must draw the attention of the States Members of the
United Nations to the real inequity that is being committed against our peoples, turning them into chips
on the table of the ideological or political interests of
other regions or on the chess-board of world hegemony, with very little or no sincere concern at all for
their misfortunes, their culture, their aspirations, their
prospects or their hopes. We have seen this happen
whenever human rights problems are discussed, problems which in recent years have been subjected to
selective treatment by which we Latin Americans are
always considered to be the worst, if not the only
examples of the gravest injustices. And those of Us
who do not bear specific ideological or political labels
have suffered especially cruelly from that; those who
do have the backing of automatic majorities condemn
the same or even less than what they themselves
practise on their own peoples. The same occurs in respect of international peace and security, and in general with regard to all values and principles SO loftily
inscribed in formal documents, but so prostituted in
actual fact.

55. Nicaragua knows of the backing the Costa Rican
people gave to the heroic struggle of Sandino against
North American military occupation, and it knows that
it was seriously threatened first, and harshly censured
later, because of the support that it gave Nicaragua
in its struggle against the Somoza tyranny.
56. Nicaragua cannot forget our votes nor our active
participation in the OAS and at the United Nations on
the various occasions when the problem of that country was discussed, during the Somoza dynasty, to
condemn it, and, as under the aegis of the Sandinist
revolution, to defend it-defending
the right it won
with its blood to direct the reconstruction of Nicaragua
on the path of independence,
dignity, pluralism and
representative democracy, which all American States
are obliged to seek, because that is clearly the wish of
their peoples and because they have formally committed themselves to it by subscribing to the Charter
of the Organization of American States and the other
legal instruments of the regional system.

61. Central America is indeed a region in turmoil, not
free from despotism or injustice, but it is not the only
one or the worst. On the contrary, it has been moving
forward, step by step-slowly
if you wish, but with
a resolve and tenacity not seen in other regionsmoving towards better goals.

57. Nicaragua also knows that we would immediately come to its defence if aggression or undue inter6

a

62. Costa Rica, which enjoys a system of freedom
and democratic stability that has been universally
recognized; which because of not having an army, has
been able to devote most of its efforts to development
and social justice; and which, I must say again, enjoys
standards of living, health, education and culture that
place it at the head of the nations of the continent
and are very close to those of many of the more developed nations, is entitled to claim respect not onIy
for itself, but also for all its Central American sisters
seeking to achieve progress under various ideological
labels and political rCgimes, but with a common desire for democracy, justice and freedom.

67. It is interesting to note that the same kind of solution proposed for Nicaragua was adopted by the General Assembly of the OAS in November
1981 in the
case of El Salvador, and consistency led my delegation, together with a majority of the other Latin American States, to reject in the General Assembly of the
United Nations a proposal that claimed for El Salvador a formula of negotiated political solution similar to that we had rejected for Nicaragua in 1979-a
formula that constituted interference in internal affairs
and that was likely to weaken a democratic electoral
solution, At this time I wish to express the satisfaction with which we Costa Ricans welcomed the elections last Sunday in El Salvador, which gave evidence
of the massive participation of its people, in defiance
of death.

63. Owing to that same respect which we claim but
which we ourselves are also obliged to guarantee and
defend, we are seriously worried at the fact that the
conflict outlined by the Government of Nicaragua has
been brought directly to the Security Council, bypassing the previous mechanisms of the Inter-American System, which are much more efficient and certainly much more our own.

68. But in addition to those reasons in favour of the
pre-emptive participation
of the Inter-American
System, for us that pre-emptive participation
constitutes
a specific obligation, juridically
binding for all the
member States of the OAS.
69. In this regard, we do not share the argument
voiced by some delegations and more or less accepted by others that each member State of regional
organizations or pacts has the option of resorting to
those organizations or to the procedures envisaged
in those pacts, or directly to the Security Council;
that would have the obvious effect of impelling the
other State or States party to the dispute to submit
to the procedures that best suit the first party. This
statement is not only contrary to logic and equity, but
also contradicts the applicable norms and principles of
international
law.

64. In this regard, certainly we must pronounce ourselves with the utmost vehemence, since for us the
integrity of the regional system is fundamental, both
for reasons of suitability for all the American States
and for reasons of legality.
65. With regard to the first aspect, suitability, the
very history of the Inter-American
System is abundantly clear in support of our thesis. As has been
stated here, the inter-American
security mechanisms
placed in the hands of the OAS not only are more
complete and expeditious, and more our own, but
boast a long series of successes, through a series of
Meetings of Consultation of the Ministers of Foreign
Affairs, who have always responded to the quest for
the peace and security of all nations of the continent.

70. In the first place, from the standpoint of the
Charter of the United Nations, Article 52 clearly imposes on Member States that are also members of
regional arrangements or agencies at least the duty to
undertake all possible efforts to achieve pacific settlement of local disputes through those regional organizations or pacts before referring them to the Securit.y
Council. The Council must first promote those regional
procedures at the request of the interested party or
on its own initiative.

66. Indeed, in that long series of successes the present rCgime of Nicaragua has been the specific beneficiary of one of the most important regional collective actions-specifically,
that of the Seventeenth
Meeting of Consultation
of Ministers of Foreign
Affairs, which was convened to be seized of the problem in that country and which is still open. An overwhelming majority of American States, in June 1979,
specifically rejected a proposal in favour of a negotiated political
solution to the internal conflict in
Nicaragua, which was at that time under the Somoza
dictatorship, and instead clearly stated that that dictatorship had to disappear, allowing the Nicaraguan
people the unconditional
opportunity to have democratic self-determination.
That resolution marked a
turning point in bringing about the end of the civil war
in Nicaragua, with the overthrow of Somoza and the
coming to power of the present Junta of National
Reconstruction,
which needs only to legitimize its
task by calling elections and consolidating full democratic-representative
institutionality.

71. This duty is in no way incompatible with the right,
or rather the power, vested in all States under Article 54 to bring before the Security Council or the
General Assembly any dispute or situation likely to
endanger the maintenance of international
peace and
security. For the pre-emptive intervention
of the regional system is neither exclusive nor definitive, but
constitutes merely a procedure aimed at introducing
order into the proceedings. It is as if the normal obligations of every citizen to exhaust administrative
means before suing the State were incompatible
with
the power of access to the courts of law, or as if the
establishment
of successive bodies to hear jurisdictional cases beginning with lower tribunals implied an
unacceptable limitation
on the right to have recourse
to higher tribunals.
7

.

72. But all this, which is quite clear so far as the
Charter of the United Nations is concerned, is even
clearer for member States of the OAS, among them
States which are parties at the same time to the InterAmerican Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance4 or the
American Treaty on Pacific Settlement,s
to which
Nicaragua and the United States belong. For at the
United Nations, we only have the obligation to make
efforts, whereas in the Inter-American
System, we
have a clear-cut and absolute duty to resort previously
to those mechanisms of the regional system before
turning to the Security Council or the Genera1 Assembly. Article 23 of the Charter of the Organization
of American States and article 2 of the Inter-American
Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance and articles II and L
of the American Treaty on Pacific Settlement, which
have been repeatedly mentioned in this debate, do not
allow for varying interpretations.

stantive rights of States, but rather a question of
procedural order, which the Charter of the United
Nations itself provides for and fosters.
76. An interesting example of how we should understand article 2 of the Inter-American
Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance is offered by the Protocol of Amendment6 to that Treaty, subscribed to at San Jose on
26 July 1975-although
it has not yet received the
more than half of the necessary ratifications for its
entry into force. Actually, while article 2 ofthe existing
text of the Rio de Janeiro Treaty establishes that:
“the High Contracting Parties undertake to submit
every controversy which may arise between them
to methods of peaceful settlement and to endeavor
to settle any such controversy among themselves
by means of the procedures in force in the InterAmerican System before referring it to the General
Assembly or the Security Council of the United
Nations”,

73. It has been said that those obligations at the
regional level must yield before the powers vested in
States under the Charter of the United Nations to
resort directly to the Security Council, because Article 103 of the Charter imposes the primacy of the
latter over any regional arrangement, and because the
inter-American
instruments
themselves provide that
same reservation when they set forth that none of their
provisions shall be interpreted as impairing the rights
and obligations of member States under the Charter
of the United Nations. In our view, both arguments
are weak.

in the Protocol of Amendment
1 have mentioned
-which
is not yet in force, obviously because when
it was being subscribed to, the thesis of bypassing the
regional system now being expressed in the Council
prevailed-the
obligatory character of article 2 was
changed to read:
“The High Contracting Parties shall make every
effort to achieve the peaceful settlement of disputes through the procedures and mechanisms provided for in the Inter-American
System before submitting them to the Security Council of the United
Nations.

74. First of all, because Article 103 of the Charter,
which sets forth considerable
ascendancy for those
provisions, does not in any way refer to the rights and
still less the simple powers of States, but only to their
obligations, and it is the obligations of States under
the Charter that prevail over those contracted by
States in other international
conventions. This could
not be otherwise, because any international
agreement, regardless of its ranking or general content,
limits the rights and powers of its States parties. That
is its objective and its raisan d’8tre. It would be
absurd to claim that the general rights of Members
of the United Nations could not also be limited by
treaty.

“This provision shall not be interpreted as an
impairment of the rights and obligations of the States
Parties under Articles 34 and 35 of the Charter of
the United Nations.”
77. To us it is clear that if the provision in article 2
of the Inter-American
Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance was changed it was because it had to be changed
to align it with the text of the Protocol of Amendment,
which, although it is not in force, has been supported
in the Council by those who uphold Nicaragua’s right
to come directly before it, bypassing the pre-emptive
role of the regional system.

75. Secondly, the provisions of article 137 of the
Charter of the Organization
of American States and
article 10 of the Inter-American
Treaty of Reciprocal
Assistance are’not applicable, since they merely establish criteria of interpretation
and not a hierarchy of
the importance of provisions, which is quite a different
thing. Furthermore,
the pre-emptive
priority of the
regional system is purely procedural
and not substantive. And lastly, there is no incompatibility
between the obligation to which American States freely
and sovereignly subscribe in signing the instruments
of the regional system and the final, superior competence recognized for the Security Council in matters dealing with the maintenance
of international
peace and security. There is no question of the competence of the Council involved here, nor of the sub-

78. Costa Rica respects and defends that pre-emptlve
jurisdiction.
It has always respected and defended it,
including in 1978, when it refused to sponsor and
introduce to the General Assembly a draft resolution
condemning the Somoza regime in Nicaragua for its
concrete acts of aggression and threats of aggression
against my country.7 At that time, Costa Rica rejected
the direct participation of the United Nations, where
we were assured of a comfortable majority of votes
in our favour, invoking the pre-emptive jurisdiction of
the Inter-American System, when we still did not even
know whether we would have the necessary votes to
support us.
8

r
79, The PRESIDENT
lintemretntion
fiorn Fwnchk
The next speaker is the representative bf the German
Democratic Republic. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.

88. Meanwhile, the interventionist
activities have
assumed such proportions
that the Government of
National Reconstruction
of Nicaragua has felt compelled to call for the urgent convening of the Council,
‘in full accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter.

80, Mr. OTT (German Democratic Republic): Permit me, Sir, first of all to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency for the month of April
and to wish you success in that responsible office.

89. The delegation of the German Democratic Republic supports this step, since we share the view repeatedly stated here that this dangerous policy not
only threatens the security of the peoples and States
of Latin America but also poses a serious danger to
world peace. As was rightly noted in the communique of the meeting of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs
and heads of delegations of the non-aligned countries
to the thirty-sixth session of the General Assembly,
held from 25 to 28 September I98 1, with reference to
the dangerous United States policy in the Caribbean
and Central America, “the policies of aggression,
interference
and intervention,
pressures and economic or military blockades can only worsen the situation and endanger international
peace and security
even more.” [S/14713, unnex, p. 161.

81. At the same time, the delegation of the German
Democratic Republic wishes to pay its respects to the
President of the Council for the month of March, the
representative of the United States, Mrs. Kirkpatrick.
82. The delegation of the German Democratic Republic wishes to thank the members of the Council
for giving it this opportunity to set forth my country’s
position on this important agenda item.

I

83. It is with deep concern and alarm that the German Democratic Republic is following current developments in Central America. In that area, too, the
imperialist policy of confrontation and aggression is
the cause of an extraordinarily
aggravated situation.

90. The history of Latin America, and especially of
Nicaragua, offers many examples that illustrate how
the ruling circles of the United States have attempted
to implement their thesis about the need to secure socalled “vita1 interests” or “spheres of influence” in
that region. These examples range from the wellknown Monroe Doctrine, direct intervention,
warfare
against liberation movements
and massive military
aid for the Fascist Somoza dictatorship,
to the current moves.

84. As has been emphasized in the course of this debate by the representatives of many States, the United
States and the most reactionary forces of the region
constantly violate the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Central American States, and under the guise
of the struggle against so-called international terrorism
and totalitarianism,
interfere massively in their internal affairs, negating the principle of a people’s
right to self-determination.
There is no doubt that this
contravenes the Charter of the United Nations.

91. However, times have changed. To an everincreasing extent, the peoples themselves decide their
own destinies. Thanks to the struggle waged by the
peoples, new relations of international
coexistence
have come into being and shape has been given to a
large edifice of norms of international
law, a major
pillar of which is the Charter of the United Nations.
There is no room in present-day international life for
the obsolete gun-boats policy.

85. A special target of this policy is revolutionary
Nicaragua. A large-scale intervention in and aggression against that country is being prepared through
subversive activities.
86, In the United States a political and psychological campaign of unprecedented
scope has been
launched against Nicaragua, Even high-ranking representatives of the United States Administration
have
quite openly made it known that, in breach of all the
norms of international law, United States aircraft regularly violate the airspace of sovereign and independent Nicaragua and that, as The Wnshington Post
reported on 10 March 1982, in the United States
budget millions of dollars have been earmarked for
the destruction of vital targets in Nicaragua. Further
proof in support of these and many other facts has
been furnished in the course of this debate. No slanders of the kind uttered against my country a few minutes ago can change those facts.

92. The well-known proposals that have repeatedly
been put forward by the Government of National Reconstruction of Nicaragua-again
a few days ago here
in the Council by the Co-ordinator of the Governing
Junta, Daniel Ortega Saavedra [2335th mecTing]and the initiatives launched by the President of Mexico
and the favourable responses to them from all parts
of the world, may provide a solid foundation for a
negotiated settlement that accommodates
the vital
interests of the peoples of Central America while at
the same time eliminating
a dangerous hotbed of
tension.
93. The people of the German Democratic Republic
has for many years been linked by fraternal ties with
the heroic people of Nicaragua. The German Democratic Republic demands the cessation of hostile acts
against that sovereign State Member of the United

87. The Government of Nicaragua has repeatedly
been compelled to protest against flagrant violations
of that country’s sovereignty and to notify the United
Nations accordingly.
9

Nations and supports the demands and proposals
- made to achieve a peaceful solution of that dangerous
conflict.

triumph, but we did choose to believe that, given the
accomplished fact of our victory, the United States
would accept it, tolerate it and, eventuaiIy, understand that the liberation of Nicaragua, like that of any
other country, was a significant contribution to peace
and stability in the region and in the world.

94, The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The next name on the list of speakers is that of the
representative of Iraq. However, as he does not appear
to be in the chamber, I shall now call on the next
speaker, the representative of Nicaragua.

100. We were not mistaken as far as the response of
the Carter Administration
was concerned; it was
able to understand that the liberation of Nicaragua
could not be viewed as a threat to the legitimate interests of any country, and prospects opened up for
beginning a whole process aimed at healing the still
fresh and bloody wounds caused by the acts of aggression and American domination in Nicaragua. We
were willing to offer an opportunity to redeem the
credibility of those who throughout history had behaved as the enemies of our people and of our country. But this process of normalization of relations with
those with whom we hoped to be friends some day
was abruptly changed when President Ronald Reagan
was chosen as the candidate of the Republican Party,
whose political platform “deplored”
the overthrow
of Somoza and described our victory as “the takingover of Nicaragua by the Marxists-Sandinists”.
The
same document states: “We oppose the Carter Administration’s programme of aid to the Government of
Nicaragua”,
and the intention to intervene in our
internal affairs can be seen from the following: “We
shall support the efforts of the people of Nicaragua to
establish an independent and free Government.”

95. Mr. D’ESCOTO
BROCKMANN
(Nicaragua)
(interpretrrtion
.fiom Spcrnish): Sir, I should like first
of all to congratulate you most warmly on your assumption of the presidency. The fact that this has
happened during the consideration of the case of Nicaragua is a twofold source of satisfaction for us. We
are certain that your equanimity,
wisdom and experience will greatly help towards the success of these
meetings,. which, as viewed by Nicaragua,
would
mean a reaffirmation of the fundamental principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and the discarding
of the illegitimate
option of resorting to the use of
force, the threat of force or intervention-whether
direct, indirect or covert-against
Nicaragua.
96. Nicaragua could not consider these meetings
to be successful unless a firm appeal were to be made
for the beginning of a systematic process of dialogue
and negotiation as the only legitimate means to arrive
at an understanding between my country and the Government of the United States, based on mutual respect and the principle of sovereign equality of States.

101. Aware of what was agreed to in the Republican
platform on the question of Nicaragua, we were not
at all surprised to see that, even before the taking of
power by the President-elect
of the United States,
Ronald Reagan, a campaign of slander, threats and
aggression was begun against Nicaragua to obtain not
only discredit for the Sandinist popular revolution but
also justification for American intervention in another
Central American country.

97. My Government asked for the convening of the
Council because we considered that the escalation of
aggression against Nicaragua on the part of the United
States Government
was unquestionable
proof that
that Government was preparing to implement the political decision to overthrow the Sandinist Government
in order to restore in Nicaragua a system similar to
that of the former admirers, defenders and allies of
the Somoza tyranny,

102. Commander
Daniel Ortega Saavedra, Coordinator of the Governing Junta of National Reconstruction of Nicaragua, has already put forward a
synthesis of the various forms these threats, acts Of
aggression and slanders have taken against our country-to the point that, as I have said, we arrived at
the conviction that direct or indirect invasion was no
longer merely probable but had become imminent.

98. This is not the right time for me to submit a list
of the acts of aggression of which Nicaragua has been
the victim from successive American Administrations
practically from the beginning of our independence,
I shall only recall that, after 70 years of American
domination
and of suffering under oppressive and
antidemocratic
Governments imposed and maintained
by American forces of occupation or by puppet armies
set up, trained and equipped by these same forces of
intervention,
Nicaragua, under the leadership of the
Sandinist
National
Liberation
Front, fulfilled
its
sacred pledge to be free or die in the struggle to obtain, consolidate and defend its freedom, which was
won on 19 July 1979, at a high price of blood and
martyrdom.

103. I shall, send to the Members’ respective Missions a much more detailed account than that Commander Daniel Ortega Saavedra presented here in his
statement before the Council [ihid.] on all the acts of
aggression that have occurred from January 1980 to
March 1982.
104. Nicaragua’s insistence that the Reagan Administration is directly involved in the acts of aggression
and the aggressive plans against our country is uot
based solely or exclusively on information which we

99. During our struggle for the liberation
of Nicaragua we never harboured the illusion that the Government of the United States would applaud our
10

have as a Government. The information given by the
Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American
Affairs, Thomas Enders, to members of congressional
select committees,
in compliance with the requirements of the Hughes-Ryan amendment of 1976, is
public knowledge in the United States. Many representatives who have taken part in these debates have
referred to this type of information published in the
most prestigious United States newspapers, among
them The New York Tirnps and The Washington Post.
In that context, I should like merely to quote the
following paragraphs from an article published in the
magazine The Nrrtim,
entitled “Destabilizing
Nicaragua: the CIA rides again”:

.

man Michael Barnes, said: “On the basis of your
replies; if I were a Nicaraguan I would be building my
air-raid shelter.” I do not think that the representative of the United States would venture to describe
Representative Michael Barnes as paranoiac because
of that remark.
106. On 15 November, at a press conference at West
Palm Beach, Florida, the Secretary of State, Mr. Haig,
in reply to a question said: “One must not discard
the possibility of military action against Nicaragua,”
107. On 22 November, Presidential Adviser Edwin
Meese, in reply to a question on the CBS television
network, said:

“A covert operation directed by the Central
Intelligence Agency against the Sandinist Government in Nicaragua is under way. According to
two persons who were present at secret briefings
held in November and December last, the Assistant
Secretary of State for Inter-American
Affairs,
Thomas Enders, told members of the Select Intelligence Committees of the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States that the CIA is
secretly providing training, money and weapons
to former members of General Anastasio Somoza’s
National Guard, who are now carrying out armed
incursions into Nicaragua from bases in Honduras.
The funds are being channelled through friendly
nations in Latin America.

“At present we are envisaging several measures;
there are several options. Many of them consist of
pressure on Nicaragua by other countries of the
region and other steps of which it would not be
prudent to speak unless we were ready to take
them.”
108. On the same day, 22 November,
while being
interviewed on the United States ABC television network, Secretary of State Haig categorically refused
to rule out the possibility of military action by the
United States against Nicaragua and pointed out that
he did not see the advisibility
of “limiting
options”.
109. On the same day, 22 November, Caspar Weinberger, the Secretary of Defense, stated on the NBC
television network that the Central American region
involved vita1 United States interests and that he could
not rule out the possibility of military action, specifically that of a naval blockade.

the Assistant Secretary of State told the
Congressmen that the purpose of the covert operation by the Central Intelligence
Agency was to
provoke uprisings in Nicaragua,
using former
Somoza guards, dissidents and the ethnic minorities of Nicaragua, as well as groups of exiles in the
United States,”
L,

.

.

.

110. On 14 February 1982, The Wtrskington
Posf
revealed that President Reagan had approved a largescale plan that was allegedly aimed at opposing the
Cuban presence in Nicaragua, and in particular provided for the instigation of operations undertaken by
foreign Governments:That
same day, when a reporter
asked President Reagan whether he had approved
any secret activity to destabilize the current Government of Nicaragua, Mr, Reagan replied: “Once again
we are faced with something that comes under national security, and I have no comment.”

The article continued:
“The objective expressed in at least one of the
Florida camps by the leaders of the Cuban exiles
and the Nicaraguan Right is the overthrow of the
Nicaraguan Government. Enders also stated when
speaking to several Congressmen
in informal
meetings that the Administration
‘was turning a
deaf ear’ to the United States Neutrality Law, since
the exile groups are part of the covert operation.”

111, On 15 March, just two weeks ago, terrorist
commandos who came from Honduras blew up an
important bridge over the Rio Negro in the Chinandega
Department,
and caused serious damage to the
bridge near the city of Ocotal, the capital of Nueva
Segovia Department,
Both bridges are situated close
to the Honduran
border. Upon questioning as to
whether the CIA was implicated in the dynamiting of
those strategic bridges, Edwin Meese, Adviser to
President Reagan, replied that he was not in a position to affirm or deny the involvement
of the CIA in
those actions,

105. On 12 November 1981, the Democratic Congressmanfrom Massachusetts, Gerry E. Studds, asked
Secretary of State Alexander Haig:
“Could you tell this Congress that the United States
will not take part in or encourage, in any direct or
indirect manner, any action aimed at overthrowing
or destabilizing the Government of Nicaragua?”
Secretary Haig’s reply was: “No, I cannot give such
assurances.” Given that reply, the Chairman of the
Sub-Committee,
the Maryland Democratic Congress11

I 12. Today we heard the representative of the United
States say that her country does not intend to invade
Nicaragua ~NI.N. 61. We thank her very much. But
we are not satisfied, since nothing is said about other
types of direct aggression or about indirect interventions through other forces, nor is reference being made
to covert activities which the Reagan Administration
has been financing and directing against Nicaragua.

“One: Nicaragua reiterates its undertaking to pursue a consistent policy of non-alignment,
expressed
in the maintenance of relations with all countries
of the world, irrespective of their economic, political and social systems, and especially with the
countries of Latin America.
“Two: We consider it advisable to enter into nonaggression and mutual security agreements with our
neighbours, on the basis of non-intervention
and
mutual respect.

113. But, while on the one hand the Reagan Administration has remained firm in support of its policy
not to rule out the possibility of resorting to any type
of direct or indirect, covert or overt aggression against
my country and has been chasacterized by its aggression, slander and threats, on the other hand the Government of Nicaragua has maintained
its resolve to
achieve, through constructive
dialogue on realistic
bases, the normalization
of its relations with Washington.

“Three: We also consider it prudent to make an
effort for the delimitation
of military frontiers and
for means of patrolling the common frontiers with
Honduras and Costa Rica, with the aim of preventing
irregular activities by elements opposed to any of
the three Governments.
“Four: We stress our willingness to maintain
friendly relations with the United States and to
begin talks on any subject of mutual concern and
interest directed in particular towards the negotiated settlement of disputes and the development of
regional economic co-operation.

114. From the first days of the Reagan Administration we have been insistently calling for dialogue at
the highest level with United States Government
officials-an
initiative which had always been systematically rejected up until August 1981, at which time,
while there was no meeting at the level of Heads of
State or Foreign Ministers,
at least a meeting took
place with Assistant Secretary Enders. Finally, in
December 1981, thanks to the insistence of the Nicaraguan Government,
a meeting took place with
Secretary of State General Alexander Haig.

“Five: Those relations must develop on the basis
of the fullest respect for the national sovereignty of
Nicaragua, non-interference in our internal affairs,
non-encouragement
from outside of counter-revolutionary activities, non-aggression in the economic
field, respect for our right to receive international
co-operation and to aspire to a just international
economic order, in circumstances which do not
compel us to take strict measures for defence and
survival. Nicaragua remains disposed to build on
its revolution and its progress, within the framework of a mixed economy, pluralism and nonalignment, and to hold democratic elections not
later than 1985.”

1IS. On the part of the United States, those meetings
seemed to have had the basic objective of making the
Government of President Reagan appear interested
in reaching an understanding with Nicaragua, although
this did not prevent them from resorting to threats
or cause them to rule out the use of any economic,
political or military
means to strangle Nicaragua.
Washington tried to handle the information about those
meetings and the exchange of letters which followed
as though Mr. Reagan’s Administration
had made
important proposals at those meetings which Nicaragua had rejected. Nicaragua never rejected any
proposal. What we did was to indicate the terms
under which those proposals could be seriously considered.

118. On 21 February, the President of Mexico,
Mr. Jo& L6pez Portillo, made a proposal in Managua
aimed at paving the way for a climate of detente,
peace, democracy, stability and development in Central America. Nicaragua immediately
supported the
proposal by the Mexican leader and followed with
particular interest the Casteiieda-Haig
talks, after
which we learned of the decision by the United States
Government to hold a high-level direct dialogue with
my Government. Once again, we expressed our readiness to take part in such a dialogue.

116. For our part, expressing our wish to find peaceful solutions on a realistic basis, we brought to the
thirty-sixth session of the United Nations General
Assembly concrete proposals for achieving an effective and lasting peace in the Salvadoran conflict, which
were disregarded by the Reagan Administration.

119. That readiness remains unchanged, but I must
say that 12 days have gone by and we are sti11 waiting
for a reply from the United States in order to agree on
a date, and since my Government cannot indefinitely
put off international
commitments
while awaiting aa
uncertain reply, we have decided to travel tomorrow
to the meeting of the Co-ordinating
Bureau of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries at the ministerial
level, which is to be held next week in Kuwait. UPon

117. Likewise, at the Standing Conference of Political Parties of Latin America, which was held at
Managua on 19 and 20 February of this year, the
Sandinist National Liberation
Front made a proposal
aimed at establishing the bases for a lasting peace in
the region, which consists of the following five points:
12

our return, beginning on 15 April, we will once again
be ready to hold meetings if the Government of the
United States decides to do so.

127. The actions of the United States and the statements made by its officials at high levels confirm the
intention of the United States Administration
to intervene in the internal affairs of Nicaragua. That flagrant
interference in the internal affairs of Nicaragua will
only lead to the destruction of that country’s economic
and political stability.

120. On behalf of my Government, I should like to
reiterate our thanks to you, Mr. President, and to all
the members of the Council and to all representatives
who have taken part in this debate; most of them have
contributed positive elements which should be taken
into account in overcoming the serious crisis in relations between the United States and Nicaragua.

128. The people of Nicaragua,
having liberated
themselves from tyranny, are now dedicated to the
development and the building of their country, on the
basis of social equality. That national social policy
seems to frighten the United States and to affect its
economic interests and its hegemonic policies in the
area. The goal of United States policy is to liquidate
the Nicaraguan revolution and the people’s liberation
movements of the region at the same time.

121. In particular, we thank the Governments
of
Guyana and Panama, as well as all the other members
of the Council who have actively and generously cooperated-thus
reflecting a high degree of solidarity
and love of peace-in drawing up a draft resolution
[S/1494/ ] which, without condemning or offending
anyone, merely seeks to reaffirm the fundamental
principles of the Charter and to rule out the threat or
use of force against my small country, and in this
manner to bring about a climate conducive to systematic dialogue and negotiation, which must begin
between the United States and Nicaragua.

129. My country vigorously
condemns that conspiracy and supports all the faithful and diligent efforts
towards the reconstruction
of Nicaragua,
as well
as the sovereignty of its people in the free choice of
its own way of life. We are convinced that the Nicaraguan people will triumph in their just struggle, and
my delegation believes that the only way out of the
present tense situation is to put an end to the United
States policy of intervention
and aggression against
Nicaragua.

122. On behalf of the Government and the people of
Nicaragua, I thank all of those present for the support
given to this draft resolution.

130. The aggressive and interventionist
policy of
the United States against Nicaragua is a part of its
over-all policy of increasing international
tension
and escalating threats against independent
States.
While we hold that policy responsible for endangering
peace in Central America, we also hold it responsible
for the deteriorating situation in the Middle East because of its unlimited military, economic and political
support for the Zionist aggressors.

123. The PRESIDENT
(interprc,trrtionJ’,.om Frcrd~):
The next speaker is the representative of Iraq. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
124. Mr. MOHAMMAD
(Iraq): First of all, I should
like to apologize for the misunderstanding
about my
place on the list of speakers. I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, and through you, all the other members of the Council for having given me the opportunity to address the Council at this time, when it is
pondering an issue which constitutes a threat to international peace and security.

131. The Iraqi delegation supports the appeal made
to the Security Council, in the statement by the Coordinator of the Governing Junta of National Reconstruction of Nicaragua to express its support for a
peaceful settlement, its rejection of the threat of the
use of force, and its condemnation
of any intervention in the affairs of the Republic of Nicaragua.

125. The Council has been called together to consider an issue of extreme concern to my country, to
all non-aligned countries, and to the entire third world.
On 25 March, Commander Daniel Ortega, Co-ordinator of the Governing Junta of Nicaragua, made a
statement in which he exposed the plot being hatched
against his country [2335th meeting].
That plot is
manifested in actions undertaken by the United States
against his country. Those actions are clear evidence
of the presence of a direct threat to his country.

132. Mr. RIERA
DiAZ (Panama) (interpretation
frurn SpNnislz): My delegation has asked to speak in
order to introduce the draft resolution contained in
document S/14941, on the complaint by Nicaragua.
That draft resolution is the result of lengthy negotiations, and my country hopes that the Council will
proceed to a vote as soon as possible.

126. In recent months, the United States has been
exerting economic, military and diplomatic pressure
against Nicaragua. The military training camps for
Nicaraguan counterrevolutionaries
in Florida, the
naval and air bases in the area and the cruising of
battleships off the coast of Nicaragua constitute a
threat to Nicaragua’s independence and security.

133. Mr. KARRAN
(Guyana): I spoke very briefly
at the 2346th meeting of the Council in support of a
point of order raised by the representative of Panama.
In the spirit of brevity, Mr. President, I omitted certain courtesies: permit me now to extend to you congratulations on behalf of my delegation on your assumption of the presidency for the month of April.
13
d

There is already evidence that the month of April
will be a month of intensive work for the Council, but
we are confident that with your demonstrated diplomatic skill you will guide us successfully through our
deliberations.

The meeting IIYIS suspended
wsumcd rrt 6.30 p.m.

rrt 2.30 p.m.

crud

140. The PRESIDENT
(interprPtNtion~om
Frock):
I understand that the Council is now ready to vote on
the draft resolution before it [ibid.]. If there is no
objection, I shall put it to the vote.

134. Sir, you succeed as President of the Council
the very distinguished and competent representative
of the United States, Mrs. Jeane Kirkpatrick.
My
delegation would like to express its appreciation to
her for the tact, efficiency and professionalism
with
which she conducted the business of the Council
during the month of March.

In ~NVOLII’: China, France, Guyana, Ireland, Japan,
Jordan, Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics

135. Guyana has asked to speak at this time because it is a co-sponsor of the draft resolution before
the Council [S/14941]. That draft resolution contains
certain basic elements: it reminds member States of
the international
community
of their obligation to
respect certain fundamental principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, and of the condemnation by
the Genera1 Assembly in its resolution 2131 (XX) of
the use or threat of use of force. It appeals to Member States to refrain from the use of force, direct,
indirect, overt or covert. It extends an invitation to
all parties to the dispute to enter into dialogue and
negotiation with a view to peaceful settlement of the
problems now facing Central America and the Caribbean.

Against: United States of America
Ahstcrining: United Kingdom
Northern Ireland, Zaire

of Great Britain and

141. The PRESIDENT
(inte,pi.ctation~urn
F~ncit):
I shall now call on representatives who have asked
to be allowed to make statements after the voting.
142. Mr. LICHENSTEIN
(United States of America): The United States had hoped to be able to join
in a consensus resolution of the Council, had hoped
that it would be possible still to find common ground,
still to make what we would regard and what we would
have hoped our 14 colleagues would regard as a constructive contribution to the de-escalation of a situation of tension within Central and South America+
We have unfortunately not been able to find that common ground.

136. It does not stop there. The Council also calls
upon all Member States to lend their support to this
search for a peaceful solution to the problems of
Central America and the Caribbean, and, as is usual
in these cases, it requests the Secretary-Genera1 to
keep the Council informed of developments.
137. The draft resolution does not seek to incriminate or to blame any party for the present crisis ip the
region of Central America and the Caribbean. It merely
seeks, among other things, to crystallize the call that
has been made by so many of the delegations that
have made statements on this issue, namely, to bring
all parties to the negotiating table with a view to peaceful settlement of the problems. It is primarily for that
reason that my delegation is pleased to co-sponsor this
draft resolution.

143. We do not feel that the draft resolution, against
which I have just voted, was in any way supportive
of our own institution, the Security Council, or of the
United Nations, or, indeed, of the experienced and
well-established Inter-American
System for the resolution and conciliation of disputes amongst member
States.

138. In conclusion, my delegation wishes to underscore its conviction that the situation in Central America has provoked such wide international
preoccupation that it is proper that the Council, in the discharge
of its primary responsibility
for the maintenance of
international peace and security, should address itself
to it. Similarly, there can be no questioning of the
right of any Member State, regional arrangements
notwithstanding, to bring before the Council a matter
of this nature. It is my delegation’s hope that the draft
resolution in document S/1494 I will obtain the consensus of this Council.

144. As Mrs. Kirkpatrick
said in her statement in
this chamber today, part of the problem with this
draft resolution has indeed been the definition of “the
problem”.
From the point of view and perspective
of the United States, the door to negotiation and conciliation-bilateral,
regional and multilateral-is
now
open and has always been open. From the perspective of the United States, the allegations of Cornandante Ortega were without foundation, are today
without foundation and have always been without
foundation. I reiterate again tonight that that door
to negotiation and conciliation remains open.

139. The PRESIDENT
(inte~p~etation~onz
French):
I propose now to suspend the meeting for consultations.

145, The defect-T should say the further defectof the draft resolution against which I voted is that it
14

failed to identify certain key elements of the true and
genuine and urgent problem of Central and South
America, a problem created in major part by the intervention of the Sandinista Junta in the affairs of its
neighbours-intervention
and adventurism sustained
and supported and encouraged by other Powers both
within this hemisphere and outside this hemisphere.
146. With reference to this draft resolution,
lieve that its

we be-

“selective invocation and application of universal
principles does not strengthen either the principles
or the organizations dedicated to their realization
and implementation.
It breeds cynicism. It harms
the United Nations. [It undermines the Inter-American System.] It mocks, the search for peace.”
[Pal%. 13 above.]
I have just quoted from remarks made earlier today
by Mrs. Kirkpatrick.
147.

I quote further:

“The Government
of Nicaragua espouses and
practises a very particular conception of non-intervention, a very particular conception of non-alignment-the
kind that, in the end, saps the meaning
and the power of both.” [PLII’CI. 25.1
148. I quote
statement:

further

from

Mrs.

Kirkpatrick’s

“We desire to live at peace with all our neighbours. We shall continue our efforts to develop a
constructive relationship with the Government of
Nicaragua. Secretary of State Alexander Haig has
made clear that we are prepared to work . . . on the
basis of mutual respect to that end.
“Various proposals have been offered for conciliation among the nations of the region and the hemisphere. The United States, interested in the constructive resolution of tension and conflict,“and I might add, in common with the views, intentions and affirmations expressed in this chamber by
many representatives of other American republics“remains ready to do its part to ensure peace in the
region and to enhance the prospects for democracy
and development
for all [of the] people [of this
hemisphere] .” [Paras. 47 and 48.1
149. Sir Anthony PARSONS
(United Kingdom):
I made clear to the Council on 30 March the United
Kingdom’s hope that the problems of the Central American region could be solved through negotiation and
not through confrontation [234/st meeting, pwa. 171.
With respect to the differences between Nicaragua
and the United States, I stated that the Government
of the United Kingdom hoped the necessary atmos-

phere of trust would be created for the two countries to re-establish a relationship based on friendship and co-operation [ihid., pwtr. ZO].
150. We have carefully studied the terms of the
draft resolution. We note that it gives great prominence, both in its preamble and in operative paragraph 2, to General Assembly resolution 2131 (XX).
My delegation was unable to support that resolution
in 1965 for reasons which were made known at the
time and which remain cogent today. Moreover, in
subsequent years, the General Assembly continued
its work on the topic of non-intervention
in the Special Committee on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among
States. This work came to fruition in the adoption,
by way of consensus, at the twenty-fifth session of
the General Assembly, of the Declaration on Principles of international
Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, including
working on non-intervention,
That was the annex to
General Assembly resolution 2625 (XXV).
1.5I. The United Kingdom also notes that the draft
resolution on which the Council has just voted contains a reference to General Assembly resolution 2160
(XXI). As members of the Council may recall, the
United Kingdom voted against that resolution, Lord
Caradon, the British representative
at the time,
explained that he could not but oppose, on the grounds
that it was in some respects inconsistent with international law and the Charter of the United Nations.R
Again, the subject of non-use of force was included
within the terms of the 1970 Declaration on Principles
of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations
and Co-operation among States in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations, which, I repeat, was
adopted by way of consensus.
152. The United Kingdom
maintains its reservations about General Assembly resolutions 2131 (XX)
and 2160 (XXI). For these reasons, my delegation was
unable to support the draft resolution on which the
Council has just voted.
153. The PRESIDENT
(intelp~cttrtio?z~o/n
French):
I shall now speak in my capacity as representative of
ZAIRE.
154. I had an opportunity to state the view of the
Republic of Zaire on the substance of this matter during.
the general debate on the subject with which the draft
resolution before the Council dealt. We feel that here
we .are faced with a problem which lends itself to a
regional approach, particularly since the regional body
involved is already seized of the matter and its activities are consistent with the purposes and principles
of the United Nations. It is stated in paragraph 2 of
Article 52 of the Charter that the Members of the
United Nations entering into such arrangements or
constituting such agencies shall make every effort to

achieve pacific settlement of local disputes through
such regional arrangements or by such regional agencies before referring them to the Security Council!

162. What has been vetoed here is not a draft resolution; what the United States has done is veto the
fundamental principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.

155. It is stated in paragraph 3 of Article 52 that the
Security Council shall encourage the development of
pacific settlement
of local disputes through such
regional arrangements or by such regional agencies
either on the initiative of the States concerned or by
reference from the Security Council.

163. For our part, we reiterate what I myself said in
my statement earlier: Nicaragua is ready to embark
as soon as possible on fruitful dialogue with the United
States. I should like to repeat what I said earlier:
“We stress our willingness to maintain friendly
relations with the United States and to begin talks
on any subject of mutual concern and interest,
directed in particular towards the negotiated settlement of disputes and the development of regional
economic co-operation.

156. Paragraph 1 of Article 33 of the Charter states
that the parties to any dispute, the continuance of
which is likely to endanger the maintenance of inter,national peace and security, shall, first of all, seek a
solution by negotiation, enquiry, mediation, conciliation, arbitration, resort to regional agencies or arrangements, or other peaceful means of their own choice.

“Those relations must develop on the basis of
the fullest respect for the national sovereignty of
Nicaragua, non-interference in our internal affairs,
non-encouragement
from outside of counter-revolutionary activities, non-aggression in the economic
field, respect for our right to receive international
co-operation and to aspire to a just international economic order, in circumstances which do not compel
us to take strict measures for defence and survival.
Nicaragua remains disposed to build on its rev&tion and its progress, within the framework of a
mixed economy, pluralism and non-alignment . I .”

157. The draft resolution
contained in document
S/14941 seems not only to disregard but even to reject
that approach, for reasons that are not clear and do not
seem to us to be objective. Moreover, in this matter
we were near-very
near-to
unanimous consensus,
and we still do not understand why obstacles were
raised to a consensus on this, as though a State Member of the United Nations could prefer to a unanimous
resolution calling on the parties concerned to show
moderation and non-use of force and to settle their
dispute through negotiations
and appropriate
contacts the exacerbation
of tension between two or
more Member States,
158. That is the reason for the abstention
delegation of Zaire.

[pCllYl. 117 crhove].
The tneeting

rose

at

6.50 p.m.

of the
NOTES

159.

I now resume my functions

160. The representative
speak, and I call on him.

as PRESIDENT.

of Nicaragua

’ General Assembly resolution 37/37.
z General Assembly resolution 37/6.
J General Assembly resolution 217A (III).
’ United Nations, Trwfy Series, vol. 21, No. 324, p. 77.
5 Ibid., vol. 30, No. 449, p, 55.

has asked to

h Officictl
SetYe sobrc

161. Mr. D’ESCOTO
BROCKMANN
(Nicaragua)
Cinie,pr’etcrtion porn Spanish): On behalf of my Government and my people I thank the 12 members of
the Council who voted in favour of the draft resolution.

Records
Trmtdos,

of

rhc

Orgmizution

of Atncricwn

document OEA/Ser.A/l.Add.
7 General Assembly resolution 33/76.

x Official Rmwds
Plenary
Mmtings,

16

qf rhe Gencrctl

Assetnbly,

1482nd meeting, para. 66.

SI(IICL

(SEPF),

Tlcvnty-fir’sl

S~wi~tn.

HOW

TO

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

publications
ma! be obtained
Itom bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
your bookstore
or write IO: United Nations.
Sales Section,
New York or Geneva.
SE PROCURER

LES

PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
monde
entier.
Informez-vous
aup&
des ventes,
New York ou Genive.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

in United

Nations.

New

York

DES

NAtiONS

sent en vente dans les librairies
de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas partes
del mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York
o Ginebra.

Litho

PUBLICATIONS

DE LAS

NACIONES

Unidas
estrin en venta en librerias
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

00400

UNIES

et les agences
a : Nations

depositaires
du
Unies, Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas,
Seccibn de Ventas.

88~60989~October

198Y--?.oso
