A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/53/185
2 February 1999

Fifty-third session
Agenda item 94
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/53/609/Add.6)]
53/185. International cooperation to reduce the impact of the El Niño
phenomenon
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of its resolution 52/200
of 18 December 1997 on international cooperation to reduce the impact of the El Niño phenomenon,1
Expressing its deepest concern about the widespread and devastating effects of the El Niño/Southern
Oscillation on most of the regions of the world, especially during the period 1997–1998, which scientists
have recognized as the period in which the El Niño/Southern Oscillation has had its strongest
manifestation on record,
Noting the progress made in the understanding of the El Niño/Southern Oscillation, and noting also
that a continued increase in the collection and exchange of data and information could assist in the
modelling and prediction of the recurrence of this natural phenomenon,
Noting further that a phenomenon opposite to the El Niño/Southern Oscillation, known as La Niña,
can, according to scientific predictions, occur in and affect several regions of the world and that
international cooperation could be needed in order to reduce its impact,

1

A/53/487.

99-76537

/...

A/RES/53/185
Page 2

Stressing that any credible strategy for the reduction of the natural disaster effects of future El Niño
occurrences must be based on effective dialogue and cooperation between the scientific and technological
areas of the United Nations system and its operational responsibilities in the fields of disaster management,
humanitarian assistance, sustainable development, technical cooperation and capacity-building, including
data-collection, monitoring and early warning systems, at all levels,
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the Secretary-General, 1 and endorses the
recommendations and conclusions contained therein;
2. Expresses its appreciation for the cooperation provided by the United Nations system to the
countries affected in their efforts to reduce the impact of the El Niño phenomenon and for the valuable
cooperation given by the international community;
3. Takes note with satisfaction of the outcome of the International Conference on Early Warning
Systems for the Reduction of Natural Disasters convened, within the framework of the International
Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction, at Potsdam, Germany, from 7 to 11 September 1998;
4. Expresses its satisfaction at the organization of the first Intergovernmental Meeting of Experts
on El Niño, held at Guayaquil, Ecuador, from 9 to 13 November 1998, in accordance with paragraph 10
of its resolution 52/200;
5. Decides that the report on the outcome of that Meeting will be considered under appropriate
agenda items at the seventh session of the Commission on Sustainable Development, at the substantive
session of 1999 of the Economic and Social Council and at the special session of the General Assembly
for the in-depth assessment and appraisal of the implementation of the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States;2
6. Also decides to consider the La Niña phenomenon in the context of the implementation of its
resolution 52/200;
7.

Calls for the continued and full implementation of its resolution 52/200;

8. Welcomes the convening, in 1999, of an intergovernmental meeting of experts on the El Niño
phenomenon, to be held at Lima, which will have a comprehensive approach, encompassing scientific,
technical, social and political issues, and a broad participation of intergovernmental experts and policy
decision makers;
9. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the Administrative Committee on
Coordination, to submit recommendations to the General Assembly, through the Economic and Social
Council at its substantive session of 1999, on how the United Nations system can deal with natural disaster
reduction after the conclusion of the International Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction in 1999, taking

2

Report of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States,
Bridgetown, Barbados, 25 April–6 May 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.94.I.18 and
corrigenda), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
/...

A/RES/53/185
Page 3

into account the lessons learned and making early warning a key element for future natural disaster
reduction strategies;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session,
through the Economic and Social Council, under the item entitled “Environment and sustainable
development”, a report on the implementation of the present resolution.
91st plenary meeting
15 December 1998
