UNITED

NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS
\ r,s 1 1 rn,n A p

THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

D,UG16 199t
(jqq j 2% 424 & $&JP!

2454th

MEETING:
.

NEW

15 JUNE 1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2454)

. . .‘. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

... .. .. ... ... ... .. .. .... .. ... ... .. .. .... ... .. ..

1

The situation in Cyprus: report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
operation in Cyprus (S/15812 and Add.1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda

WPV.2454

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
‘t,)Iz
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before I January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2454th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 15 June 1983, at 4 p.m.
President: Mr. Elleck Kufakunesu
(Zimbabwe).

pendence struggle, are following with interest and sympathy that country’s growth and development.

MASHINGAIDZE

4. The Council is meeting today at a time when the
question of Cyprus has just entered a delicate stage following the recent debate in the General Assembly and the
adoption by that body on 13 May of its resolution 37/253,
which Turkey and the Government of the Turkish community of Cyprus immediately rejected in toto. It is a time
when each of us should reflect on the profoundly harmful
effect which this unrealistic, unjust and futile exercise has
had on the progress of the intercommunal
negotiations.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2454)
1. Adoption

of the agenda.
5. The Turkish Cypriot community and Turkey are in
no way responsible for this deplorable situation. They
made it clear from the very outset that even if it were to be
supposed that this exercise had taken place under the best
conditions imaginable it could only have added to the
considerable acrimony which already existed between the
two communities and have caused a regrettable delay in
the intercommunal
negotiations. But the debate took
place in an unprecedented atmosphere of a lack of realism, of bias, of lies and of injustice which bore out our
apprehensions all too well.

2. The situation in Cyprus: report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations operation in
Cyprus (S/15812 and Add.l)
The meeting was called to order at 4.40 p.m
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Cyprus: report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations operation in Cyprus (S/l5812 and
Add.1)

6. First of all, it took place in conditions of inequality
for the two communities. The General Assembly, forgetting that the intercommunal negotiations are taking place
on the basis of equality in accordance with Security Council resolutions, and still clinging to the false and
unfounded supposition of the existence of the Government of the Republic of Cyprus, persisted in its error by
refusing to establish a procedure which would have given
the Turkish Cypriot community the opportunity on an
equal footing to explain and argue its point of view.

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with decisions
taken at the 2453rd meeting, I invite the representatives of
Cyprus, Greece and Turkey to take places at the Council
table. I invite the representative of Canada to take the
place reserved for him at the side of the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Moushoutas
‘(Cyprus), Mr. Dountas (Greece) and Mr. Kirca (Turkey)
took places at the Council table; Mr. Pelletier (Canada)
took the place reserved for him at the side of the Council
chamber.

7. Secondly, the resolution adopted by the General
Assembly after that debate marred by procedural shortcomings was nothing more than a flagrant denial of the
recent history of Cyprus and a tacit-but
none the less
dangerous-justification
of the violation of the most
sacred principles which are supposed to govern civilized
societies, such as the principle of the inviolability of international treaties, the principle of the supremacy of the rule
of law and the principle of legitimate individual or collective self-defence. Furthermore, the text contradicted the
provisions of the high-level agreements between the two
communities. It could be used to attempt to destroy the
political and legal basis of the good offices mission of the
Secretary-General with which he was entrusted exclusively by Security Council resolutions and to set aside the
mutually accepted framework and bases for these negotia-

2. The PRESIDENT:
The first speaker is the representative of Turkey; on whom I now call.
3. Mr. KIRCA (Turkey) (interpretation from French): I
should like at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of June and also to compliment you on the
impartiality with which you conducted consultations with
the parties concerned before today’s meetings. I should
like also to take this opportunity to say how much the
Government and people of Turkey, which to the best of
their ability assisted Zimbabwe in the course of its inde1

tions being conducted under the auspices of the SecretaryGeneral. But the height of injustice and unreality was
attained when the text called upon all States to assist the
Greek Cypriot administration,
the usurper of the title of
Government of Cyprus, to regain its so-called sovereignty
over the territory inhabited almost exclusively by the Turkish Cypriot community. That would. mean aiding a
puppet army set up by trampling under foot the provisions of the Cypriot Constitution
and the Treaty of
Alliance’ and the Treaty of Guarantee,z both of 1960, and
manned and commanded by officers who were appointed
from Greece by the Greek Government.. If such a stupid
undertaking were ever to come about,.there would be no
room for doubt that these fantastical adventurers would
learn a painful lesson as they have in the past.

no way be taken into account during the intercommunal
talks.
13. Hence the Greek side must harbour no hopes in this
connection. If the Greek side, in violation of the mutually
accepted framework of the intercommunal
talks, continues to try to destroy that framework and to replace it
by a one-sided and tendentious text, it will once again
simply have succeeded in holding up the negotiations and
the efforts at finding a definitive solution. That could provide the Greek side with a pretext for evading responsibility for such possible delay on the Turkish side. But all the
delays which have been encountered during the negotiations are due to the express requests and the attitude of
the Greek Cypriot side, and the ‘same would be true this
time. At any rate, the Greek side should not be so misguided as to believe that any of its manoeuvres can make
the least impression on the Turkish side.

8. But the very fact that this inappropriate appeal
appears in the text of the General Assembly resolution
can only serve to heighten the vigilance of the Turkish
Cypriot community and of Turkey. I therefore declare
with all solemnity that Turkey will continue to protect the
Turkish Cypriot community
in that island where its
members have lived for more than four centuries, and
that the Turkish armed forces will remain there, standing
firm, at the request of the Government of the Turkish
Cypriot community until a definitive solution has been
agreed to by all the interested parties, including the necessary security arrangements for that community.

14. How in these circumstances can one continue to
hope for success from the intercommunal
talks? How
can one still harbour the belief that these negotiations
remain the best possible way of finding.a definitive solution to a painful problem which has lasted too long?
15. Nevertheless, Mr. Nail Atahy, the representative
of the Turkish Cypriot community, has just stated in the
Council [2453rd meeting] that, -his Government continues to pin its hopes on these talks and does not intend
to leave the negotiating table. For its part the Turkish
Government supports and encourages it in this attitude.
Why has the Turkish Cypriot, community persisted in
this stance and why has my-Government encouraged it,
despite the well-justified exasperation of the Turkish
community of the island in the face of the manoeuvres
of the Greek side and all the-injustice it has suffered?

9. Without question, that definitive solution should prohibit both union of the Republic of Cyprus with another
State and its partition into two States.
10. The Greek side, particularly following the official
release of the Secretary-General’s “evaluation” paper of
18 November 1981, has systematically attempted to avoid
detailed discussion of that document. As I have just
stressed, the General Assembly resolution, unfortunately,
contains provisions which tend to encourage it in this.

16. It must be confessed tha:‘this positive attitude of
the Turkish side vis-Avis the intercommunal
talks stems
not only from the traditional wisdom and the wealth of
diplomatic experience which are some of the characteristics of the Turkish people, but also from the sagacity,
perseverance, honesty and sense of realism of the
Secretary-General.

11. In this connection, I must recall once again that the
Turkish Cypriot community and Turkey rejected that
resolution and that the Greek side maintains its desperate
pretense that this unjust, illogical and inappropriate text is
the “verdict of the international community”. It is merely
a high-sounding but meaningless slogan to be added to
the misleading literature on the subject. There is no such
“verdict of the international community”.

17. Indeed, it is thanks to the Secretary-General’s
efforts that the Turkish side was able to rekindle its
desire to support the intercommunal
talks. My Govemment was gratified to note the Secretary-General’s statements, in particular those in paragraphs 48,49, 51 and
60 to 63 of his report, which is now before us. The
Turkish Government believes that these statements provide sufficient reassurance for the Turkish Cypriot community to continue believing the intercommunal
talks to
be the best possible way of bringing about a definitive
solution to the question of Cyprus.

12. There is simply a recommendation which has been
made by a body whose authority is well defined and can
in no way supersede the sovereign rights of States. The
recommendations of that body as such can of course be
accepted or rejected by States. These recommendations
may contribute to the preservation ofpeace and the settlement of international disputes only if they remain closely
wedded to truth and all the general .principles, without
exception, of morality and law which form the basis of the
Charter of the United Nations. But this text is far from
meeting these criteria. As a recommendation
that was
totally rejected by the Turkish Cypriot community and
Turkey, it has absolutely no value whatsoever and can in

18. In this connection I should like to state, for the
benefit of the Greek Cypriot representative and at the
request of the Turkish Cypriot representative, that it is
not true that the Secretary-General or his Special Representative in Cyprus has requested a meeting of the negotiators of both communities
in order to discuss the
2

Secretary-General’s
sonal participation.

intention

to incfease his own per-

treaty. Faithful to its international commitments, Turkey
refuses to recognize their claim to that title, a title which
in no way reflects the actual situation in which each of
two distinct communal administrations governs its own
community in its own zone, as envisaged in the Geneva
Declaration of 30 July 1974 [see S/11398]. That is why
the third preambular paragraph of the resolution remains
unacceptable to Turkey.

19. As I informed the.General Assembly on 12 May last,
at the 120th meeting of the thirty-seventh session, at the
express request of the Govemment.of the Turkish Cypriot
community, and as the representative of that community
has just informed the Council, the Turkish Cypriot community is in the process.of re-assessing its position in the
light of the circumstances now prevailing as a result of the
adoption of General Assembly resolution 37/253. This reassessment has not yet been concluded. None the less,
neither the fact that this reassessment is continuing nor its
results will in any way, as the representative of the Turkish
Cypriot community has just stated, weaken the determination of this community to continue the intercommunal
talks with the aim of arriving at a comprehensive agreement whose principles and objectives are defined in the
high-level intercommunal
agreements of 2 August 1975
[see S/11789, annex], 12 February 1977 [see S/22323, para.
5’l and 19 May 1979 [see S/13369, para. 511 and in the
opening statement of the Secretary-General of 9 August
1980 [S/14100, annex]-that
is to say, a Republic of
Cyprus that is independent, sovereign, bicommunal, bizonal, federal and, if it so chooses, non-aligned. For its
part Turkey continues and will continue firmly to support
these principles and objectives.

23. I should also like to inform the Council of the fact
that the various reservations entered by Turkey and its
positions in connection with the texts referred to in this
same resolution and in the Secretary-General’s report
have not at all changed and remain equally valid for the
resolution that has been adopted today and for the
Secretary-General’s report now before us.
24. You will undoubtedly recall, Mr. President, that in
the course of the consultations you were kind enough to
conduct in this connection, my Government supported
the. point of view of the Government of the Turkish
Cypriot community that the important events which have
occurred since the conclusion of the high-level agreement
of 1979 should be reflected in the text of the resolution.
25. First is the resumption of intercommunal
negotiations that took place thanks to the Secretary-General’s
opening statement of 9 August 1980. That statement
contains elements of considerable importance which at
present constitute one of the foundations of those negotiations. The Turkish Government does not understand
why any reference to that statement has been avoided.
Nevertheless, my Government would like to reiterate its
view that that statement continues to be one of the bases
of those negotiations.

20. The Turkish Cypriot community’s
work of reevaluation following the-adoption of Assembly resolution
371253 has not yet been’ concluded, as I just pointed out.
Whatever the results of this reevaluation, Turkey will
respect the decisions which ‘are democratically taken by
the Turkish Cypriot community, while firmly supporting
that community’s desire to continue the intercommunal
talks, since that desire will hardly be affected by’any decisions stemming from this re-evaiuation.

26. Furthermore,
the presentation of the SedretaryGeneral’s “evaluation”
of 18 November 1981 is in itself
an event of singular importance which should have been
referred to in the resolution.

21. I have already made my basic comments on the
Secretary-General’s report.“1 should now like to make
further comments on certain other passages in the’report.
My Government wishes to enter distinct reservations on
some of the specific points taken up therein. In order not
to abuse the Council’s time, I shall raise them later with
the Secretary-General himself. However, I cannot refrain
from stating here and now that it is regrettable to see that
the principle of equality of the two communities-an
integral part of the constitution of the Republic of Cypruswas not respected in the titles used to designate their
oflicials. Furthermore, the administration of the Greek
Cypriot community is designated as the Government of
Cyprus, a capacity which that administration is not legitimately and legally eligible to claim.

27. The resolution extends the stationing of the United
Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP)
for
a further period of six months. Since the representative
of the Government of the Turkish community in Cyprus
has just informed the Council of the assent of his
authorities [2453rd meeting], the Turkish Government,
for its part, also agrees to this extension. Nevertheless, I
should like to draw the Council’s attention to the
request made by that representative, just as on several
similar occasions before the Council, to the effect that
the mandate of the Force, drawn up in 1964, should be
revised and brought more into line with present conditions in Cyprus. The Turkish Government fully supports that request.

22. Hence my first observation on the text of resolution
534 (1983), adopted by the Council at the previous meeting, is on the reference in the third preambular paragraph
to the so-called “Government of Cyprus”. For reasons
which my Government has constantly reiterated, the leaders of the Greek Cypriot community are no more than
usurpers of the title of “Government of Cyprus”. The
Republic of Cyprus was established by international

28. Finally, I should like to draw the Council’s atten-.
tion to the behaviour of certain Governments that provided contingents for the Force in the General Assembly
at the time of the adoption of resolution 37/253. In the
opinion of my Government, their behaviour is likely to
cast serious doubts on the ability of the Force to fulfil its
functions objectively and im’partially. If those Govern3

ments do not reconsider and realize that the presence of
their contingents in that ‘United Nations Force necessarily implies that they are duty-bound to maintain total
impartiality
and equal distance between the two parties
concerned, they must realize that their contribution can
no longer be considered as serving the cause of peace
and understanding in Cyprus. The Major-General
who
commands the United Nations Force in Cyprus still
retains the confidence of my Government. Nevertheless,
my Government believes it its duty and that of the
Secretary-General to issue the necessary warnings to
those Governments.

34. MY Government believes that the two communities
of Cyp& and the other parties involved in the dispute
have displayed a regrettable lack of will to make the necessary and admittedly difficult compromises required for a
successful political settlement. We therefore call on those
parties to enter serious and substantial. discussions’ in a
spirit of compromise and conciliation. Canada very much
hopes that a clear indication of progress will be evident
before the end of the mandate period just now approved.
35. As troop contributors
to UNFICYP,
we have
remained neutral and impartial towards all aspects of the
question of Cyprus, both within the United Nations and
in our bilateral relations with the parties concerned. Canada continues to be willing to assist in the peace-keeping
process but is anxious to ensure that there is tangible
evidence that the complementary
process of peacemaking is progressing. Our patience and resources are not
boundless.

29. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Canada. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
30. Mr. PELLETIER
(Canada): I should like, at the
outset, Sir, to convey to you the best wishes of my delegation for the period during which you will be President
of the Security Council. Our two countries have worked
closely together and indeed share a common concern for
the peaceful resolution of a stubborn and difficult problem which has just been the object of the Council’s
attention. I am particularly
glad, therefore, of this
opportunity to pay a public tribute to you and to your
country for the well-deserved honour of presiding over
affairs of this important
body. I should like also,
through you, to thank the members of the Security
Council for having acceded to our request briefly to
address the Council after the mandate of UNFICYP has
been renewed.

36. We do not consider that the intercommunal differences can ever be resolved merely by a virtually atomatic
extension of the UNFICYP
mandate every six months.
UNFICYP of itself cannot bring about a settlement of the
problem. There must be a recommitment
by the parties
themselves to seek compromise through genuine negotiations intended to bring about a just and lasting solution.
Unless there is a negotiated settlement, peace and stability
will continue to elude the people of Cyprus.
37. It is against this background that I wish to reafftrm
Canada’s strong support for the Secretary-General in
his efforts, as he phrased it in his report to the General
Assembly last month: to “give fresh impetus to the
negotiating process” am-ong the parties concerned. We
very much hope that all interested countries will do
likewise.

[The speaker continued in French.]
3 1. My Government has already advised the SecretaryGeneral that we are prepared to continue our commitment to UNFICYP
for the mandate period which the
Council has just approved. However, we wish to take this
opportunity to place before the Council Canada’s concerns over the unsatisfactory situation in regard to
Cyprus. We believe that our record in this and other
peace-keeping enterprises clearly demonstrates our determination to act consistently and responsibly in that cause,
which is a key element in carrying out the important
responsibility of the Organization to maintain intemational peace and security.

38. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of Cyprus
has asked to speak in exercise of his right of reply and I
call on him.
39. Mr. MOUSHOUTAS
(Cyprus): It is indeed with
reluctance that I ask to speak. I am obliged, however, to
do so in order to set the record straight and to defend
my Government and people, all our people, irrespective
of ethnic background,
against the unsubstantiated
charges levelled against them. I do so in the hope that if
certain facts are made abundantly clear to the Council
and the problem we face is seen in its right perspective, a
positive contribution will be made to the efforts under
way for a just and lasting solution.

32. No one can dispute that the presence of the United
Nations Force has prevented a recurrence of the intercommunal fighting and has contributed powefully to the restoration and maintenance of law and order. However, the
primary objective of the Force mandate-to
facilitate the
achievement of a negotiated settlement and a return to
peaceful conditions-has
unfortunately eluded us for over
19 years.

40. As I did in previous Council meetings, I shall
address my remarks only to the representative of Turkey. I do not intend to disregard, nor do I believe the
members of the Council will disregard, the lengthy statement of the individual who was allowed to speak in his
personal capacity under rule 39 of the provisional rules
of procedure, only to abuse the privilege in order to
complement the voice of the occupying Power in my
country.

33. The formation and maintenance of UNFICYP have
provided the necessary stable conditions under which the
peace-making process should have succeeded long ago.
The United Nations has done all that is possible to create
and maintain those conditions in Cyprus. Thus we must
ask ourselves what has been the cause of failure.
4

41. In spite of this statement, I feel that Turkey is the
principal and that Turkey ,is the one which made both
statements. For he who does things through others does
them himself. I will disregard the implied reference as to
the legality of my delegation. As I have said time and
again, the fact that I address this body as the representative of a Member State of the United Nations under rule
37 is, I believe, a sufficient reply to this oft-repeated
Turkish allegation.

48. Sixthly, a host of resolutions have been adopted by
the General Assembly and the Security Council recognizing the Cyprus Government, the latest of which are Security Council resolution 534 (1983) of today and General
Assembly resolution 37/253.
49. It is very interesting to note that when the so-called
Turkish Federated State of Cyprus was declared in February 1975 and recourse was had by my Government to the
Security Council, the representative of the United Kingdom, Mr. Ivor Richard, said on 4 March 1975 in the
Council that his delegation would like to make clear that
as far as it was concerned, the declaration of a Turkish
Federated State “does not alter our attitude towards the
legitimate Government of Cyprus, nor towards our obligations under the 1960 Treaties” [see 1828th meeting,
para. 133. He said specifically, ‘There is only one legitimate Republic of Cyprus, and there is only one Government.” [Ibid.]

42. As to the Turkish allegation about the legal&v of
my Government and its reference to the Gene& Diclaration, I should like to read the exact and full wording of
the relevant part of the Geneva Declaration of 30 July
1974, upon which the Turkish representative relies. Let
me remind the Council that that meeting took place 10
days after the onslaught upon our people and that the
meeting was attended by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs
of Greece, the United Kingdom and Turkey. The relevant
part reads as follows:

50. The views of the Greek Government
to the members of the Council.

“Among the constitutional questions to be discussed
should be that of an immediate return to constitutional
legitimacy, the Vice-President assuming the functions
provided for under the 1960 Constitution. The Ministers noted the existence in practice in the Republic of
Cyprus of two autonomous administrations,
that of
the Greek Cypriot community and that of the Turkish
Cypriot community.”
[See S/11398, para. 5.1

are well known

51. The second argument made by the representative of
Turkey is that the Turkish Cypriot members of the
Government were expelled. I must state that it was the
Turkish Cypriot Vice-President, the three Ministers and
Turkish Cypriot Members of Parliament who, acting
upon instructions from Turkey, withdrew from the
Government. They were not expelled. Why did they withdraw? The answer is obvious: upon instructions from
Ankara, with the aim of destroying the Constitution and
to further the partitionist goals of Turkey.

43. Let me say, first, that Cyprus was not represented at
the Geneva meeting, nor was the lawful Government of
the Republic consulted.

52. The Vice-President, Mr. Fazil Ktic;Uk, answered this
question eloquently when he stated, as quoted in The New
York Times of 31 December 1963, “The Cyprus Constitution is dead.” He further stated, according to the special
news bulletin of 5 January 1964: “It is out of the question
to collaborate any longer with the Government.” Where is
the expulsion? Nowhere, I submit, but here is evidence of
the purpose for their withdrawal, and I quote from the
same bulletin: “Cyprus will be divided into two sections,
one of which will join Turkey.” That statement was made
by the former Vice-President of Turkey, Kemal Satir, in
1964. From Mr. F. C. Erkin, the then Foreign Minister of
Turkey, we have this most revealing statement in June
1964: ‘The radical solution would be to cede one part of
Cyprus to Greece and the other closest to the Turkish
Asiatic Coast to Turkey.”

44. Secondly, in any event, the above quotation refers
to *‘community
administrations”,
which do not preempt the existence of the Government either at that time
or thereafter.
45. Thirdly, the above quotation was part of a “ceasefire” arrangement made subject, under its article 2, to the
undertaking that “the areas controlled by opposing
armed forces on 30 July 1974 should not be extended”.
And I underline this. Turkey violated that condition on 14
August 1974 and proceeded to occupy almost 40 per cent
of the area of the Republic. Turkey cannot now be
expected to invoke a part of an arrangement which Turkey itself first violated and ignored.
46. Fourthly, the Geneva Declaration has no legal force
whatsoever, was violated by Turkey on 14 August1974 by
the second round of the invasion, and has in any case
been repeatedly superseded by subsequent events, declarations and resolutions.

53. The Turkish representative spoke about equality
and about partnership. Partnership is based on equity.
Partnership does not mean the strangulation of democracy. We accept that each citizen has equal rights, equal
opportunities, that he has the right to a vote and a right
to have that vote counted. But numerical equality of a
community
in the executive, legislative and judicial
branches we cannot accept. We cannot accept that 18
per cent equals 82 per cent. Such numerical equality
strikes at the roots of democracy and causes inequality.
By creating inequality we strike at the balance upon
which a federal State is to be based.

47. Fifthly, the Republic of Cyprus and its Government
have been consistently and exclusively recognized by the
United Nations and all international organizations and in
all international forums where the Government of the
Republic of Cyprus is recognized, as the only representative of the Republic of Cyprus.
5

58. Of course Turkey did not invade with the sole aim of
re-establishing the state of affairs created by the Treaty,
but to destroy it. Under the Treaty of Guarantee, Turkey
undertook to guarantee the constitutional
order of
Cyprus and nothing else. That ‘this’was not the aim of
Turkey is proved by the fact that Turkey is not supporting
a return to the 1960 constitutional order. Instead, even to
this day, Turkey is advocating other constitutional orders.

54. The Turkish representative repeatedly referred to
his favourite topic, enosis, but for every quotation the
Turkish representative can present on enosis I can present one on tag&z-that
is, partition-the
aim of the
Turkish Government in Cyprus.
55. There is, however, a difference between the two.
While the Greek Cypriots were simply speaking about
enosis, Turkey acted on its pronouncement.
It is no
secret that the right to self-determination
claimed by the
Cypriots during the colonial years was aiming at enosis.
Nor can it be disputed that in 1960 Archbishop Makarios, at that time the protagonist for the right to selfdetermination
and enosis, became the first President of
the independent, sovereign State of Cyprus and that he
subsequently fought three elections and won against
candidates who had enosis as a platform, and most
importantly
that the coup against ‘him in 1974 was
caused because he was not pursuing enosis.

59. ‘As to the Turkish allegation?hat the invasion was
carried out in order to protect the Turkish Cypriot community, I will simply say that Turkey has never been
entrusted with the task of protecting the ‘rights of any
specific community or individual,m Cyprus. It is only the
status quo that Turkey has been protecting. None of the
guarantors is the protector of any specific community.
3‘
60. We heard today an allegation by the Turkish representative that the invasion was for-reasons of self-defence.
The.validity of that argument I leave to the judgement of
Council members, considering that Cyprus is 100 times
smaller than Turkey, the latter having one of the mightiest
armies in the world. My Minister was absolutely right in
making the statement in the 116th”meeting of the thirtyseventh session of the General Assembly about Turkey’s
trying to devour little Cyprus. .
Ii.

56. But what about today? There is an independent,
sovereign and non-aligned State Member of the United
Nations, and I assure members of the Council that it
struggles to remain so. Its House of Representatives
declared on 20 September 1979 and 2 October 1981 its
immovable
aim to achieve full independence and its
rejection of any solution’ that would abolish that independence or call for any annexation of the territory of
the Republic of Cyprus, in whole or in part, by any other
State. It further stipulated its rejection of any partition
or the declaration of any part of Cyprus as an independent State.

61. The Turkish representative referred also to “a population exchange agreement”, which the Turkish Cypriot
leadership presents as a r&&n
for its partitionist
and colonization policies and,a’s‘+r,‘excuse for not complying with the agreements of. 1.2 February 1977 [see
S/12323, para. 5J and 19 May 1979 [see S/13369, para.
511. It would be ironic, indeed, for anyone to allege
that the 200,000 Greek Cypriot refugees came to the free
areas of the republic voluntai$y.‘It
was the invasion, it
was the Turkish tanks and Turkish bayonets which
forced one third of the population of Cyprus to abandon
their ancestral homes and properties and seek refuge in
the free areas of the Republic. How could the agreement
of July-August 1975 [see S/11’789, annex] be described
as a “population
exchange agreement” when in paragraph 2 it was stated that:

57. I have, I believe, covered the question of enosis. The
question of partition is a matter for the Turkish Government to explain. The attempt by the Turkish representative to justify, in a United Nations era, the invasion of
Cyprus under the provisions of the Treaty of Guarantee2
is, to say the least, to be oblivious and completely disrespectful of the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations, in particular Article 2, paragraph 4,
which calls upon Member States to refrain from the use of
force in their international relations. Turkey used the coup
d&t of 15 July 1974 as a pretext to invade Cyprus, and
the consequences of the invasion show that its actions
were not those of a guarantor to restore constitutional
order in Cyprus. It should be pointed out that article IV
of the Treaty of Guarantee calls for the guaranteeing Powers to act jointly, and if this should not prove possible
each guaranteeing Power has the right to “take action
with the sole aim of reestablishing the state of affairs
created by the . . . Treaty”. That article does not refer to
nor allow military action or use of armed force, as Turkey
claims. If this were so, article IV of the Treaty of Guarantee would be contrary to Article 2, paragraph 4, of the
Charter, which is the preemptory norm of international
law, from which no derogation is allowed. It should be
remembered that Article 103 of the Charter clearly states
that obligations under the Charter shall prevail over obligations of a State under any other international
agreement.

“Mr. DenktaS reaffirmed, and it was agreed, that
the Greek Cypriots at present in the north of the
island are free to stay and that they will be given every
help to lead a normal life, including facilities for education and for the practise of their religion, as well as
medical care by their own doctors and freedom of
movement in the north.”
How could that agreement be defined as a “population
exchange agreement*’ when in paragraph 5 it was stipulated that:
“In connexion with the implementation
of the
above agreement priority will be given to the reunification of families, which may also involve the transfer
of a number of Greek Cypriots, at present in the
south, to the north”?

-4

It also provided in paragraph 4 that “The United Nations
will have free and normal access to Greek Cypriot villages
and habitations in the -north”.
62. What was the outcome of that agreement? The Turkish side violated immediately each r&d every one of its
provisions. A mere look at the periodical reports of the
Secretary-General on the question of Cyprus will show
everyone how the Turkish leadership honours its signature: the Greek Cypriots enclaved in the occupied area
were forced to leave their homes to join the other Greek
Cypriot refugees fleeing .to the free areas of the Republic.
Instead of help being .given to them to lead a normal life,
their plight became even more miserable. Their education
was hampered, as was the practise of their religion. No
medical care by their own doctors was allowed and their
freedom of movement was hindered. As regards the freedom of movement of UNFICYP in the occupied areas,
there has for nine yearsnow appeared in every biannual
report of the Secretary-General a special paragraph
devoted to the restrictions imposed on UNFICYP.
2 63. The Turkish representative tried to represent the
biem of Cyprus as a dispute between the two communities, and not one of ,invasion and occupation. If it were
not one of invasion and occupation, which is an international problem, this subject would not have been
debated today before this very Council.
64. The Turkish representative referred to oppression
of the Turkish Cypriot ,community
by the Cyprus
Government. That alle)&&on of oppression of the Turkish Cypriot community by the Cyprus Government is
pure political propaganda; used in the past by Turkey to
pave the way as a pre-emptive justification for the invasion, and it is now usedt,o justify the continuation of the
military occupation of territory of the Republic of
Cyprus under the pretext ‘of protecting the Turkish
Cypriot community, as I.‘we.‘heard today.
65. Now, what are the’facts? For centuries, all Cypriots,
whether Greeks, Turks, Armenians or Maronites, lived
and worked side by sidd,in peace and harmony, in mixed
villages. This is proof of the security, safety and peaceful
co-existence enjoyed by all, and of the historical links
which were forged among them.
66. Never in the history of Cyprus prior to the 1955-to1959 anti-colonial struggle were any clashes recorded
between the two communities. It was Ankara’s policies of
segregation and partition, implemented by the extremist
elements of the Turkish Cypriot leadership, that brought
about the artificial barriers between the Greek and the
Turkish communities. Ample evidence of this is provided
by the regular bi-annual reports of then SecretaryGeneral U Thant, which irrefutably show the falsehood of
allegations of mistreatment of the Turkish Cypriot community by the Government of Cyprus. Here are quotations from two of these reports, the first dated 15 June
1964:
“the lack of movement of Turkish Cypriots outside of
their areas is also believed to be dictated by a political

purpose, namely, to reinforce the claim that the two
ma&r communities of Cyprus cannot live peacefully
together in the island without some sort of geographical separation.“, [See S/5764, para. 113.1
And from 10 June 1965:
“the hardships suffered by the Turkish Cypriot population are the direct result of the leadership’s selfisolation policy, imposed by force on the rank and
file.” [See T/6426, para. 206.1
67. The Turkish representative denied the existence in
Cyprus of settlers, but there is undeniable evidence of this.
The British newspaper The Guardian wrote on 18 October
1975 that
“Migration
of Turks to the northern Turkish;
occupied part of Cyprus is taking place on a scale that
will soon radically alter .the racial balance of the island
and could seriously affect the chances of a political
solution.*’
The Turkish Government originally claimed that these
settlers were “seasonal workers” brought to Cyprus to
work in the fields. Mr. Caglayangil’s statement of 27 October 1975, made during his tenure as Foreign Minister of
Turkey, is a case in point. It is very strange that in an area
where unemployment was about 25 per cent there was a
need for the importation of agricultural help, especially as
we know that most of the Turkish Cypriots are employed
in the agricultural sector.
68. The revelations of the settler Colonel Ismail Tezer,
who participated in the invasion and who is, incidentally, a leader of a Turkish Cypriot party, speak louder
than any attempts of Turkey to conceal the truth.
Colonel Tezer, in a press conference held on 17 December 1978, openly declared that the settlers came to
Cyprus with the approval of Turkey, that they were
represented as agricultural workers, and that almost all
of them were made Cypriot citizens. These actions were
deplored not only. in United Nations resolutions and
non-aligned declarations, but also by the Turkish Cypriots themselves. The former Vice-President of Cyprus,
Mr. KiicUk, wrote in Halkin Sesi on 24 May 1978 that
these settlers had “turned this paradise island into
Hell”.
69. The representative of Turkey tried to iustify tht
setting up of a central bank ,as being called for bi the
economic needs of the Turkish Cypriot community. The
actions taken to establish a central bank and to introduce the Turkish lira to replace the Cyprus pound constitute a purely divisive policy of Ankara aimed at
partitioning
the occupied areas and at incorporating
them with the mainland of Turkey. These illegal actions,
which are economic in nature, are now added to the
political, geographical and social efforts for separation
in the island.
70. There is one central bank in each country, whether
the system is unitary or federal. The creation of a second

central bank is, therefore, divisive and partitionist. The
argument put forth today by the Turkish side that this
central bank created by Turkey in the occupied areas of
Cyprus does not have the main function of issuing
money is meant to deceive, since at the same time Turkey introduced the Turkish lira in the occupied areas.
71. Regarding missing persons-a humanitarian
matter completely separate from the political aspects of the
problem of Cyprus-the
questions which have been
addressed to the Turkish Government emanate from the
facts themselves. There are prisoners of war in the hands
of Turkish troops; they were photographed by Turkish
or foreign journalists. These people were not released
when the exchange of prisoners of war took place.
72. There are cases of people whose names were on the
-’ official Turkish lists of prisoners of war but who were
never released and whose existence has since that time
been denied. There are cases where the names of people
held in concentration camps in occupied Cyprus were on
the lists of the International
Committee
of the Red
Cross but who were also never released. There are
people who, after they were captured, were heard on the
clandestine Turkish Cypriot radio three weeks after the
cease-fire and who continue to be missing. The claim
that these people disappeared prior to the Turkish invasion of the island is baseless. If the Turkish side would
agree to co-operate on this humanitarian
problem,
which, as I said before, is separate from the political
aspects of the problem of Cyprus, then the full truth of
the matter would be established. The fact that they
refuse to permit appropriate international
bodies to
assist the Committee
on Missing Persons in Cyprus
speaks clearly of their motives..
73. I should like finally to refer to another matter
raised by the Turkish side: the Turkish side wants to
apply the right of self-determination
to a community
within a State, irrespective of and contrary to the wishes
of a people as a whole and in utter violation of the unity
and territorial integrity of a State. If by some stretch of
the imagination it should ever be applied, it would dismember every State and nation on the face of this Earth,
including Turkey. As to the territory targeted for the
setting up of this fictitious state, I would remind the
representative of Turkey that the Government of the
Republic of Cyprus has full rights of defire jurisdiction
and control, as reconfirmed by General Assembly resolution 37/253.
74. The representative of Greece has asked to speak in
exercise of the right of reply. I call on him.
75. Mr. DOUNTAS
(Greece): I am fully aware that a
speech at this late hour might prove to be counterproductive for the cause of the speaker, because even the
most diligent Council member is labouring under exhaustion and sleepiness. I feel, however, compelled to take the
risk and to appeal for the Council’s attention for a few
minutes.

76. In the first place, I would mention Mr. Atalay’s
speech this morning. I found s&iking sim~ilari.t.es betKeen
that speech and the one delivered by the representative of
Turkey, Mr. Kirca, in the 116th meeting of the General
Assembly’s thirty-seventh session, about four weeks ago:
similarities of style, similarities of content-the
same
inaccuracies-and
even similarities with regard to the
length of the speech. That is why I will limit myself to
referring to the reply I gave on that occasion, which is
reflected in paragraphs 316 to 326 of the verbatim record
of the--..120th~. meeting.
~~
77. There was only one point in Mr. Atalay’s statement
that I should like to mention more particularly. Terminating his speech in rhetorical euphoria, he said that history
had borne witness to the many atrocities of the Greeks for
centuries. I would submit that if I were a Turk, as is Mr.
Atalay, I would have been more cautious when invoking
history as a witness to atrocities and acts of genocide.
78. As to the statement of Mr. Kirca, I should like to
express my surprise at the wealth of adjectives he found to
characterize a recent resolution of the General Assembly,
resolution 37/253. He said that that resolution is unrealistic, unjust, futile, irresponsible and so on. I leave it to the
103 countries that voted in favour of that resolution and to
the 20 countries that abstained to judge the value of the
courteous and flattering adjectives with which their position has been characterized.
79. I would make another point concerning Mr. Kirca’s
statement. He said that that resolution was null and void,
and of absolutely no value since it had been rejected by
the Turkish side. I would like to ask him if he is going to
introduce a new amendment to the provisional rules of
procedure and if he is trying to replace the rule of majority by the rule of unanimity. In my very humble view,
resolutions adopted even by simple majority are valid
erga omnes.
80. Finally I should like to refer to another statement of
the Turkish representative. He said that the Turkish
troops of occupation in Cyprus will remain as long as the
problem is pending and until a solution is found. I take it
that the talks envisaged by the Secretary-General will be
conducted under the pressure of a foreign army, with all
the freedom that such pressure implies. I leave it to the
Secretary-General to evaluate that statement, which was
made with the arrogance of the conqueror, within the
context of his forthcoming initiative.
81. No matter what rhetorical phrases are going to be
used, nobody can blur the obvious-namely,
that in the
Republic of Cyprus there is foreign occupation in flagrant
violation of all international law. This sheer truth cannot
be denied, no matter what firecrackers of phraseology one
may use. And this occupation, which is an international
anomaly, if continued will not help at all in any efforts
towards finding a solution to the problem.
82. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative of
Turkey, who has asked to speak in exercise of the right
of reply.

83. Mr. KIRCA (Turkey) (interpretation from French):
I have not prepared a second statement, but I do want
briefly to exercise my right of reply.
84. I note that the Greek representatives have an irreversible faith in the magic of words. They are blind to
realities and have contempt for the truth. Most of their
allegations, which they have just repeated, found suitable replies in my statement and in that of the representative of the Turkish Cypriot community. That is why I
find it unnecessary again to make a detailed reply to
them.
85. As for the reference to the 1960 Treaty of Guarantee aad the application of its Article IV, that article
did not oblige Turkey to consult with Greece before its
intervention since, as has just been admitted by the representative of the Greek Cypriot community,
Greece
itself was the instigator of the coup d&at for union with
Greece:
-’ 86. In addition, the Treaty of Guarantee guaranteed
only the state of affairs created by the Basic Articles of
the Cypriot Constitution. That Constitution and its Basic
Articles were completely disregarded by the Greeks,
which shows that even those Basic Articles were inadequate to gc.arantee and safeguard the state of affairs
they created. This shows that in order to safeguard the
same state of affairs we need bi-zonal and federal institutions. That is the whole purpose of the intercommunal
talks,
87. One point concerning the Geneva Conference of
1974. It was my honour to be the Vice-Chairman of the
Turkish delegation during that Conference. Mr. Glafcos
Clerides, the Greek Cypriot representative, stated, when
the Conference resumed with the participation
of both
communities,
that his administration
completely subscribed to the Geneva Declaration in question. All the
provisions of that Declaration were violated by the
Greek Cypriot administration,
and that brought about
the second intervention by Turkey, in 1974. Those who
have violated an agreement are not entitled to declare it
null and void.
88. As regards the reference to certain Turkish individuals, we must .say that they are completely unfounded.

89. Mr. MOUSHOUTAS
(Cyprus): In my statement I
did not say that the coup aimed at enosis. As a matter of
fact the “coup-ists”, once they had established themselves, called for negotiations, for the continuation of
the intercommunal talks.
90. Secondly, as to the accusation that we are not realists, well, we believe in justice and we believe in the
Charter ,of the United Nations.
91. The PRESIDENT:
There are no further speakers
on my list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

Statement

by tbe President

92. The PRESIDENT:
As this is the last meeting of the
Security Council to take place before the end of the
period covered in the Council’s annual report to the
General Assembly, submitted in accordance with Article
24, paragraph 3, of the Charter, it has been agreed that I
should place on record the fact that, since 21 December
1982, the Council has been engaged in consultations
with all members in connection with the issues raised in
the report of the Secretary-General on the work of the
Organization, submitted to the thirty-seventh session of
the General Assembly, during which members have
explored possible ways and means for enhancing the
effectiveness of the Council in accordance with the powers entrusted to it under the Charter. These far-ranging
consultations are being pursued in private on a continuing basis, and the Council is exploring means of presenting an interim account of the progress of its work.
The meeting rose at 5.50 p.m.

NOTES

’ Treaty of Alliance betweenthe Kingdom
of Turkey
and the Republic of Cyprus (United
vol. 397, No. 5712).
f Ibid., vol. 382, No. 5475.
’ A/37/805,

of Greece, the Republic
Nations, Treaty Series,

.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

L’NIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les aeences depositairez
du monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous-&
: Nations Unies.
Section des ventes. New York ou Gen+ve.
KAK

IlOJIYYMTb

H3,!IAHH5l

OP~AHM3ALIMM

OKbE,!IMHEHHbIX

M3naHHn
OpraHH3auwH
O6IWHHeHHblX
HauHtk MOYHO K,‘nHTb
B KHloKHbIX
H aRHTCTBaX
80 BCeX paiiOHaX
MHpa.
HaBOnHTe
ClIpaBKR
06 H3llaHHRX
B BaUIeSl
Mara3HHe
wmi nHUlHTe
no anpecy:
OpraHti3auHn
06aenHHeHiiblx
HaunR.
nponaxe
H3LIaHkik,
Hbm-MOpK
HJIW >KeHeBa.

HAUMm
Jiara3m4au
KH1i‘ZiHOY.I

CeKuun

no

COMO
CONSECUIR
PUBLICACIONES
DE LAS NACIONES
UNIDAS
Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas esten en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas panes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirfjase a: Naciones Unidas. Seccidn de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

00300

90-60205-July

1991-2,050
