V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports_~f the Second Committe_e___ ~-·-··- ~---------~63

Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 197 5
on development and international economic co-operation.
Recalling further its resolution 381155 of 19 December
1983,
Recognizing the need for reversing the negative trends in
international co-operation for development and, in particular, their detrimental effects on developing countries,
Recognizing also the importance of achieving a sustained world economic recovery, in particular the reactivation of the economies of developing countries, and
ensuring rapid expansion of international trade that is supportive of economic growth and development. in particular that of developing countries.
I. Takes note of the report of the Trade and Development Board on its twenty-eighth. thirteenth special and
twenty-ninth sessions; 153
2. Notes that the Trade and Development Report,
1984 154 was of great interest to Governments in the valuable debate on the interdependence of problems of trade.
development, finance and the international monetary system, which took place at the twenty-ninth session of the
Trade and Development Board;
3. Calls for early and full implementation of the work
programme on protectionism and structural adjustment
adopted by the Trade and Development Board at its
twenty-eighth session; 155
4. Calls upon the international community to continue
to address, in an adequate and appropriate manner, the
debt problems of developing countries, taking into account
the agreed conclusions of the Trade and Development
Board at its twenty-eighth session on the review of the
implementation of the agreed features contained in
(Board) resolution 222 (XXI) of 27 September 1980 156 and
in pursuance of resolution 161 (VI) of 2 July 1983 of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development; 157
5. Takes note of Trade and Development Board decision 297 (XXIX) of 21 September 1984, 158 concerning further work in the field of trade relations among countries
having different economic and social systems and all trade
flows resulting therefrom;
6. Welcomes Trade and Development Board decision
301 (XXIX) of 21 September 1984, 158 in which the
Interim Committee was requested to report to the Board at
its thirtieth session with a view to the taking of a decision
to hold a ministerial session in the autumn of 1985 and, to
this end, invites all Governments to exert efforts to ensure
the successful outcome of the consultations;
7. Expresses its concern at the current state of commodity markets, and urges all Governments to expedite
the implementation of the Integrated Programme for
Commodities through, inter alia, positive and constructive
decisions at the sessions of the Committee on Commodities in 1985 and at the fourteenth special session of
the Trade and Development Board;
8. Reaffirms the importance of the Common Fund for
Commodities, and urges all States that have not yet done
so to sign and ratify the Agreement establishing the Fund
without any further delay so that the Common Fund
would become operational;
153 Official Records of the General Assembly, Th1rty-mnth Session, Supple
men/ No. /5 (N39/15).
154 United Nations publication, Sales No. E.84.ILD.23.
155 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-ninth Sesswn, Supple
ment No. I 5 (N39/l 5), vol. I, sect. HA resolution 286 (XXVIII).
156 Ibid., Thirty-Jifih Sessum, Supp/cmenr N,, I.' (A/35 '15), vol. II, annn
I.

9 _ ( 'alls upon all countries to exert every effort to
strengthen international economic co-operation by adopting and implementing the measures necessary for revitalization of the development process of the developing
countries and for dealing with structural problems in the
global economy. and reiterates the continuing important
role of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development in this regard:
l 0. Requests the Trade and Development Board and
the subsidiary organs of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development to take the appropriate necessary
action on the resolutions and decisions adopted by the
Conference at its sixth ,cssion
104th plenary meeting
18 December 1984

39/215. Co-operation between the United Nations
and the Southern African Development Coordination Conference
!'he (ieneral Asscmh,1.
Recalling its resolutions 371248 of 21 December 1982
and 38/160 of 19 December 1983. by which it, inter alia.
requested the Secretary-General to promote co-operation
between the organs, organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system and the Southern African Development Co-ordination Conference and urged intensification of contacts in order to accelerate the achievement of
the objectives envisaged in resolution 3 7/248,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on co-operation between the United Nations and the
Southern African Development Co-ordination Conference. 159
Noting that progress is being made by organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations system in formulating co-operation programmes with the Conference,
l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General 159
concerning the progress made in the implementation of
General Assembly resolution 37 /248:
2. Commends the organs, organizations and bodies of
the United Nations system that have already established
concrete contacts with the Southern African Development
Co-ordination Conference:
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with
the Executive Secretary of the Conference, to continue
contacts aimed at promoting and harmonizing co-operation between the Conference and the United Nations:
4. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at Its fortieth session a report on the
implementation of the present resolution.
104th plenary meeting
18 December 1984

39/216.

Activities of the United Nations system in
support of economic co-operation among
developing countries

The General Assemblr,
Recognizing that economic co-operation among developing countries is an integral part of the efforts to establish
7
I 5 See Proceedings of the ( 1111ed Nauons Cm!lerence on Trade and Develop men!, Sixth Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes (United Naltons puhlicatton. Sales No. E.83.11.D.6). pan one, sect. A.
158 See Official Records of rh1· General Assemh!\' rl1irt\'-lllll/h S,·s11011,
Supplement No /_, (Ad9·1 ,) ,ol II, ,crt. !LB
I'

9

,\

"I '408

164

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

the new international economic order, without being a
substitute for or an alternative to co-operation between
developed and developing countries, and that the Caracas
Programme of Action 160 adopted by the High-level Conference on Economic Co-operation among Developing
Countries, held at Caracas from 13 to 19 May 1981, provides their basic framework for specific activities and
arrangements in the field of economic co-operation among
developing countries,
Mindful of the various resolutions adopted within the
United Nations system in support of economic co-operation among developing countries and calling for appropriate action on them,
Looking forward to the cross-organizational programme
analysis on economic co-operation among developing
countries, to be considered by the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination at its twenty-fifth session, and
to the cross-organizational programme review of the activities of the United Nations system on the same subject, to
be held at the second regular session of the Economic and
Social Council in 1985,
I. Urges the organs and organizations of the United
Nations system to provide and to intensify support and
assistance, in accordance with their mandates, to economic co-operation among developing countries, giving due
regard to the Caracas Programme of Action;
2. Urges the Secretary-General, giving due consideration to the conclusions emerging from the ongoing crossorganizational programme analysis, to pay careful attention to economic co-operation among developing
countries in preparing his programme budget proposals for
the biennium I 986-1987 and to include in his future performance reports on the programme budget specific information on the implementation of activities for economic
co-operation among developing countries;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with
the executive heads of the bodies and organizations of the
United Nations system and of the specialized agencies, to
keep the activities of the United Nations system in support
of economic co-operation among developing countries
under periodic review in the existing inter-agency machinery;

4. Recommends that the documentation being prepared for the cross-organizational programme review of
medium-term plans in economic and technical co-operation among developing countries and for the cross-organizational programme analysis should be combined into one
report so as to ensure an integrated approach to this area;
5. Requests the executive secretaries of the regional
commissions to continue to intensify activities to support
economic co-operation among developing countries at the
subregional, regional and interregional levels and to
include an assessment of progress made in their reports to
the Economic and Social Council;
6. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, in view
of its key role in the area of economic co-operation among
developing countries, to continue to intensify activities in
this area, in accordance with its mandate;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
104th plenary meeting
18 December 1984
160 A/36/333 and Corr I. annex

39 /217.

Biennial programme of work for the Second
Committee

The General Assembly,
Recalling its decision 38/429 of 19 December 1983, in
which it decided to adopt, beginning at its fortieth session,
a biennial programme of work for the Second Committee,
apart from its general debate,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council decision
1984/182 of27 July 1984, in which it recommended to the
General Assembly for its consideration a number of suggestions relating to the biennial programme of work for the
Second Committee. contained in the annex to that decision,
1. Decides that the Second Committee, in drawing up
its biennial programmes of work, should:
(a) Endeavour to adopt a biennial cycle of consideration of reports submitted to it, with the exception of those
reports which are specifically mandated to be considered
annually, once every three years or more, or on an ad hoe
basis;
(b) Consider all reports of standing intergovernmental
bodies on a biennial basis, except the reports of the Economic and Social Council, the Trade and Development
Board and the Governing Council of the United Nations
Development Programme;
(c) Consider, m principle, all recurrent Secretariat
reports on a biennial basis, except the report of the Director-General for Development and International Economic
Co-operation on operational activities for development;
2. Decides to approve, in principle, annex I to the present resolution as the basis for the formulation of the biennial programme of work for the Second Committee and to
review it periodically;
3. Decides that all requests for Secretariat reports to be
submitted to the Second Committee should henceforth
conform to the biennial programme of work, except where
the urgency of the subject-matter requires otherwise;
4. Requests intergovernmental bodies reporting to the
Second Committee to adjust their cycle of meetings to
conform to the biennial programme of work;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
Second Committee for consideration and approval each
year a proposed biennial programme of work, taking into
account relevant resolutions and decisions of the General
Assembly of that year;
6. Requests the Economic and Social Council, in discharging its responsibilities in preparing the work of the
General Assembly in the economic, social and related
fields, to take fully into account the approved programme
of work for the Second Committee of the General Assembly in formulating its own biennial programme of work
and in this context:
(a) To concentrate, in its consideration of reports of
intergovernmental bodies submitted through it to the
General Assembly, on the co-ordination aspect of the
work of those bodies in conformity with the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations;
(b) To consider undertaking an in-depth review of the
reports of intergovernmental bodies which the General
Assembly does not consider directly in a given year and to
submit substantive recommendations thereon to the
Assembly for consideration and action;
(c) To consider reviewing those reports of intergovernmental bodies which the General Assembly considers
