Gcnrrnl Asscmbly-Eleventh Session

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE SIXTH COMMITTEE

CONTENTS
1103 (XI). Amendrnents to articles 2 and 9 of the Statute of the International
Law Commission ( 18 December 1956) ( item 59)
1104 (XI). Amendments to rules 31, 38, 39 and 101 of the rules of procedure
of the General Assembly ( 18 December 1956) ( item 5) .
1105 (XI). International conference of plenipotentiaries to examine the law of
the sea (21 February 1957) (item 53)
1106 (XI). Special allowance to be paid to members of the International Law
Commission (21 February 1957) (item 53)
1107 (XI). Elimination or reduction of future statelessness (21 February 1957)
(item 54)

53
53
54
54

SS

"Rule 31
"The General Assembly shall elect a President
and eight Vice-Presidents, who shall hold office until
the close of the session at which they are elected
The Vice-Presidents shall be elected, after the election of the Chairmen of the seven Main Committees
referred to in rulc 101, on the basis of ensuring the
representative character of the General Committee."

ll03 (XI). Amendments to articles 2 and 9 of
the Statute of the International Law Commiaaion

The GeneraJ Assembly,
H aving regard to the present composition of the
United Nations and to the duties and responsibilities
of the International Law Commission,
Considering that, for the purpose of securing in the
Commission an adequate presentation of the main
forms of civilization and of the principle legal systems
of the world, it is appropriate to increase the number
of the members of the Commission,
1. Decides to amend as follows article 2, paragraph
1, of the Statute of the International Law Commission:
"The Commission shall consist of twenty-one members who shall be persons of recognized competence
in international law" ;
2. Decides, as a consequence, to amend as follows
article 9, paragraph 1, of the said Statute:
"The twenty-one candidates who obtain the greatest number of votes and not Jess than a majority of
the votes of the Members present and voting shall
be elected".
623rd plenary meeting,
18 December 1956.

"Rule 38
"The General Committee shall comprise the President of the General Assembly, who shall preside,
the eight Vice-Presidents and the Chairmen of the
seven Main Committces. No two members of the
General Committee shall be members of the same
delegation, and it shall be so constituted as to ensure
its representative character. Chairmen of other committees upon which all Members have the right to
be represented and which are established by the
General Assembly to meet during the session, shall
be entitled to attend meetings of the General Committee and may partiripate without voté in the diseussions."
Rule 39
"If a Vice-President of the General Assembly
finds it necessary to be absent during a meeting of
the General Committee he may designate a member
of his delegation as his substitute. The Chairman
of a Main Committee shall, in case of absence, designate the Vice-Chairman of the Committee as his
substitute. A Vice-Chairman shall not have the right
to vote if he is of the same delegation as another
member of the Committee."

ll04 (XI). Amendments to rules 31, 38, 39
and 101 of the rules of procedure of the
General Assemhly 1

The General Assembly,
Having regard to its decision, taken at the 577th
plenary meeting on 15 November 1956, to change the
name of the Ad Hoc Political Committee to "Special
Political Committee" and to confer a permanent character on that Committee,

Rule 101
"The Main Committees of the General Assembly
are:
" (a) Political and Security Committee ( including
the regulation of armaments) ( First Commit-tee) ;
·• ( h) Special Political Committee;
"'(c) Economie a11J Financial Committee (Second
Comrnittee) ;

Decides to amend as follows rules 31, 38, 39 and
101 of its rules of procedure:
1

Page

See "Composition of General Committee," footnote 2, p.

viii.

53

54

General Assembly-Eleventh Seesion

" ( d) Social, Humanitarian and Cultural Committee ( Third Committee) ;
" ( e) Trusteeship Committee ( including Non-SelfGoverning Territories) (Fourth Committee);
"(f) Administrative and Budgetary Committee
( Fifth Committee) ;
"(g) Legal Committee ( Sixth Committee) ".

623rd plenary meeting,
18 December 1956.

1105 (XI). International conference of plenipo•
tentiaries to examine the law of the sea
The General Assembly,
H aving received the report of the International Law
Commission covering the work of its eighth session,2
which contains draft articles and commentaries on
the law of the sea,
Recalling that the General Assembly, in resolution
798 (VIII) of 7 December 1953, havirtg regard to the
fact that the problems relating to the high seas, territorial waters, contiguous zones, the continental shelf
and the superjacent waters were closely linked together
juridically as well as phy~ically, decided not to deal
with any aspect of those matters unt_il ail the problems
involved had been studied by the International Law
Commission and reported upon by it to the General
Assembly,
Considering that, by its resolution 899 (IX) of 14
DecemLer 1954, it requested the International Law
Commission to submit its final report on these subjects
in time for the General Assembly to consider them as
a whole at its eleventh session,
Taking into account also paragraph 29 of the report
of the International Law Commission wherein it is
stated that the Commission considers-and the comments of Governments have confirmed this view-that
the various sections of the law of the sea hold together,
and are so closely interdependent that it would be
extremely difficult to deal with only one part and leave
the others aside,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the International
Law Commission for its valuable work on this complex
subject;
2. Decides, in accordance with the recommendation
contained in paragraph 28 of the report of the International Law Commission covering the work of its
eighth session, that an international conference of plenipotentiaries should be convoked to examine the law
of the sea, taking account not only of the legal but
also of the technical, biological, economic and political
aspects of the problem, and to embody the results of
its work in one or more international conventions or
such other instruments as it may deem appropriate;
3. Recommends that the conference should study
the question of free access to the sea of land-locked
countries, as established by international practice of
treaties;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to convoke the
conference early in March 1958;
5. Invites all States Members of the United Nations
and States members of the specialized agencies to par• Official Records of the General Assembly, Eleventh Session,
Supplement No. 9 (A/3159).

ticipate in the conference and to include among their
representatives experts competent in the fields to be
considered ;
6. Invites the interested specialized agencies and
inter-governmental bodies to send observers to the
conference ;

7. Requests the Secretary-General to invite appropriate experts to advise and assist the Secretariat in
preparing the conference, with tbe following terms of
reference:
(a) To obtain, in the manner which they think most
appropriate, from the Governments invited to the conference any further provisional comments the Governments may wish to make on the Commission's report
and related matters, and to present to the conference
in systematic form any comments made by the Govemments, as well as the relevant statements made in the
Sixth Committee at the eleventh and previous sessions
of the General Assembly;
( b) To present to the conference recommendations
concerning its method of work and procedures, and
other questions of an administrative nature;
( c) To prepare, or arrange for the preparation of,
working documents of a legal, technical, scientific or
economic nature in order to facilitate the work of the
conference ;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to arrange also
for the necessary staff and facilities which would be
required for the conference, it being understood that
the technical services of such experts as are needed
will be utilized ;
9. Refers to the conference the report of the International Law Commission as the basis for its consideration of the various problems involved in the
development and codification of the law of the sea, and
also the verbatim records of the relevant debates in
the General Assembly, for consideration by the conference in conjunction with the Commission's report;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the conference ail such records of world-wide or regional international meetings as may serve as official
background mate rial for its work;
11. Calls upon the Governments invited to the conference and groups thereof to utilize the time remaining
before the opening of the conference for exchanges of
views on the controversial questions relative to the
law of the sea;
12. E:rpresses the hopc that the conkrence will be
fully attended.
658th plenary meetin_q,
21 February 1957.

1106 (XI). Special allowance to be paid to memhers of the International Law Commission
The General Assembly,
Recalling that, by its resolution 485 (V:) of 12 December 1950, it amended article 13 of the S"tatute of the
International Law Commission, in consequence of
which that article reads as follows:
"Members of the Commission shall be paid travel
expenses, and shall also receive a special allowance,
the amount of which shall be determined by the
General Assembly",
