S/PV.8496

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8496th meeting

Thursday, 28 March 2019, 9.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Le Drian/Mrs. Gueguen/Mr. Michon . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Adom
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Fachir
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia/Mr. Kuzmin
Ms. Mapisa-Nqakula
Mr. Allen
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts
Preventing and combating the financing of terrorism
Letter dated 14 March 2019 from the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2019/239)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-08879 (E)
*1908879*

S/PV.8496

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The meeting was called to order at 9.40 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts
Preventing and combating the financing of
terrorism
Letter dated 14 March 2019 from the
Permanent Representative of France
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2019/239)
The President (spoke in French): I wish to warmly
welcome the Ministers from Estonia, Indonesia, Ireland,
the Philippines, Romania, Slovenia, South Africa and
Tajikistan, as well as the other representatives present
in the Security Council Chamber. Their presence
today underscores the importance of the subject matter
under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representatives
of Afghanistan, Algeria, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Canada, the Central African Republic,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
the Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Ecuador,
Egypt, Estonia, Gabon, Georgia, Greece, Guatemala,
Hungary, India, Iraq, Ireland, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Latvia,
Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Malaysia, Monaco,
Montenegro, Morocco, New Zealand, the Netherlands,
the Republic of North Macedonia, Norway, Pakistan,
Paraguay, the Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, Romania,
Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sri Lanka, the Sudan, Switzerland, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine,
the United Arab Emirates, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela and Viet Nam to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Vladimir
Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General, United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism; Mr. Marshall Billingslea,
President of the Financial Action Task Force; and
Ms. Mercy Buku, an expert in anti-money-laundering
and countering the financing of terrorism.
2/78

28/03/2019

Mr. Voronkov and Ms. Buku are joining today’s
meeting via video tele-conference from Rome and
Nairobi, respectively.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following to participate in this meeting: Mr. Robert
Mardini, Permanent Observer of the International
Committee of the Red Cross to the United Nations; His
Excellency Mr. João Pedro Vale de Almeida, Head of
the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations; Mr. Emmanuel Roux, Special Representative
of the International Criminal Police Organization to the
United Nations; and Her Excellency Ms. Fatima Kyari
Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African Union
to the United Nations.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/239, which contains the text of a letter
dated 14 March 2019 from the Permanent Representative
of France to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note on the
item under consideration
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2019/268, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, the Central
African Republic, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Djibouti, the Dominican
Republic, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, France,
Gabon, Georgia, Greece, Hungary, Indonesia, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lithuania, Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco, New
Zealand, the Republic of North Macedonia, Norway,
Peru, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania,
Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Turkey,
Ukraine, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
19-08879

28/03/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Belgium, China, Côte d’Ivoire, Dominican
Republic, Equatorial Guinea, France, Germany,
Indonesia, Kuwait, Peru, Poland, Russian
Federation, South Africa, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America
The President (spoke in French): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 2462 (2019).
I now give the floor to Mr. Voronkov.
Mr. Voronkov: I am joining the members of the
Security Council today from Rome, where I have
just a signed a memorandum of understanding with
Italy’s Guardia di Finanza, a major expert agency and
capacity-building provider in the field of countering
terrorist financing, to work together with the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT) on
relevant activities around the world.
Today’s resolution 2462 (2019) is further evidence
of France’s leading role on strengthening international
cooperation to counter the financing of terrorism.
In that regard, I would like to recall the high-level
International Conference on Combating the Financing
of Da’esh and Al-Qaida, held in Paris last year on
the theme “No money for terror” under the personal
leadership of His Excellency Mr. Emmanuel Macron,
President of France, where I represented the SecretaryGeneral. As follow-up to the Paris Conference, this
year Australia is leading the convening of the next
international conference on countering the financing
of terrorism.
The adoption of resolution 2462 (2019) comes at a
critical time. Recent terrorist attacks around the world
demonstrate that financial flows continue to reach
terrorist groups from both illegal and legal means.
A concerted effort to redouble the world’s attention
on stopping the financing of terrorism is therefore a
vital topic. Several Security Council resolutions have
focused on countering the financing of terrorism. But
the resolution the Council just adopted helps consolidate
the various requirements into a single document and
expands the focus to key emerging issues, including
innovative terrorist financing typologies. I would like to
particularly welcome the role that the resolution assigns

S/PV. 8496

to the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism in
identifying ways to suppress terrorist financing and
helping countries develop the capacities to implement
key priorities. We at UNOCT are ready and willing to
play an enhanced role in supporting Member States in
implementing the resolution.
The United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism
and its Centre for Counter-Terrorism have focused an
important of their policy, coordination and capacitybuilding work on countering the financing of terrorism.
We offer a coordination platform for inter-agency
dialogue through our United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Coordination Compact Working Group
on Countering the Financing of Terrorism. We have
also provided practical support to Member States on
understanding and implementing effective measures to
suppress terrorist financing.
I thank the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the United
States of America, Japan, Switzerland and, most
recently, India and the State of Qatar for making
contributions to the counter-terrorism financing
projects implemented by the United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism.
I would like to make three points on UNOCT’s
priorities in the field of countering the financing
of terrorism.
First, we must expand our focus to include
intelligence sharing, sectoral risk assessments and
public-private partnerships to ensure that financial
regulation is responsive, targeted, proportional
and effective.
Secondly, taking a cue from the resolution, we
must look at countering the financing of terrorism
as a comprehensive package comprising a variety
of related topics. System-wide awareness-raising,
inter-agency coordination, judicial reviews and the
continuous commitment of human and technological
resources are equally important. Human rights and
humanitarian law should be upheld and protected. It is
only through a comprehensive and multidimensional
approach that national and international financial
systems and institutions can be properly safeguarded
from terrorist abuse.
Thirdly, we must work more closely with the
Financial Action Task Force (FATF) and FATF-style
regional bodies on capacity-building assistance. I
welcome the participation of the FATF in this forum.

19-088793/78

S/PV.8496

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

My Office remains committed to working with
all our partners, particularly the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, to coordinate
capacity-building support to interested Member
States, which is in line with the Security Council’s
guidance under resolution 2395 (2017). We will use
our inter-agency coordination platforms to extend
such alignment of assistance and needs with other key
bodies, such as the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team, the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, the International Monetary Fund, the World
Bank and INTERPOL.
I would like to take this opportunity to call upon all
Member States, and especially those actively engaged
in today’s discussions, to make available national
experts to United Nations programmes on countering
the financing of terrorism so that beneficiary countries
have an opportunity to learn good practices in this area.
Significant financial support for more comprehensive
packages of assistance is also necessary to increase
Member States’ capacity to prevent and detect
terrorism financing.
Only through strong collaboration and targeted
efforts can we achieve concrete results in our fight
against terrorism and terrorist financing. My Office
is ready to play its policy development and capacitybuilding roles in the broader international efforts to
counter the financing of terrorism.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Voronkov for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Billingslea.
Mr. Billingslea: First, I thank France for its
leadership on the critical issue of countering terrorist
financing. As the Under-Secretary-General just
mentioned, resolution 2462 (2019), which was just
adopted, meaningfully advances the work of President
Macron’s high-level International Conference on
Combating the Financing of Da’esh and Al-Qaida, held
in Paris last year on the theme “No money for terror”,
in which you, Sir, played a key role. We look forward to
this year’s follow-up conference in Australia, and thank
you for inviting the Financial Action Task Force (FATF)
to speak at the adoption of resolution 2462 (2019).
Terrorism remains a threat to international peace
and security from which no region is immune. Terrorist
groups, such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), Al-Qaida and their affiliates continue to obtain
4/78

28/03/2019

funding from a wide range of sources; they use this
funding to conduct terrorist attacks, but they also use
it to maintain and grow their terrorist organizations
as a whole. Combatting all these aspects of terrorist
financing is top priority shared by the Security Council
and the Financial Action Task Force. I am pleased that
the resolution recognizes the FATF’s central role in
setting global standards to combat money-laundering,
terrorist financing and proliferation financing.
The FATF was founded in 1989 by the Group of
Seven to combat money-laundering by drug trafficking
and organized crime networks, and we have since
expanded our focus to counter both terrorist financing
and the financing of the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction (WMDs). Now, more than 190 member
jurisdictions of the FATF and the Global Network
of Counter-Terrorism Centres have committed to
implementing and being evaluated for compliance with
those standards, which include specific requirements to
give effect to Security Council resolutions, including
the one just adopted, to counter the aforementioned
threats. In this way, the FATF and the Security Council
work hand in hand to strengthen Member States’
response to these critical threats to international peace
and security.
As the FATF moves towards its thirtieth
anniversary in the coming days, we have focused our
presidency on pressing for action on three crucial
challenges. Specifically, we are prioritizing efforts,
first, to address the illicit financing risks associated
with virtual currencies and related assets; secondly, to
take further action to strengthen international efforts
to combat the financing of terrorism; and thirdly, to
enhance our work in proliferation financing matters.
I was particularly pleased to see that the resolution
highlights the progress that the FATF has made on the
first priority, welcoming the recent work to amend our
standards and to adopt an interpretive note that clarifies
how all nations must regulate and supervise activities
and providers of virtual assets, and the importance of
the effective prosecution of terrorist financing.
Additionally, as the resolution conveys, it is critical
for all States to recognize where they may be vulnerable
to terrorist financing and then use that understanding
to mitigate those risks properly. I appreciate the
invaluable information that the Under-SecretaryGeneral and his Office provide, as well as the reports
of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
19-08879

28/03/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

(1999) 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL
(Da’esh) Al-Qaida and associated individuals groups
undertakings and entities. We also prepare confidential
reports on ISIL and Al-Qaida funding sources and
methods, as well as counter-measures that may be
adopted. We work, through the mutual evaluation
process, to ensure that all countries are accurately
assessing their financing risks and adequately and
effectively responding to those risks.
We should all recognize that terrorist financing
risks extend well beyond the banking and financial
sectors. States need to identify all sectors — including
those of non-financial services such as construction,
commodities and pharmaceutical trafficking and
others — that are being exploited for terrorist purposes.
For example, the typology reports that our member
nations compile reveal multiple different methods of
terrorist financing that rely on disparate schemes of drug
trafficking and even the used-car trade. Groups such
as Hizbullah, the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia and Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb have
all benefitted from intermingling funds from criminal
and otherwise legal trade for the purpose of funding
terrorist attacks.
FATF reports also identify — and the resolution
adopted today further amplifies — the use of
kidnapping for ransom as a prominent and sometimes
even primary source of terrorist revenue. The resolution
rightly prompts all States to do their necessary part in
breaking the vicious cycle and to prevent payments that
fund terrorist operations associated with kidnapping,
and further recognizes that payment of ransoms
incentivizes additional crimes. States must not allow
hostage-takers and terrorists to benefit from ransom
payments. That is crucial, particularly as kidnapping for
ransom has become the major funding source used by
the remnants of Da’esh around the world. More broadly,
States need to address the underlying contextual issues
that create environments conducive to terrorism and
terrorist financing. Corruption or weak and ineffective
governance and a lack of respect for the rule of law
are problems that lead to regional instability and render
economies vulnerable to terrorist exploitation.
The resolution also includes an important focus on
the adequate criminalization and effective prosecution
of terrorist financing. We must criminalize not only
financing that is itself linked to a particular terrorist
act, but also the provision of funds to terrorist groups or
terrorists for any purpose, whether it be for their travel

S/PV. 8496

or their general operations. Under France’s leadership,
the resolution brings United Nations obligations into
line with FATF recommendation 5 and the FATF
guidance on this matter. Through our assessments,
we will continue to encourage more than 50 countries
to pass new legislation to counter terrorist financing.
More is urgently needed.
Nearly two thirds of our FATF assessments around
the world show that States are not effectively prosecuting
terrorist financing. We are using the evaluation and
follow-up process to strengthen prosecution efforts,
and under my presidency of the FATF, we have driven
capacity-building workshops, most recently in the State
of Israel. I am pleased that all five permanent members
of the Security Council, including some individuals
present here today, participated in the workshop that
took place last week.
But I must underline that fewer than one fifth of
the countries around the world that we have assessed
to date are effectively applying the targeted financial
sanctions and prosecutions that are necessary in line
with the resolution just adopted. More is urgently
needed by all States Members of the United Nations,
and we in the FATF will continue to support the work
done at the Security Council and to drive adoption of
and adherence to FATF standards.
Finally, in conclusion, we need to bolster
inter-Agency coordination and information-sharing,
much as the Under-Secretary-General has mentioned,
both among and within States. States need to need
to exchange more information among all relevant
authorities, such as financial-intelligence units, law
enforcement and intelligence services. We also need
to work very closely with the private sector. New
developments in public-private partnerships give
significant benefits in terms of greater and faster
access to information. Large banks often have access to
significant amounts of data that can assist in countering
these terror operations.
Likewise, Governments need to provide relevant
information to financial institutions in return. A
number of FATF member nations, including my own,
the United Kingdom and others, have put in place legal
frameworks that foster the sharing of specific-threat
information with and by financial institutions. We
would encourage nations to consider additional ways
that we can work closely with our financial sector.

19-088795/78

S/PV.8496

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

I congratulate the French Republic on its leadership
on this matter, on the adoption of resolution 2462 (2019).
This vital resolution prompts all nations to “up their
game” in countering the terrorist-financing business.
We will continue to use our assessment processes to
reinforce the critical work that the Security Council is
now undertaking.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Billingslea for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Buku.
Ms. Buku: It is indeed a great honour and privilege
for me to be invited to address the Security Council
today. Resolution 2462 (2019), adopted today, is a
timely measure in the promotion of the fight against
terrorism, terrorist financing and money-laundering.
I am from Kenya, and Kenyans have experienced
firsthand the terrible consequences of terrorism, with
the most recent incident at a local hotel still fresh in
our minds.
However, it is important to recognize that the
fight against terrorism and the channels for financing
terrorism must proceed in an enabling regulatory
environment that does not stifle financial-inclusion
initiatives in the affected regions. Indeed, the FATF
guidance paper on anti-money-laundering and terroristfinancing measures and financial inclusion, issued
in June 2011, recognized financial inclusion as a key
agenda item in the fight against terrorism and terrorist
financing, and this will be the main focus of my briefing
to the Council this morning.
Financial services are foundational to addressing
today’s pressing global issues of poverty, inequality and
migration, and to enabling the achievements of a wide
array of national development goals, which is evidenced
by an expanding body of research. Numerous studies
have demonstrated that bank accounts and payment
services — and, in particular, access to them — have
a measurable impact on poverty, more particularly as
follows. They make day-to-day transactions possible,
including the sending and receiving of money. They
safeguard savings, which can help households better
manage their cashflow and build working capital,
which has also contributed to uplifting women in
these countries. They help finance small businesses or
micro-enterprises, assisting owners to invest in assets
and grow their businesses. They enable planning and
payments for recurring expenses such as school fees
and access to electricity and water. They also mitigate
6/78

28/03/2019

shocks and manage expenses related to unexpected
events, such as medical emergencies, death in the
family, theft and natural disasters, including famine
alleviation and refugee crises. They also improve the
overall welfare of poor families.
There is a direct link between financial inclusion
and global development goals, including the eradication
of poverty, promotion of prosperity and protection of
the environment, as more particularly outlined in the
United Nations Sustainable Development Goals.
Globally, around 1.7 billion adults are currently
“unbanked” and without access to safe, reliable and
convenient financial services, either through an
account at a financial institution or through a mobile
money-provider. In 2014, that number was 2 billion.
Because account ownership is nearly universal in highincome economies, virtually all unbanked adults live
in developing economies, mainly in Africa and SouthEast Asia. These economies are also the ones suffering
most from terrorism, especially Africa, which has been
identified as being among the top three continents
affected by terrorism, with the Horn of Africa and East
Africa — where I come from — being identified as
the region in sub-Saharan Africa most threatened by
indigenous and international terrorism.
Traditional providers of financial services are
banks, microfinance institutions, credit unions and
cooperatives. However, in developing economies, due to
the lack of adequate traditional banking channels, new
delivery channels have been at the forefront of financial
inclusion, the most notable being mobile money-transfer
and mobile-banking services. In this regard, the lack of
access to financial services in these regions, combined
with the increasingly widespread use of mobile phones,
has given rise to a mobile-phone-based economy
whereby mobile platforms are used as an alternative
to traditional banking systems. Indeed, when M-Pesa
was launched in Kenya in 2007, only 1 billion of the
world’s 6.5 billion people had bank accounts, yet at
least 3 billion had mobile phones.
Today, mobile money-transfer services are
arguably the single most effective contributor to
global financial-inclusion initiatives, and, particularly
in the developing countries, have facilitated access
to cheap and reliable financial services to an everincreasing formerly unbanked population segment.
Recent innovations in mobile transfer services in
various jurisdictions coupled with a favourable
19-08879

28/03/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

regulatory environments have heralded unprecedented
success in financial-inclusion initiatives, which have
morphed today into an entire digital financial-services
ecosystem offering savings, insurance, both local and
international money transfers, payments and credit
services on mobile-money platforms to both individuals
and corporate entities.
Today, there are over 270 mobile-money-transfer
systems globally, and 866 million mobile-moneyaccounts transacted $1.3 billion daily in 2018 alone,
45.6 per cent of which were in sub-Saharan Africa
and 33.2 per cent in South Asia. As an example, if I
forget my phone at home today, I have to go back home;
otherwise, I will be severely financially handicapped.
But if I forget my debit or credit card, I am not worried.
That is the power of mobile money and digital financial
services in those countries.
Every good thing, however, must come with an
element of risk, as aptly captured by the Paris Agenda
adopted at the high-level International Conference
on Combating the Financing of Da’esh and Al-Qaida,
held in Paris on 25 and 26 April 2018, on the theme
“No money for terror”, which recognizes that
the products and services provided by innovative
financial technologies may offer significant economic
opportunities but also present a risk of being misused
by criminals for money laundering and other criminal
activity, including terrorist financing.
Mobile money and other digital forms of
payments will be attractive to criminals due to their
speed of delivery and their anonymous nature. Other
factors include porous borders and a lack of adequate
identification regimes in some of the jurisdictions
where these payment channels are in use. In addition,
important users of such services are illiterate rural
populations, for whom identity verification, know your
customer and customer due diligence procedures may
be difficult to carry out.
The diversified product ranges offered through
these payment channels, including cross-border
and international remittances, can also be used by
criminals for money laundering and terrorist financing.
Criminals, including terrorists, will also use mobile
networks as a primary means of communication to plan
and coordinate terrorism and other criminal activities. It
is therefore of critical importance that Governments in
those jurisdictions put in place anti-money-laundering/
combating the financing of terrorism and financial

S/PV. 8496

regulations, which will facilitate financial inclusion
initiatives while ensuring the integrity of the systems
used to deliver such services so that they are not used
for money laundering and financing terrorism.
Such regulations will ensure that financial
institutions and other non-bank-designated institutions
have anti-money-laundering/combating the financing
of terrorism programmes with appropriate controls
that comply with Financial Action Task Force (FATF)
standards and United Nations conventions on customer
due diligence, transaction monitoring, sanction
screening, record-keeping etc. In particular, we will
also adopt the risk-based approach recommended in the
guidelines note on new payment products and services
issued by FATF in June 2013.
Much has already been done in those jurisdictions
to put in place relevant legislative and private-sector
controls. However, more remains to be done and in
that regard I wish to highlight the commitments made
by the Paris Agenda to put in place measures such as
the strengthening of information-sharing frameworks
among the private sector, regulatory authorities and law
enforcement agencies, as well as to work with financial
institutions and designated non-financial businesses
or professions to ensure that they fulfil obligations
under domestic anti-money-laundering/combating the
financing of terrorism legislation.
Such measures should also include capacitybuilding, training and infrastructural support.
Resolution 2462 (2019) under debate today also affirms
the importance of improving national frameworks and
inter-agency coordination, cooperation with the private
sector, international cooperation and the need to explore
ways in which the United Nations can better support
Member States in implementing those initiatives.
Accordingly, I wish to conclude by noting that
the need to balance financial inclusion with financial
integrity cannot be overemphasized. As the Security
Council debates resolution 2462 (2019), it is my hope
that such debates will take cognizance of the need for
member States to promote initiatives that will assist
jurisdictions in financially excluded areas to put in
place the necessary measures to combat the financing
of terrorism and money laundering without stifling
financial inclusion and hence to promote sustainable
development in those countries.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Buku
for her statement.

19-088797/78

S/PV.8496

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs of France.
I would like to thank the briefers for their very
informative statements.
The Charter of the United Nations, which entrusts
the Council with the responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security, has for many years
driven it to devote regular attention to all aspects of the
fight against terrorism. Indeed, it is the objective of a
concerted, coherent and effective fight against terrorism
that brings us together today to adopt resolution
2462 (2019) on the fight against new modalities for
financing terrorism.
For many years, we have been acting decisively
in the face of the terrorist threat by confronting our
enemies directly on the ground. I would like to pay
a warm tribute here to those — first and foremost
the Iraqi security forces and the Syrian democratic
forces — who fought Da’esh and recovered from the
so-called Caliphate all the territory it had conquered in
2014. They have defended and continue to defend our
security and our model of collective existence.
Yet the biggest mistake would be to believe that
terrorism is defeated once its territorial claims have
been destroyed. Al-Qaida and Da’esh, even if they
are in retreat, have not disappeared. On the contrary,
they are adapting. If we have driven them out of
the territories in which they had settled, they are
reorganizing themselves into clandestine networks.
While we have prevented them from crossing borders,
they are using cyberspace to remotely direct or inspire,
at the very heart of our societies, the architects of their
criminal projects.
As Governments, our first responsibility is to
ensure the safety of our fellow citizens. We are therefore
obliged to persist in our fight against terrorism, while
anticipating every shift in the threat we face and
adapting our response accordingly. Our enemies seek
to relocate in new territorial franchises — we will fight
them. They wish to contaminate our youth with their
deadly ideology — we will protect our societies. They
wish to project fighters, publicize their ideas, transfer
funds — we will isolate them.
As I said a moment ago, we must deal with the
root causes of the problem and intensify our efforts to
isolate terrorists by drying up their sources of funding.
Because, in this area too, our enemies have confirmed
8/78

28/03/2019

their formidable capacity to adapt. They have long
been able to direct trafficking, banditry and even some
conventional economic flows to their benefit. Today,
driven out of their territories, they have learned to
invest in the new virtual financial spaces, where they
exploit the possibilities offered by new technologies.
Terror networks know how to raise funds by
opening online jackpot accounts. They do not hesitate
to pervert the practice of hawala to transfer funds
to the other side of the world. They are learning to
transform their resources into cryptocurrency in order
to acquire drones in cyberspace. The challenge is great.
Our determination must be just as strong so that we do
not leave out any aspect of the fight against financing
terrorism. This is the ambition that led France to
organize the high-level International Conference on
Combating the Financing of Da’esh and Al-Qaida,
held in Paris last year on the theme “No money for
terror”, and to promote the adoption of an ambitious
agenda and the formation of the Paris coalition against
financing terrorism.
That will also be Australia’s ambition, which will
follow in the footsteps of France and bring together the
Paris coalition in Melbourne in November 2019. In that
regard, I warmly thank the representative of Australia.
That is also the ambition that led us to bring the issue
to the Council by proposing the adoption of a reference
doctrine to guide the international community’s action
in the fight against financing terrorism.
The adoption of a Security Council resolution
is a strong political act. We thank all our Security
Council partners for their active contribution to the
negotiations. However, the adoption of a resolution is
not an end in itself. It is the beginning of the process of
implementation, which must mobilize us just as much
and in which we must demonstrate that we are equal to
our responsibilities.
In the face of the protean and constantly changing
threat I described a few moments ago, we need to build
the broadest possible partnership. Such a partnership, by
involving all the actors concerned — States, the private
sector, multilateral institutions and civil society — is
the only one capable of providing an adequate response
to the challenge.
I would like to appeal to all members of this
partnership to take up the resolution we have just
adopted and commit themselves to implementing it in
all its aspects. In particular, I call on States to fight,
19-08879

28/03/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

through their legal systems, against the individuals,
groups and entities that finance terrorism; strengthen
their cooperation and commitment to assist the countries
that need help the most in this fight; and implement
the recommendations of the Financial Action Task
Force, whose role in creating norms and standards in
the fight against terrorist financing is recognized by
the resolution. In that regard, I would like to thank its
President, Marshall Billingslea, for being here with us
this morning.
I also call on the United Nations, in particular the
Office of Counter-Terrorism and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, the work of which
is so important, particularly in providing countries in
need with the necessary technical assistance to develop
their capacity to combat terrorist financing. I especially
welcome the remarks made by Mr. Voronkov, UnderSecretary-General of the United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism, and assure him of France’s full
support. We further call on the private sector, whose
involvement and participation in the fight against
terrorist financing are more essential than ever.
Lastly, I welcome the balance struck in the text
between our objective of better combating the financing
of terrorism and the ability of humanitarian actors to
carry out their mission in proper conditions, without
hindrance to their activities.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I give the floor to the other members of the Council
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Fachir (Indonesia): I would first like to
commend you, Mr. President, for convening this
important debate and congratulate all delegations
on their excellent work in producing the important
resolution 2462 (2019), which the Security Council
has just adopted. I also wish to warmly thank
Mr. Voronkov, Mr. Billingslea and Ms. Buku for their
insightful briefings.
The recent terrorist attack in Christchurch,
New Zealand, was a reminder for us that no country
is immune from terrorism. Indonesia once again
condemns terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
regardless of its origins or motivations. In the same
vein, we also continue to strongly reject any attempt to
link terrorist acts to any specific religion, nationality,
people or civilization. Moreover, Indonesia is fully
committed to fighting terrorism, including terrorist

S/PV. 8496

financing, not only because Indonesia has been a
victim of terrorist attacks as well but also due to our
deep concern that terrorism has been evolving in its
modus operandi, which continuously poses imminent
threats to our society.
With that in mind, Indonesia would like to share
three main standpoints.
First, we need to close the implementation gap in
international instruments related to preventing and
combating the financing of terrorism. The resolution
we adopted today, which Indonesia co-sponsored, has
provided both great momentum and a significant push
for us all to further enhance our common and concerted
efforts in addressing the financing of terrorism. As
such, we must reaffirm our commitment to existing
international instruments, such as the International
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism, relevant resolutions and the recommendations
of the Financial Action Task Force. Nevertheless, we
are still witnessing a wide gap in implementation. It is
therefore both imperative and crucial for us to ensure
that all instruments are implemented effectively.
Secondly, we need to strengthen our adaptive
capabilities in responding to increasingly dynamic
and complex challenges. There is a clear indication
that terrorist financing is shifting towards hightech cyberactivities, including sophisticated online
transactions, which has made it even more difficult for
authorities to detect and curb them. Given the nature
of such challenges, we need to be not only decisive,
consistent and firm in our policies, but also flexible
in our strategies and innovative and practical in
our approach.
Nonetheless, States’ particularities in addressing
the challenges of terrorist financing must also be
taken into account and recognized. For the sake of
effectivity, any measure, including capacity-building,
must therefore correspond to the needs and interests of
any particular State. We cannot afford to have an evil
opponent, with its rapidly changing forms of operation,
outpace our international cooperation.
That brings me to my final point. The fight
against terrorist financing must take place within the
framework of strengthened international cooperation
and coordination. We have no other option. Exchanging
information and best practices; lending technical
assistance and adequate resources for capacitybuilding; enhancing the capacity of financial

19-088799/78

S/PV.8496

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

28/03/2019

intelligence units and law enforcement agencies; and
bolstering coordination among relevant United Nations
agencies, including close consultation and synergy with
international financial institutions, are indeed vital.

and Al-Qaida, held in Paris last year on the theme “No
money for terror”. The Security Council remains key
to international efforts on counter-terrorism, which
includes the financing of terrorist acts.

In that regard, Indonesia, together with Australia,
Malaysia and Thailand, has since 2015 alternately
hosted the Counter-Terrorism Financing Summit,
which advocates for a regional risk assessment to
analyse the threat, vulnerability and impact of the
financing of terrorism in the Asia-Pacific region. At the
domestic level, we adopt an annual national strategy to
strengthen close coordination among relevant agencies,
including the private sector, and ensure that our legal
and institutional infrastructures are adequate to deal
with the emerging methods of terrorist financing.

The Financial Action Task Force (FATF) has the
essential role of setting global standards for preventing
and combating money-laundering, terrorist financing
and proliferation financing. To that end, the United
Kingdom strongly urges all States to implement the
comprehensive international standards embodied in
the revised 40 recommendations on combating moneylaundering and the financing of terrorism proliferation
and its interpretive notes.

In closing, we must adapt to changing technology
and new methods of financing. We must be innovative
in our approach, not only in tracing terrorist money
but also in preventing the creation of terror money. We
must not stop at finding their resources, but use all our
financial resources to curtail terrorist activities.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I join others in
thanking the briefers today for their very informative
presentations and welcome Under-Secretary-General
Voronkov, Mr. Billingslea and Ms. Buku to the Security
Council this morning.
As I said yesterday in this Chamber (see S/PV.8493),
the United Kingdom welcomes the territorial defeat of
Da’esh. However, as Da’esh transforms from a territorial
entity into a covert network, it remains capable of
directing or enabling attacks and perpetrating violent
extremist ideologies. It is as important as ever that
we work together collectively to deny them access to
resources, just as we must tackle the phenomenon of
far-right extremism and terrorism — an issue that my
country has warned about for some years and has been
acting against domestically. Again, we pay tribute to
the victims of the Christchurch attacks.
Across the globe and across a range of groups,
we have seen that terrorists can perpetrate horrific
attacks with small amounts of money, use new payment
technologies and move funds through different
channels, including legitimate enterprises. That is why
the United Kingdom supported and co-sponsored the
landmark resolution 2462 (2019), which we adopted
just now, and we thank France for its leadership on
that initiative, following the high-level International
Conference on Combating the Financing of Da’esh
10/78

I particularly highlight Mr. Billingslea’s words on
effective information-sharing, well beyond financial
and banking sectors alone, and the vital importance
of implementation and prosecution. In that regard, I
thought Ms. Buku’s comments about the importance
of balancing both financial inclusion and financial
integrity were very well judged.
The United Kingdom has taken a number of
measures to strengthen efforts to counter the financing
of terrorism. An important feature of our system is the
strong public-private partnership on terrorist financing
matters. We set up the Joint Money Laundering
Intelligence Taskforce in 2015 to create an environment
in which the financial sector, Government and law
enforcement can exchange and analyse information
and intelligence so as to better detect the movement of
terrorist funds.
Increasing collaboration between Government and
the private sector is a key part of the United Kingdom’s
protection. Allow me to share a case study that
illustrates this.
The London Bridge attack took place on 3 June
2017. The Financial Intelligence Unit of the National
Crime Agency of the United Kingdom initiated an
immediate response, and the case was brought to the
Taskforce within 12 hours of the attack. A few hours
after that briefing, financial institutions were able to
provide assistance to identify the payments for van
hire and established other spending patterns, which
allowed further investigative strategies to be identified.
This assistance was crucial in allowing investigators to
conclude early on that the attack involved only three
attackers with no broader network.
19-08879

28/03/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

A robust legislative framework to give lawenforcement powers the tools they need to tackle the
threats we face is the cornerstone of any effective
terrorist finance regime. This was enhanced in the
United Kingdom by the Criminal Finances Act, which
adds to the ability of United Kingdom law enforcement
to identify, investigate and disrupt terrorist finance
activity and to work effectively with private-sector
partners. The United Kingdom welcomed the Financial
Action Task Force mutual evaluation visit of December
2018 and the positive report we received.
As we strengthen our measures to counter
terrorism and ensure that terrorist groups cannot
exploit vulnerabilities in various sectors, we must
also recognize the vital role played by humanitarian
actors and the roles they play in meeting urgent needs
under some of the most challenging circumstances.
The United Kingdom welcomes the fact that we have
addressed those issues for the first time in this Chapter
VII counter-terrorism resolution.
The effectiveness of counter-terrorism sanctions
also depends on their implementation across the globe.
The United Kingdom will continue to be an active and
global supporter of counter-terrorism sanctions as a key
tool to combat terrorism from Da’esh, Al-Qaida and
their affiliates within the high legal evidence threshold
set by our courts.
Soon after the attacks of 11 September, the Council
came together to adopt resolution 1373 (2001) and
decided that Member States should prevent and suppress
the financing of terrorist acts. Eighteen years later, we
have seen a dramatically evolving terrorist landscape
against an evolving financial and technological context.
We know that prevention, rehabilitation and whole-ofsociety approaches are key to ensuring credible and
sustainable responses. But while we have adapted
our responses, so, too, have terrorist groups. We
therefore commend France for this initiative and thank
Council members for their constructive and proactive
engagement throughout this process, demonstrating
once again the strength of our collective resolve to
combat terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.
We have today agreed an excellent resolution
under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter. We
must not sit back and admire it; we now need to see
effective implementation by all Member States. The
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
must support Member States in identifying how they

S/PV. 8496

can strengthen their own response, and the Office of
Counter-Terrorism then needs to support Member
States in filling the gaps identified.
But above all, it requires all of us to stick to our
task and to press for continuous improvement. Our task
never stops.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland) (spoke in French): Allow
me at the outset, Mr. President, to warmly welcome your
presence here today. I would also like to congratulate
France for having taken the initiative of organizing this
important debate.
(spoke in English)
I wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Vladimir
Voronkov; the President of the Financial Action Task
Force, Mr. Marshall Billingslea; and anti-moneylaundering expert Ms. Mercy Buku for their valuable
contribution to our discussion.
Resolution 2462 (2019), which we have just adopted,
sends a strong message to Member States reminding
them of their existing obligations within the framework
of countering the financing of terrorism and to give a
political impetus to strengthening national policies in
this area. Terrorists have adapted their methodologies,
and it is time to review the tools at the disposal of
Member States.
In discussing measures to counter the financing of
terrorism, we can distinguish four main objectives.
The first is prevention. Sources of revenue for
terrorists change continuously. They know how to move
from perpetrating costly attacks to carrying out lowbudget ones, which can have equally deadly impacts.
When one source is cut off, they will pursue a different
form of revenue generation.
No matter which tools Member States choose to
fight it, we cannot prevent terrorist financing without
addressing the root causes that attract supporters. In
order to counter extremist and terrorist threats, early
action must be taken to respond to the first symptoms
of radicalization in society. Achieving this goal
can be ensured by a properly designed and efficient
system of prevention measures that have an impact
on the individuals and groups that are exposed to
extremist ideologies.
The second objective is timely detection. Countries
should ensure that policymakers, financial intelligence
units and law-enforcement authorities have effective

19-0887911/78

S/PV.8496

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

mechanisms for cooperation in place. The strategic and
operational analyses provided by financial intelligence
units, along with information-sharing at the national
and international levels, should be regarded as a priority.
Poland considers the application of intelligence and
investigative techniques as one of the crucial measures
leading to the detection and disruption of terrorist
undertakings. Joint efforts can lead to revealing red
flags indicating potential misuse of the financial system.
We call on States to apply a risk-based approach,
as required by Financial Action Task Force (FATF)
recommendations. We find national risk assessments
and, in the case of the European Union, supranational
risk assessments to be a significant part of the global
struggle to combat terrorist financing. Country-tailored
risk assessments enable States to address vulnerabilities
in the most comprehensive manner possible.
The third issue is the traceability of suspicious
transactions. Terrorists, whether acting alone or in
organized groups, tend to apply techniques mirroring
those used by money launderers in order to hide money
and erase traces of their incriminating activities. All
of these factors, combined with legal and regulatory
loopholes or differences among States, adversely affect
the tracing and curtailing of financial flows and make
financing investigations more challenging.
The response to the changing trends and new
threats in terrorism financing will be better tailored
when the competent authorities and the private sector
cooperate and share information on a reciprocal
basis and in compliance with international law. The
most difficult task is to follow transactions in real
time. Providing platforms for sharing expertise and
exchanging experience on ways to detect sources of
terrorist funding, methods of financing terrorism and
the evolution of trends is of the utmost importance
as well.
The Polish intelligence unit works actively with
the Counter ISIL Finance Group, operating as one of
the working groups within the Global Coalition against
Daesh. At our initiative, the second meeting of the
Group in 2018 took place in Warsaw. The meeting was
attended by high-level representatives of 32 Member
States, the United Nations, FATF, the European Union
Agency for Law Enforcement Cooperation, the Egmont
Group of Financial Intelligence Units and the Gulf
Cooperation Council.
12/78

28/03/2019

Last but not least are effective asset-freezing
mechanisms. A critical element of the effectiveness
of financial sanctions is timing. Once an individual or
entity’s designation by the United Nations becomes a
matter of public record, Member States should facilitate
the process of circulating information to the actors
involved in a timely manner.
In the Anti-Money Laundering and Combating
Financing of Terrorism Act, adopted in July 2018,
Poland introduced new provisions implementing the
regulations of the Anti-Money Laundering Directive
of the European Union, aimed at a more effective
application of asset-freezing mechanisms. We should
cooperate on improving the quality of data concerning
entities on sanctions lists, ensuring efficient and
effective information-exchange channels to verify
potential hits with designations. We cannot turn a blind
eye to the unintended consequences of sanctions, which
can have an effect on humanitarian actions. That is why
Member States, when designating and implementing
measures to counter the financing of terrorism, should
take into account their potential effect on the activities
of non-governmental actors.
Poland is convinced that the relevant Security
Council resolutions and the standards of the Financial
Action Task Force constitute a universal and tangible
framework within which Member States should plan and
build their measures in combating terrorism financing.
Only by pooling our efforts and sharing knowledge can
we make it work.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We
welcome you, Mr. President, as you preside over this
important meeting. We also welcome the adoption
today of resolution 2462 (2019) . We commend your
delegation’s efforts in facilitating its adoption, which
will foster international cooperation in preventing and
combating the financing of terrorism. I also thank the
briefers Mr Voronkov, Mr. Billingslea and Ms. Buku
for their important briefings.
Over the past two decades, terrorist groups have
developed advanced tools to ensure their continued
ability to carry out terrorist activities, thereby posing
a threat to international peace and security. Preventing
and combating the financing of terrorism is therefore
one of the most important pillars in countering the
phenomenon of terrorism throughout the world.
Terrorist groups finance their activities by
different means, including transnational organized
19-08879

28/03/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

crime, ransom, arms and drug trafficking, the illicit
trade in natural resources and extortion. That has
called for decisive action by the organ entrusted with
the maintenance of international peace and security
through the adoption of many resolutions to strengthen
prevention and combating of financing terrorism, the
most important of which is resolution 1373 (2001), which
has developed binding legal rules as international terms
of reference underpinning the action of the Council
in its adoption of new resolutions on preventing and
countering terrorism.
Those rules have compelled all Member States to
take effective, as well as preventive, measures aimed
at preventing and combating the financing of terrorist
acts, while refraining from any tacit or direct support
for entities and individuals involved in such terrorist
acts. That also includes ending recruitment by terrorist
groups and providing terrorists with weapons. The
Council has continued to address this phenomenon
through the adoption of resolutions 2253 (2015) and
2368 (2017), which have strengthened measures to
prevent and combat the financing of terrorism and
to tackle the financing of Da’esh at its roots. Those
measures have also fostered the sanctions measures
against Da’esh and Al-Qaida.
We have made great strides towards reducing
criminal activities of a terrorist nature. However,
despite the success of the international community
in that regard, the threat posed by terrorism and its
destructive impact persists. The ways and means to
which terrorist groups resort in order to finance their
activities attest to that. We should therefore step up our
efforts to strengthen international peace and security
through the effective implementation of international
resolutions, especially those that deal with preventing
or combating the financing of terrorism. Today’s
resolution 2462 (2019) also reflects the firm resolve
of Member States to continue building on those past
successes in order to pave the way towards defeating
this heinous scourge from which millions of people
have suffered.
One of the most important factors helping us today
in preventing and combating the financing of terrorism
is international, regional and subregional cooperation in
the following areas: exchanging information; refraining
from inciting terrorist activities, controlling financial
support for terrorist groups through the implementation
of the measures contained in relevant Security Council
resolutions, and training law-enforcement personnel.

S/PV. 8496

We also need to address the nexus linking crime and
terrorism, focus on youth and education and conclude
bilateral and multilateral conventions.
We therefore value cooperation among the relevant
United Nations agencies, Member States and regional
organizations in capacity-building and the exchange of
experiences. We look forward to further cooperation
and urge all Member States to take additional measures
to tackle the root causes of financing terrorism by
implementing financial sanctions imposed by the
Security Council. We should also raise awareness
concerning the use of donations and information-sharing
in connection with financial transactions in cooperation
with banks and competent Government authorities with
the aim of establishing financial investigation units
and ratifying international protocols and conventions
on counter-terrorism and transnational organized
crime, including the International Convention for
the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism, while
joining and implementing them as soon as possible. In
that regard, we welcome the efforts of the Financial
Action Task Force (FATF) to develop risk indicators
related to the financing of terrorism.
The State of Kuwait is aware of the threats posed
by the financing of terrorism and is working to combat
that scourge. We have therefore adopted a law to combat
money-laundering through a number of precautionary
measures, including the requirement that financial
institutions report all suspicious transactions. We have
also developed controls on the movement of cash, and
established a financial intelligence unit to collect and
analyse information about revenues suspected to be
related to crimes.
In 2017, the State of Kuwait chaired the Middle
East and North Africa Financial Action Task Force
to combat money-laundering and financing terrorism.
This group is seeking to adopt and implement the 40
FATF recommendations and strives to encourage joint
action to identify issues related to money-laundering
and the financing of terrorism at the regional level,
while exchanging expertise and developing solutions.
In conclusion, we reiterate our condemnation of
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, regardless
of its motives. It is a criminal act that cannot be justified
or linked to any religion, nationality, civilization
or ethnic group. Combating terrorism requires the
mobilization of international efforts to address that

19-0887913/78

S/PV.8496

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

criminal scourge by taking measures to ensure respect
for human rights, the rule of law and good governance
Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, I would like to
thank our briefers, Under-Secretary-General Voronkov,
Mr. Billingslea and Ms. Buku, for their insightful and
informative briefings.
Our efforts to combat the financing of terrorism
need to be part of an all-encompassing and holistic
approach. We need to fight the financing of terrorism
with all the instruments at our disposal. I congratulate
our friends from France on the adoption of today’s
important resolution 2462 (2019) and commend the
French leadership in bringing it to fruition. Germany is
very proud to be a sponsor of this important resolution.
Our fight against terrorism cannot be successful
unless we effectively cut the financial bloodline that
keeps the terrorist threat alive. Fighting terrorism is
not only a matter of military force, effective police
work and successful prevention and deradicalization;
above all, it is a race for knowledge. We have to find
the marks left by terrorists and trace their steps back to
their homes. The money trail helps us to do that. But,
of course, terrorists do their best to cover their tracks.
Many of them avoid the official banking sector and
instead use informal, more anonymous ways to transfer
money in an increasingly sophisticated way, as we have
learned once again from our briefers today. That is a
serious threat to our security and those loopholes must
be addressed. The resolution that we just adopted does
exactly that. States are called on to keep a watchful
eye on those informal systems, and Germany strongly
supports that effort. Informal money transfers should
be regulated, and we commend the Financial Action
Task Force (FATF) for its work in that field.
Today’s debate also seeks to share good practices
in countering the financing of terrorism. We are not
starting from scratch. With the FATF, we can already
rely on global standards agreed on by eminent specialists
and experts in the field. Let me very briefly highlight
some measures that we have taken in Germany and the
European Union (EU).
In the European Union, in addition to the
implementation of Security Council sanctions, we fight
terrorist financing with two autonomous sanctions
regimes, one against terrorist groups in general and the
other against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
and Al-Qaida specifically. The EU is also constantly
reviewing and improving its own internal regime with
14/78

28/03/2019

regard to anti-money-laundering and countering the
financing of terrorism. In Germany, laws to that end
have been tightened even further and organizations
with ties to terrorist financing have been exposed
and banned.
Before concluding, I would like to address a few
of the concerns that some humanitarian organizations
have expressed during the discussions in recent
weeks. Many of us have been receiving telephone
calls from humanitarian organizations, including the
International Committee of the Red Cross and others.
Those organizations fulfil a crucial role in many
conflict regions by providing indispensable aid to those
who are the hardest hit by violent conflict. For the
most vulnerable, their work often makes the difference
between life and death. Some of those organizations
have voiced concern about the possible negative
consequences of resolution 2462 (2019) for their work,
and we feel that they deserve to be listened to closely.
Without money one cannot provide humanitarian
assistance to people in need. Financial transactions
are needed to buy food and medicine. It is therefore
paramount that we do not erect barriers to humanitarian
assistance by restricting the access of humanitarian
personnel to funds in conflict regions. We believe
that the resolution that we adopted today strikes the
necessary balance in a very convincing way, promoting
effective counter-terrorism measures, on the one hand,
and a safe space for principled humanitarian action,
including with the necessary financial transactions, on
the other.
We know that every text can be interpreted, but
I want to be absolutely clear. Today’s resolution must
not be misused to criminalize impartial, neutral and
independent humanitarian action. Rather, it reaffirms
and reminds us of our obligations under international
law, including international humanitarian law, human
rights law and refugee law. All the counter-terrorism
measures that we have agreed on today must comply
with those bodies of law. The resolution is absolutely
clear on that issue. Safeguarding the necessary space
for humanitarian action is therefore by no means a step
backwards in our counter-terrorism efforts. On the
contrary, it is a step forward in an approach that takes
international law seriously.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the delegation of France,
and to Mr. Le Drian personally, for organizing this
19-08879

28/03/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

meeting on combating the financing of terrorism. The
Security Council has been actively working on this
matter since the beginning of the year. Following the
consideration of the current threats in the framework
of the presentation of the Secretary-General’s eighth
report (S/2019/103) on the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL), and the exchange on national practices at
the Arria Formula meeting led by France, the Council
made the right decision to take concrete action. We
affirm our support for resolution 2462 (2019), adopted
today, and call on all States to tackle its implementation
responsibly. That difficult task will be possible only
with the active support and coordination of the United
Nations, making use of the unique expert capacity and
effective mechanisms of the Financial Action Task Force
(FATF), as well as by involving non-State structures in
combating the financing of terrorism. In that regard,
we would like to thank Mr. Vladimir Voronkov,
Mr. Marshall Billingslea and Ms. Mercy Buku for their
insightful contributions to the discussion.
The examples of ISIL and Al-Qaida clearly
demonstrate that the intensity level of terrorist activity
depends directly on its funding levels. Adequate
material resources enable terrorists to prepare and
carry out attacks, attract new recruits and actively
counter law-enforcement agencies. In order to expose
terrorist financing channels quickly, it is essential to
conduct a thorough risk assessment. At our suggestion,
the issue of identifying ISIL’s new sources of support
has become a priority for FATF. In June 2016, Russia
initiated regular updates in analysing financial flows
associated with ISIL. In accordance with today’s
resolution, we urge States to actively participate in
FATF’s efforts to disseminate the results of the analysis
and draw practical conclusions from them.
As the extensive network of terrorist syndicates
in the Middle East is being liquidated, the facts of the
various sources of support for terrorists in Syria and
Iraq, including support from States, are coming to light.
The scope of that improper conduct is extraordinarily
broad, ranging from supplying so-called non-lethal
assistance to concealing their companies’ cooperation
with militants. Ultimately, States that apply double
standards and politicize the counter-terrorism agenda
themselves risk becoming targets of terrorists. They
should think about that sooner.
One might say that it has now become fashionable
at the United Nations to talk about the prevention
of terrorism and violent extremism. Some even

S/PV. 8496

naively believe that promoting so-called soft power
instruments is enough to prevent terrorist attacks.
However, it is not every criminal, by a long shot, who
can be re-educated, rehabilitated and reintegrated. And
it is even less acceptable to replace criminal justice
with such efforts. Anyone who has been involved in
terrorist activity, including its financing, should be
held accountable. The Security Council has termed
any dealings with terrorists a serious crime regardless
of whether the money or other material resources are
spent on organizing specific terrorist attacks or on
extremists’ personal needs. Attempts to disregard
obligations in that regard are in violation of resolutions
1373 (2001), 2178 (2014), 2199 (2015), 2253 (2015), 2368
(2017) and the one we have just adopted, as well as the
FATF standards.
We are grateful to the French delegation and to
Council members who take a constructive approach
for their support to Russia’s proposal to include in
the resolution’s scope issues related to combating the
supply of weapons to terrorists. Today the Security
Council has significantly strengthened its toolkit in
that area. We emphasize that the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons is a serious crime that must
be prosecuted to the full extent of the law. The need to
criminalize the full range of relevant acts is contained in
paragraph 27 of the resolution. We call on the CounterTerrorism Committee to pay close attention to that and
to immediately start assessing States’ compliance. The
same applies to the various measures of countering the
illegal trade of small arms and light weapons within the
framework of the Madrid Guiding Principles on foreign
terrorist fighters.
Of course, some countries will require assistance
in implementing new measures for combating the
financing of terrorists and preventing their access to
weapons. We are ready to extend support in various
areas to the efforts of the United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism in these priority areas and to give
technical assistance to partners through regional
platforms and bilaterally.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): At the outset, I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Voronkov, Mr. Billingslea and
Ms. Buku for their briefings.
Last week Belgium commemorated one of the most
tragic attacks in our country’s history. On 22 March
2016, no fewer than 32 people died and 340 others were

19-0887915/78

S/PV.8496

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

injured, some very seriously. As we remember the
victims and their families, this anniversary reminds us
how unjust and indiscriminate terrorist attacks are. The
tragic attacks in two mosques in Christchurch on Friday,
15 March, show that no part of the world is immune to
that phenomenon. We must remain vigilant and never
let down our guard. In that context, resolution 2462
(2019), which the Security Council has just adopted,
is essential. Belgium would like to express its deep
appreciation to France for its initiative and its untiring
efforts during the consultation process leading to the
resolution’s adoption.
Belgium attaches considerable importance to
combating terrorist financing. There is already an
important set of international conventions calling on
States to combat the financing of terrorism, but the
Council’s new resolution, adopted under Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations, brings them together
coherently and transparently. It also fills important
gaps related to the rapid evolution of the electronic
financing infrastructure.
For Belgium, it is essential, first and foremost, to
understand the nature of the problem. Terrorists abuse
both legitimate and illegitimate means of raising funds
and are constantly finding new ways to do so. Belgium
is particularly concerned about the increasing use of
trafficking in human beings, sexual exploitation and
wildlife trafficking for terrorist purposes. In recent
years, wildlife trafficking, which is a form of organized
crime, has been particularly successful in generating
considerable profits for terrorist organizations in
Central Africa such as Boko Haram. In order to
effectively combat this problem, it is crucial for States
to develop a legal foundation for criminalizing terrorist
financing, as well as effective financial intelligence
services, in cooperation with the private sector and
civil-society organizations. Those services must be able
to share their information with competent authorities
at both national and international levels, in a balanced
manner and in a way that does not affect the fulfilment
of States’ obligations under international human rights
instruments. The Financial Action Task Force has done
significant work by establishing international standards
for the creation of legal, regulatory and operational
measures to combat terrorist financing, and we welcome
the fact that the new resolution asks Member States to
implement those standards and recommendations.
We would like to reiterate our view that no measures
taken in the field of counter-terrorism should hinder
16/78

28/03/2019

the work of humanitarian organizations whose work
is neutral and impartial. Not only are we convinced
that that is the most effective approach for a successful
counter-terrorism strategy since its harmful effects are
limited, but we must also remember that we agreed on
those fundamental principles almost 70 years ago when
we adopted the Geneva Conventions, a legal framework
that is as relevant today as it was then.
While we understand that the reality on the ground
is often very complex and that terrorist organizations
can operate in war zones, we believe it is important to
take into account the potentially harmful effects of our
counter-terrorism policy on the work of humanitarian
organizations. We therefore believe that mitigation
measures should be taken to prevent the possible
negative consequences of this policy, or at least reduce
them to a minimum. Let us prioritize the implementation
of this resolution.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): My delegation thanks France and Minister
Le Drian for organizing this open debate on preventing
and combating the financing of terrorism and for its
leadership on this important issue. We also welcome
the participation of Vice-Minister Fachir of Indonesia. I
also want to take this opportunity to thank the briefers,
Mr. Voronkov, Mr. Billingslea and Ms. Buku, for
their enlightening presentations, which help us better
understand the changes in the global architecture for
countering the financing of terrorism.
Equatorial Guinea associates itself with the
statement to be made by Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed
this afternoon, on behalf of the African Union.
Resolution 2462 (2019), which the Security Council
just adopted unanimously, is a key tool in our efforts to
eradicate terrorism, its financing and money-laundering.
We see it as one of the ways of attacking the pillars of
terrorism. The Republic of Equatorial Guinea strongly
condemns terrorism. We firmly believe that terrorist
acts are unjustifiable and constitute one of the most
serious threats to peace and security in the world. As
the Council has noted in resolution 1373 (2001), among
others, preventing and combating the financing of
terrorism is central to ensuring that the responses of the
United Nations, regional and subregional organizations
and States to terrorist threats are effective and efficient.
In Central Africa, we are concerned about the
spread of terrorism due to the presence of terrorist
groups such as Boko Haram and the Lord’s Resistance
19-08879

28/03/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Army, among others; the potential transit of foreign
terrorist fighters returning to their countries; and
the growing collaboration between terrorist groups,
transnational organized crime on land and at sea and
armed groups. That expansion is facilitated by access to
resources and funding, which increases the complexity
of the fight against terrorism. Like other regions,
Central Africa is vulnerable to money-laundering and
terrorist financing. To address that vulnerability, the
States of the Central African Economic and Monetary
Community (CEMAC) adopted regulations against
money-laundering and terrorist financing in 2010.
Those regulations are currently being revised to better
align them with the requirements of Council resolution
1373 (2001) and other relevant resolutions.
Equatorial Guinea is also a member of the Action
Group against Money Laundering in Central Africa,
which is a specialized body of CEMAC and an associate
member of the Financial Action Task Force. At least
11 types of terrorist financing have been identified in
the region and recommendations for their limitation
and elimination have been proposed.
Equatorial Guinea condemns the entire range of
terrorist financing, including by means of the abusive
use of non-profit organizations, new methods of
payment and money-transfer companies, the illegal
exploitation of natural resources, kidnappings and
human trafficking, as well as the exploitation, sexual
abuse and rape committed by those groups.
Owing to the subregional threat, we have no doubt
that national efforts to suppress and eradicate the
sources of terrorist financing should be coordinated
with regional and international efforts. In that regard,
Equatorial Guinea has ratified the International
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism. Following CEMAC regulations, Equatorial
Guinea established the National Agency for Financial
Investigation in 2007 and is investing in its effective
operationalization so that it can prevent and control
financial terrorism. We believe that it is important
for Governments to cooperate with the private sector,
civil society and other sectors, while maintaining full
respect for State sovereignty and laws. At the same
time, we reiterate that the most effective way to prevent
terrorism, violent extremism and conflicts is through
investment in sustainable development.
Terrorism can be defeated only through a sustained
and comprehensive approach involving the effective

S/PV. 8496

participation and cooperation of all States. That
requires using all the necessary means, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations and, to the extent
possible, international law, including applicable human
rights law, refugee law and international humanitarian
law standards.
In that regard, we recognize the importance of
the role of financial sanctions in disrupting terrorist
activities. We therefore commend the work of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism, and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1267 (1999), concerning Al-Qaida and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities, and
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1988 (2011), on the Taliban, and their
respective analytical and monitoring teams.
We also recognize the important work of the Office
of Counter-Terrorism and others, such as the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, INTERPOL
and the Financial Action Task Force for their support
to States in training and technical assistance in the
implementation of resolutions and other financial
counter-measures. We encourage increased cooperation
and coordination among the various United Nations
entities in that regard, as well as their support to
regional and subregional bodies, such as the African
Union and CEMAC.
In conclusion, we reiterate that all States must be
united in the fight against terrorism in all its forms.
Equatorial Guinea reiterates its full commitment to
cooperate in that crucial work.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We are pleased to congratulate the
French Republic for the important work it has been
doing in the fight against terrorism financing and for
organizing this interesting debate where, without a
doubt, we have enriched ourselves with the information
shared. We are also grateful for the time taken by
Mr. Voronkov, Mr. Billingslea and Ms. Buku to enhance
this debate with their knowledge.
The Dominican Republic reaffirms its commitment
to combating all terrorist and terrorist-related activities.
In that regard, we applaud the efforts of all the
delegations of the member countries of the Security
Council, in particular the French delegation, which,
through their tireless work and after long hours

19-0887917/78

S/PV.8496

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

of negotiations, have succeeded in adopting today
resolution 2462 (2019), which is yet another tool for
combating terrorist financing activities.
Security Council resolutions have laid a solid
normative foundation that will serve as a frame of
reference for the national legislation of the various
States and strengthen the national legal framework
established to criminalize and punish terrorist
activities. For that reason, the Dominican Republic is
pleased to be a co-sponsor of the resolution that we
have adopted today. The Dominican State understands
the vulnerability of economic sectors to the financing
of terrorism or terrorism-related activities. That is why
we are working on an action plan to prevent and combat
the financing of terrorism, as part of the strategic plan
of the National Committee against Money Laundering
and Terrorist Financing.
In order to develop better communication and
cooperation between Dominican authorities and the
private sector, my country recognizes the importance
of investigating and identifying the areas that should
have priority in that bisectoral relationship in the
fight against terrorist financing. In that regard, the
Dominican State, since the enactment of Law 155-17
against money laundering and terrorist financing, has
identified the importance of training the private sector
on the scope of that law and has held frequent seminars
on its application and implementation.
The Dominican Republic stresses how important
it is for States to work internally to implement the
standards established in the text adopted today. That is
essential if the resolution is to be an effective tool in the
fight against terrorist financing.
Finally, we call on the Member States to take
account the relevance of the work carried out by
non-profit and non-governmental organizations. We
must always work together to find a formula that
ensures that the implementation of measures to prevent
and suppress terrorism financing does not end up
negatively affecting to the point of cancelling out the
excellent work that those organizations do.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes this debate on one of the most
worrisome issues of today — the prevention and fight
against the financing of terrorism. I would like to
congratulate all the excellent speakers we have heard
so far on the quality of their statements.
18/78

28/03/2019

At the outset, I would like to underscore that Côte
d’Ivoire associates itself with the statement to be made
by Ambassador Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent
Observer of the Africa Union to the United Nations.
In view of the interest and importance that your
country, Madam President, attaches to this important
issue, my delegation welcomes the adoption by
consensus of resolution 2462 (2019), which comes at a
time when the constantly changing threat of terrorism
is at the heart of our concerns.
Today, despite the remarkable progress we
have made, humankind is still unfortunately under
the constant threat of this phenomenon, which is
continuously evolving and creating new challenges for
our world. By taking advantage of loopholes in financial
regimes and current regulations and exploiting informal
channels and technological innovations, terrorist
groups continue to have access to significant resources
to finance their destabilizing activities.
The African continent has not escaped that global
scourge; indeed, it has been ravaged by it. Various
studies have shown that terrorism in Africa is fuelled
by trafficking of all kinds, owing to the weakness of
States and the high level of poverty. Those sources of
funding are essential to the activities of such groups,
which sometimes even abandon their traditional donors
and become actors in the production of wealth and
capital accumulation. It is therefore essential that the
international community tackle the root of the problem
by drying up all sources of terrorist financing.
The magnitude of the threat requires a collective
assessment of our current control strategies and
normative frameworks in order to provide a more
appropriate and better coordinated response that
will eliminate any gaps or dysfunctions that could
be exploited by terrorists. In our view, that approach
involves measures at the international, regional and
national levels.
At the international level, combating the financing
of terrorism is a global security priority that requires
mobilizing all stakeholders, harmonizing legal
frameworks and pooling resources. In that context, the
United Nations has a leading role to play in promoting
the values of multilateralism and international
cooperation. In that regard, better synergy among United
Nations entities is essential, along with improving
their cooperation with States and with regional and
subregional organizations. My country would like
19-08879

28/03/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

to take this opportunity to once again commend the
high-level International Conference on Combating
the Financing of Da’esh and Al-Qaida, held in Paris
on 25 and 26 April 2018 on the theme “No money for
terror”, and to reaffirm its support for the conference’s
outcomes. In the face of a threat that knows no bounds,
and in a spirit of complementarity and solidarity,
countries should also promote multifaceted cooperation,
particularly in the justice, police and financial sectors.
As the sharing of information and best practices is a
key strategic element in this fight, particular attention
should be paid to establishing formal cooperation
mechanisms between the customs services of various
countries and increasing border surveillance.
At the regional level, the Intergovernmental
Action Group against Money Laundering in West
Africa constitutes a major response and a contribution
by the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) to fighting money-laundering. That
specialized agency works with States, Governments
and financial institutions operating in ECOWAS
countries to strengthen their capacity to combat
money-laundering and the financing of terrorism.
ECOWAS’s support has enabled member States to
adopt legislation to combat the financing of terrorism,
establish corresponding institutional frameworks and
strengthen cooperation among their national services
and international partners.
At the national level, my delegation is of the view that
it is incumbent on States to strengthen their legal tools
for countering terrorism, especially by criminalizing
terrorism financing and fully implementing United
Nations sanctions. With that in mind, beginning in 2015,
Côte d’Ivoire’s National Assembly enacted a terrorism
suppression law that criminalizes a number of actual
terrorist acts as well as related offences, including
recruitment, association, incitement and provocation
to commit terrorist acts. In 2018, we strengthened our
counter-terrorism system by criminalizing the provision
or collection of funds for financing terrorism-related
objectives and the organization on our national territory
of travel by persons to another State in order to enable
them to participate in the commission, organization or
preparation of terrorist acts, provide or receive terrorism
training or participate in other activities that facilitate
terrorist acts, including recruitment, in accordance
with resolution 2253 (2015). As part of its strategy for
combating terrorism financing, in November 2016 Côte
d’Ivoire enacted a law on combating money-laundering

S/PV. 8496

and terrorism financing, in accordance with the relevant
directive of the West African Economic and Monetary
Union. With the support of the World Bank, we plan
to conduct a national money-laundering and terrorismfinancing risk assessment, in line with the obligations
of the West African Economic and Monetary Union.
Côte d’Ivoire has also signed and ratified the
main regional and international legal instruments
on combating terrorism. In addition, we have begun
the process of drafting the provisions of a uniform
national assets-freeze law and have already adopted
a law on the freezing of funds in accordance with
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1267 (1999). We have also
provided for the establishment of an administrative
freeze advisory committee by decree. Under article 5
of our law No. 2016-992, non-profit organizations are
now subject to anti-money-laundering and terrorismfinancing obligations.
Following the tragic terrorist attack in March 2016
in the coastal city of Grand-Bassam, Côte d’Ivoire
strengthened its anti-terrorism measures, taking steps
to increase its vigilance in order to prevent further
terrorist attacks by stepping up intelligence; improving
the operational capabilities of counter-terrorism units
by strengthening material resources, training and
international cooperation; and raising public awareness
on what to do in the event of a terrorist attack. In
addition, our national financial information processing
unit, created in 2006, is fully operational. We have
also strengthened identification procedures for mobile
telephone operators. Lastly, in partnership with France,
Côte d’Ivoire launched the International CounterTerrorism Academy, with a ceremony attended by
Minister Le Drian, on 18 October 2018 in Jacqueville,
30 kilometres outside Abidjan.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire is of the view that
preventing and combating the financing of terrorism
requires mobilization and collective efforts at all levels
in order to make better use of the tools at our disposal
and to implement new measures. We are ready to play
our full part in that regard.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank France for its initiative in convening today’s
open debate on an issue as important as the financing
of terrorism. Today’s consensus adoption of resolution
2462 (2019), submitted by France, gives the fight against
terrorism renewed political impetus by addressing
its sources of financing, while endorsing the various

19-0887919/78

S/PV.8496

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

elements of the outcome of the high-level International
Conference on Combating the Financing of Da’esh and
Al-Qaida, held in Paris in April 2018 on the theme
“No money for terror”. We also thank Mr. Vladimir
Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General of the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, Mr. Marshall
Billingslea, President of the Financial Action Task Force
(FATF), and Ms. Mercy Buku, expert in anti-money
laundering and countering the financing of terrorism,
for their informative briefings.
Peru believes that combating the financing of
terrorism is not only an international obligation but also
a strategic option for States to prevent, limit and impede
the capacity of terrorist groups to plan and carry out
their actions. In that regard, we want to highlight the fact
that today’s resolution addresses traditional and new
forms of terrorism financing, particularly its conduct
through financial institutions, the abuse of legitimate
businesses and non-profit organizations, including shell
corporations and organizations, and the use of virtual
payment methods and other financial technologies.
We also want to stress that the resolution is concerned
about terrorists who benefit from organized crime and
that it recognizes that the nature and scope of these
links may vary according to the context, emphasizing
the importance of coordinating efforts to address this
new challenge. But while terrorist groups do link up
with criminal groups to obtain funding, there are also
broader and more complex dynamics of cooperation
between the two. In that regard, we believe it vital to
continue examining the question of the nexus between
those phenomena.
Faced with that constantly evolving scenario, the
resolution’s emphasis on strengthening inter-agency
coordination is very relevant, especially with regard
to the need to intensify and accelerate informationand intelligence-sharing, in line with FATF
recommendations. For that reason, we also believe that
the work conducted by financial intelligence units is
essential, and we want to highlight the resolution’s call
for strengthening their capacities, which we have also
proposed within the framework of the Financial Action
Task Force of Latin America, currently chaired by
Peru. In that regard, I would like to highlight the need
for greater support from the international community
so that we can strengthen our national capacities.
Similarly, international cooperation is essential to
effectively combating this scourge. I want to underscore
the significant role played in that regard by the Counter20/78

28/03/2019

Terrorism Committee and its Executive Directorate.
Peru also makes available its experience in the fight
against terrorism.
Our country is committed to the fight against
terrorism financing, and recognizes that States must
consider the potential effects of the actions that they
take in that regard on humanitarian assistance efforts.
I conclude by reiterating our firmest rejection of
terrorism and renewing our solidarity with the victims
of such heinous acts. Bearing in mind the competencies
of each multilateral body, Peru will continue to support
any action that contributes to a comprehensive and
objective response to this scourge that is in accord with
international law.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): We thank
France for raising this issue in the Security Council
and for its efforts to generate the groundbreaking
counter-terrorism financing resolution we adopted this
morning (resolution 2642 (2019)). We also thank our
briefers today.
The Security Council has been instrumental in
building a global framework for Member States to
counter the financing of terrorism, beginning with the
adoption of resolution 1373 (2001), which we drafted
after 11 September 2001, which provides the foundation
for our global counter-terrorism financing efforts. The
Council has come a long way to tackle the financing
of terrorist groups, including by adapting our robust
sanctions regime against the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIS) and Al-Qaida pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) to the evolving threat we face and adopting
important resolutions, such as resolutions 2199 (2015),
2253 (2015) and 2368 (2017), which target the use of oil
and antiquities by ISIS to raise funds as well as other
illicit activities.
The comprehensive resolution adopted today is an
important step forward in adapting United Nations tools
to address today’s counter-terrorism financing threat.
As we heard from the President of the Financial Action
Task Force (FATF), United States Assistant Secretary
of the Treasury Billingslea, the resolution brings the
obligations of Member States under Security Council
resolutions further into line with the FATF standard
on criminalizing terrorism financing. Specifically,
the resolution obligates Member States to criminalize
terrorism financing even in the absence of a link to
a specific terrorist act, so that States are equipped to
stymie the general operations of terrorist groups and
19-08879

28/03/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

individual terrorists. This new and very important
global obligation will help ensure that Member States
have the frameworks in place to utilize effectively
an important counter-terrorism financing tool, the
prosecution of those who knowingly finance and
otherwise support terrorist groups.
The Security Council is clear in its intent when
creating this obligation. As we have reaffirmed many
times before, Member States must implement resolution
2462 (2019) in a manner consistent with their obligations
under international law, including international
humanitarian law, international human rights law and
international refugee law. The United States supports
the essential work of humanitarian actors and relief
agencies that provide life-saving assistance to those
suffering through conflict. We are the single-largest
humanitarian donor worldwide and urge Member States
to coordinate and strengthen risk-mitigation efforts,
so that those in need can receive aid and so that the
terrorists who cause their suffering do not benefit from
such assistance. The resolution adopted today also
underscores the critical need for the full and effective
implementation of all targeted financial sanctions
flowing from the United Nations sanctions regime
against ISIS and Al-Qaida pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999), as well as from the domestic sanctions regime of
each Member State pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001),
so as to fully disrupt terrorism financing.
The United States employs a comprehensive
approach to counter terrorism financing. We use
financial sanctions, other financial measures and
law-enforcement action to cut off terrorists from
their sources of revenue and from the international
financial system, which involves close coordination
and information-sharing with our inter-agency
and international partners. It also involves strong
collaboration with the private-sector, non-profit and
civil society groups to share and receive information
on terrorist-financing threats. We must disrupt the
financing of groups like Hizbullah that export violence
and instability across the Middle East and have a
long history of destabilizing activity that continues
to threaten global peace and security. Hizbullah,
which continues to fight wars on two fronts, in Syria
and Yemen, uses an increasingly sophisticated array
of tools and international networks of companies and
brokers, including seemingly legitimate businesses,
in the construction and pharmaceutical sectors, for
example, to generate revenue, conceal the procurement

S/PV. 8496

of weapons and circumvent controls to disrupt moneylaundering and terrorism financing.
Social networks and tools cannot be tackled in
isolation, or in any one corner of the globe. We cannot
let proven terrorist groups such as Hizbullah continue
to stay one step ahead of our international monitoring
and counter-terrorism financing efforts. All of us
must recognize Hizbullah and other such groups for
what they are: a global threat to peace and security.
The terrorist-financing threat that Hizbullah, ISIS and
Al-Qaida pose requires employing the full range of
tools highlighted in today’s resolution.
We enhance the impact of our individual efforts
to counter terrorism financing by working with
key international partners. For example, the United
States, together with its fellow co-Chair, Saudi
Arabia, established the Terrorist Financing Targeting
Center, in Riyadh, to facilitate coordinated disruptive
actions, information-sharing and capacity-building
to target terrorist-financing networks and activities
of mutual concern that pose national security threats
to the United States and the Gulf. Together, we are
countering evolving terrorist-financing networks,
including those supporting ISIS, Al-Qaida, Hizbullah
and Lashkar-e-Taiba. Since the Center’s inception,
in May 2017, we have implemented three rounds of
multilateral designations, sanctioning 36 individuals
and entities. We also work multilaterally through the
FATF, the global standard-setting body that promotes
the effective implementation of its standards through
a rigorous peer assessment and follow-up process, to
ensure States are taking action to combat terrorism
financing, money-laundering and the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction.
In conclusion, we must continue to bring all of our
tools to bear on combating terrorism financing around
the world. Our collective efforts have had a tremendous
impact thus far and, while there is much more work to do,
today’s unanimous vote reinforces the Council’s resolve
to suppress the financing of terrorism worldwide.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
supports the convening of today’s open debate on
preventing and combating the financing of terrorism.
China welcomes Foreign Minister Le Drian to New
York to preside over the meeting.
China supports the adoption of resolution 2642
(2019), on preventing and combating the financing of
terrorism. We appreciate the efforts of France. I would

19-0887921/78

S/PV.8496

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

also like to thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov
and President Billingslea for their briefings. We also
thank Ms. Buku for her briefing.
Preventing and combating the financing of
terrorism is an important part of responding to the threat
of terrorism and conducting international counterterrorism cooperation. Terrorism is the common enemy
of humankind. The future of all countries is a shared
one, and no country remain immune from the scourge
of terrorism. In order to completely eliminate terrorism
financing in the international financial system, we
must enhance our awareness of a community of a
shared future for humankind, commit to deepening
international cooperation and effectively implement
the relevant Security Council and other United Nations
resolutions throughout the world and follow the
technical standards, such as those recommended by the
Financial Action Task Force (FATF). China supports
the international community in strengthening the fight
against international terrorism in the light of the trends
and characteristics of terrorism financing, and we
would like to propose the following.
First, we must strictly abide by the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
maximize the central role of the United Nations and
the Security Council. The international fight against
terrorism includes preventing and combating the
financing of terrorism, and in that fight we must follow
international law and the norms governing international
relations and comply with the United Nations Charter
and Council resolutions.
Secondly, we need multiple measures and
integrated policies to address symptoms and root
causes. Eliminating financing for terrorism requires
the coordination and cooperation of political,
security, economic, financial, intelligence, science
and technology, and various other sectors. Special
commitments should be made to eradicate the sources
of, and breeding grounds for, terrorism. Efforts should
be made to assist Member States in poverty reduction
and alleviation and the realization of sustainable
development, and to encourage dialogue on an equal
footing and peace and harmony among different
civilizations and religions.
Thirdly, we must make advances in practical
cooperation in combating the financing of terrorism
and vigorously strengthen the capacity-building of
Member States. The fight against terrorism financing
22/78

28/03/2019

involves many sectors and complicated issues of
a tactical nature. Developing countries face the
daunting challenge of a lack of capacity in financial
regulation and lack of resources. In order to prevent the
shortcomings of any given country from resulting in
an influx of external risks and thereby forming a gap,
and to prevent any place from becoming a safe haven
for terrorist financing, the international community
should vigorously strengthen its provision of technical
and capacity-building assistance to Member States, in
a joint effort to respond to the threat of the financing
of terrorism.
Fourthly, standards should be unified in order
to resolutely combat all forms of terrorism and
its financing. Terrorism and its financing must be
steadfastly fought against, no matter the location,
pretext or target country. The international community
and Member States should reach consensus and develop
synergies to effectively respond to all sources, ways
and channels of terrorist financing. Special attention
should be given to regulating the Internet, so as to cut
off terrorist organizations’ use for their proliferation
and cyberfinancing.
China attaches great importance to preventing and
combating the financing of terrorism, with enhanced
regulatory mechanisms to combat money-laundering,
financing for terrorism and tax evasion as important
ways to participate in global governance and further
open up our financial services. China has been deeply
involved in the work of the FATF and the Eurasian
Group on Combating Money Laundering and Financing
of Terrorism (EAG). On 21 February, the plenary
meeting of the FATF reviewed and approved China’s
fourth assessment report, thereby fully recognizing the
sound basis of China’s role in countering the financing
of terrorism, as well as the favourable progress it
has made in its work. In 2018, China, in its capacity
as the rotating chairmanship of the EAG, hoste its
first forum on advancing international and domestic
cooperation among Governments and financial and
academic institutions.
Given the still grave situation in countering the
financing of terrorism and with a more stringent
international standard, China will further explore
launching a regulatory mechanism to counter
terrorist financing based on financial intelligence, the
monitoring of funding and shared data — a system
that will meet the needs of national Governments.
At the same time, China will actively participate in
19-08879

28/03/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

international cooperation, provide capacity-building
assistance to developing countries within our ability
and work together with all other countries in jointly
eliminating the financing of terrorism, combating
terrorism and maintaining world peace and tranquillity.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Minister of Defence and Military Veterans
of South Africa.
Ms. Mapisa-Nqakula (South Africa): We welcome
the presence at this meeting of the French Minister
for Europe and Foreign Affairs. We also commend
France for its efforts in developing the comprehensive
resolution 2462 (2019), on preventing and combating
the financing of terrorism, which the Security Council
adopted at the beginning of this open debate.
We also thank the following speakers for their
informative remarks: Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, UnderSecretary-General of the United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism; Mr. Marshall Billingslea, President
of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF); and
Ms. Mercy Buku, expert in anti-money-laundering and
countering the financing of terrorism.
South Africa is pleased that the Security Council
is today discussing ways to effectively prevent and
counter the financing of terrorism with the broader
membership of the United Nations.
South Africa aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by Ambassador Fatima Kyari Mohammed,
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the
United Nations.
We recognize with great concern that the scourge
of terrorism and violent extremism is spreading across
all corners of the globe, with devastating impact. I
would like to reiterate South Africa’s unequivocal
condemnation of all acts of terrorism, whatever form,
for whatever reason and wherever they may occur.
Indiscriminate attacks against civilians can never be
justified under any circumstances. We again extend
our condolences to the people of New Zealand for the
horrendous attack that took place earlier this month in
Christchurch and express our solidarity with all victims
of terrorism.
As we have witnessed time and time again, the
scourge of terrorism knows no boundaries and continues
to evolve, despite concerted efforts by the international
community to counter it. No country or continent can
claim itself free from that threat. While terrorist groups

S/PV. 8496

may have suffered military and financial setbacks, they
remain resilient and retain an ability, through various
means, to carry out attacks and generate funds in
support of their activities.
Against that background, we welcome France’s
initiative on addressing the financing of terrorism,
as well as other related efforts on strengthening
international cooperation in halting the flow of funds to
terrorist groups. As a country from a continent affected
by terrorism, we recognize the importance of halting the
means of financing that sustain terrorist organizations
and the horrific violence that they commit, including
against our peacekeepers.
We know fully well that, unchecked, that threat
has the potential to derail our collective efforts to bring
about peace, security and sustainable development on
the continent. We have witnessed the devastation on
infrastructure and the displacement of people as a result
of terrorist acts. Our continent of 55 countries — a
rich tapestry of different peoples, histories, languages,
cultures and legal and financial systems — is
nevertheless guided by a common commitment, under
the leadership of the African Union, to take measures
to counter terrorism and the destruction it causes.
In that regard, the African Union, over the course of
its existence, has developed a wide-ranging policy
framework, legal instruments and programmes to deal
with that threat, including its financing.
Our efforts to fight terrorism and its financing
in South Africa are guided by those measures,
commensurate with the country’s exposure to terrorist
financing activities, and its obligations as both a State
Member of the United Nations and member of the
Financial Action Task Force. In that regard, South
Africa is engaged in the implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, as well as the Financial
Action Task Force global standards on countering the
financing of terrorism.
Those measures are supported by South Africa’s
legislative framework and its national counter-terrorism
strategy, and are implemented and achieved with the
assistance of our Financial Intelligence Centre and
other relevant Government structures. The sharing of
information and coordination at the domestic level and
private-public partnerships are important components
of addressing the threat.
In addition, together with our global counterparts,
South Africa is engaged in regional efforts to develop

19-0887923/78

S/PV.8496

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

the relevant counter-terrorism financing legislative
and regulatory frameworks. We are finding strategies
to detect, deter and disrupt terrorist financing and
militate against the inherent risks and vulnerabilities,
which could be exploited for the purposes of raising,
moving, storing and using funds in support of terrorism
and terrorist activities anywhere in the world. Those
efforts include dedicated technical assistance and
capacity-building initiatives that South Africa shares
with its neighbours.
In a world where terrorist organizations utilize
sophisticated, high-technology means to move funds
around various regions of the world, we are pleased
that the resolution that we have just adopted provides
an equally sophisticated response to this challenge.
It is important that the fight against terrorism
continue to be led by the United Nations as the most
appropriate, representative structure for coordinating
our actions against this global challenge. It is
imperative that our joint response to the challenge of
terrorism internationally give due weight to the need
to address those conditions that influence vulnerable
people, particularly the youth, to become radicalized
and involved with terrorist organizations. This is true
not only in Africa but throughout the world. It is also
important that the fight against terrorism be undertaken
in a manner that does not have a negative impact on the
provision of humanitarian aid and medical assistance,
and we welcome the efforts made by France in providing
these assurances in the resolution.
In conclusion, South Africa remains steadfast in
its commitment and contribution to the fight against
terrorism, and we will continue to work at the bilateral,
regional and international levels to address this scourge
in all its forms and manifestations.
The President (spoke in French): I wish to remind
speakers to limit their statements to no more than
four minutes maximum in order to enable the Council
to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations with
lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate
their texts in writing and to deliver a condensed version
when speaking in the Chamber.
I wish also to inform all concerned that we will be
carrying on this open debate right through the lunch
hour, as we have a very large number of speakers.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Tajikistan.
24/78

28/03/2019

Mr. Muhriddin (Tajikistan): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate France on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. We welcome the
convening today of an open debate on such an important
topic as combating the financing of terrorism.
Terrorism and its financing, as well as illicit drug
trafficking and organized crime, continue to pose major
threats to international peace and security. Moreover,
they undermine regional and international efforts to
ensure stability, economic and social development, and
respect for fundamental human rights.
Acknowledging the seriousness of the aforementioned
threats, the Government of the Republic of Tajikistan
has been taking decisive and comprehensive measures
aimed at preventing and combating terrorism, in
particular its financing. Those measures including
the approval of the National Concept on Countering
Money-laundering, the Financing of Terrorism and
Weapons of Mass Destruction for 2018-2025, and the
plan for its implementation adopted on 5 March 2018.
Following the Financial Action Task Force guidance
on national money laundering and terrorist financing
risk assessments, Tajikistan implemented a similar
assessment between April 2015 and September 2017.
The assessment indicated that methods of laundering
the funds generated through illegal activities have
become more sophisticated and that the volume of
terrorist financing has increased. In addition to such
funds, advanced technologies are being employed
in the process of financing terrorism. Moreover, our
assessment indicated that drug-related crimes have
become a significant source of illicit funds that can
make contribute considerably to money-laundering and
the financing of terrorism.
Stability and security in Tajikistan and in the
entire Central Asian region are, to a great extent,
related to and depend on the situation in Afghanistan.
Tajikistan shares a long border with Afghanistan and
remains concerned at the current situation in the border
territories of Afghanistan. Intensified activities on the
part of terrorist groups, including the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham, in the northern districts of the
country, against the backdrop of a significant influx of
narcotics and weapons, is a matter of great concern.
The law-enforcement agencies of Tajikistan
and Afghanistan have been closely cooperating in
addressing these complex problems. We support the
constructive efforts of the international community and
19-08879

28/03/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

the Government of neighbouring Afghanistan aimed at
building lasting peace and stability.
The current situation requires that the countries
of the region take more robust action and make firm
commitments by facilitating regional cooperation
and partnership. We are committed to continuing to
contribute to this process.
Specific measures have also been taken in Tajikistan
to implement resolution 2178 (2014), of 2014, which
calls on States to prevent and counter the financing
of foreign terrorist fighter travel and activities. One
of the steps in the implementation of that resolution is
the adoption of the national strategy of the Republic
of Tajikistan on countering extremism and terrorism
for 2016-2020, approved by presidential decree on
12 November 2016.
The goals of the strategy include increasing the
efficiency of the competent agencies’ interaction
on preventing and combating the manifestations of
terrorism, extremism, drug trafficking and legalization
of the income generated through crime that provide
a source of financing terrorism and extremism.
The implementation of the strategy involves civilsociety institutions and is based on international and
regional cooperation.
We believe that efforts should be focused on
eliminating the military infrastructure of international
terrorism, depriving it of political, military and
financial support; and on preventing the use of the
Internet for the radicalization of minds, recruitment
and propaganda on extremism and violence.
Drug trafficking as one of the channels for financing
terrorism and violence is yet another challenge that is
causing deep concern in the region and across the world.
Combating illicit drug trafficking requires concerted
and coordinated action at the regional and international
levels. There is still a need for extensive international
cooperation to counter narcotics.
Given the long-term experience of the Republic
of Tajikistan in peacebuilding and in preventing and
combating terrorism, we are planning, in cooperation
with the relevant United Nations agencies and other
international and regional organizations, to hold a highlevel conference entitled “International and Regional
Cooperation on Countering Terrorism and its Financing
through Illicit Drug Trafficking and Organized Crime”
in Dushanbe on 16 and 17 May.

S/PV. 8496

The goals of the conference are: to promote and
strengthen international and regional cooperation; to
identify effective measures to combat the financing
of terrorism; and to promote expert discussions on the
response to the changing forms of financing used by
terrorists for their activities, including through illegal
drug trafficking and organized crime. This event
will serve as a platform for an exchange of views and
deliberations on the complex issues and multifaceted
problems related to countering terrorism and its
financing. We look forward to welcoming delegations
from all States Members of the United Nations to this
important event.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that Tajikistan
stands ready to engage in an open and constructive
dialogue in this area.
The President (spoke in French): I now give
the floor to the Secretary for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of the Philippines.
Mr. Locsin (Philippines): Money is the lifeblood
of terrorism. The financing of terrorism in the
Philippines is a complex web of illicit flows, moneylaundering, transnational organized crime, especially
the drug trade, and even the occasional remittance sent
by Filipinos overseas. Porous physical, financial and
cyberborders enable it.
Since the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001), the
Philippines has complied with the call to counter the
financing of terrorism by all means sufficient for its
containment and extinction. We have defined terrorist
financing as a separate crime and are amending our
human security act to address the exploitation of
cyberspace for terrorism. Without an international
regulatory framework for cyberspace, its increasing
use of encrypted platforms for transnational terrorist
financing will continue to create security challenges.
We adopted the 2018-2022 national anti-moneylaundering and countering the financing of terrorism
strategy in response to the 40 recommendations of
the Financial Action Task Force and our own national
risk-assessment exercise. At its core is the lesson that
financial intelligence units, law enforcement agencies,
the prosecution service and local Government units
must work together, share information with one another
and raise awareness — not only between the private
and public sectors, but first and foremost among
themselves. Intelligence gathering has been ineffective
because agencies were only looking at terrorist acts,

19-0887925/78

S/PV.8496

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

not the means that enable them. Our strategy tells us
to further tighten our legal and regulatory framework.
In that regard, I want to focus on a crucial driver of
the Philippine economy — remittances. Stand-alone
money-service businesses, particularly remittance
agencies, have been used as a channel for terrorist
financing. Money transfers through informal channels
helped terrorist groups launch the Marawi attack
in 2017.
Remittances account for 9.8 per cent of our gross
domestic product. Restricting their flow has touched
off a cultural nerve of resistance. The challenge is to
balance the requirements of counter-terrorism and the
imperative of convenience for those who have struggled
in Babylonian captivity to make ends meet in Biblical
lands for their families at home. The dilemma has
tempted foreign banks to demand that they be used
exclusively for remittances at piratical rates. Bankers
will be bankers. There is also a concern with non-profit
organizations. Contributions that they receive for
laudable purposes are knowingly diverted to, or
set up precisely as conduits for, terrorist financing.
Such non-governmental organizations operate in the
southern Philippines. The geographical distribution of
threat incidents indicates that some regions are more at
risk than others, hence the need to reinforce counterterrorism mechanisms at the local Government level.
Marawi illustrates the symbiotic relationship
between terrorism and the illegal drug trade. With drug
money, terrorists were able to gather a motley assortment
of well-armed extremists, criminals, mercenaries and
foreign terrorist fighters to take control of Marawi and
re-establish in our part of the world their shattered
caliphate in the Middle East. We met them with all-out
force and in six months took back Marawi at a fantastic
fatality ratio of 165 of our soldiers slain to more than
1,000 dead jihadists. Our counter-terrorism efforts are
anchored in respecting human rights because a State’s
first, foremost and overriding responsibility is to protect
the law-abiding against the lawless and the innocent
against those threatening their safety and well-being.
To that responsibility, my President has made an iron,
unwavering and total commitment. We just do not care
about politically compromised public opinion. To the
contrary, it will not be pretty, but we will get them. The
Philippines is pleased to have co-sponsored resolution
2462 (2019).
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Romania.
26/78

28/03/2019

Mr. Meleşcanu (Romania) (spoke in French): I
commend the French presidency of the Security Council,
Madam President, on its initiative to convene this open
debate on preventing and combating the financing of
terrorism. Let me also express my deep gratitude for the
very informative briefings by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the French Republic, Mr. Jean-Yves Le
Drian; Under-Secretary-General Vladimir Voronkov;
Mr. Marshall Billingslea, President of the Financial
Action Task Force; and Ms. Mercy Buku, an expert in
anti-money-laundering and countering the financing
of terrorism.
Romania associates itself with the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union. I will
make several remarks in my national capacity.
In the current context characterized by multiple
and diverse threats linked to terrorism, which seriously
jeopardize peace and security, our national role
and, above all, our role as a responsible actor at the
international level are of paramount importance. Despite
the fact that national, regional and international efforts to
combat terrorism have been intensified, responses have
too often not been fully adapted to the ever-changing
working methods used by terrorist organizations to carry
out their attacks. Terrorist organizations have shown
themselves capable of acquiring their own resources
through criminal activities, such as drug trafficking,
smuggling networks and directly extorting populations.
However, when they lack the necessary financial
resources, they are nonetheless also able to carry out
attacks with reduced financial resources, entailing a
significant impact and immense loss of human life.
Consequently, the prevention of terrorist financing is a
necessary pillar in the fight against terrorism, and we
support all international and regional measures adopted
to prevent and combat this major threat.
Romania has taken a series of legislative and
administrative measures to ensure the protection of
all persons on its territory, while at the same time
ensuring that the fight against terrorism is conducted
in accordance with our international obligations
and the applicable international and national human
rights provisions. To that end, we have set up a special
structure called the National System for Preventing and
Combating Terrorism, made up of 21 public authorities.
Several of the System’s authorities are directly
involved in activities to combat terrorist financing
and have developed a strategy that relies heavily on
the prevention aspect. Romania criminalized terrorist
19-08879

28/03/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

financing beginning in 2002, and our regulatory and
oversight authorities are engaged in a process to clarify
our legislation in that area.
At the same time, we support the development and
implementation of programmes and measures aimed
at strengthening the protection of our financial system
against any form of illegal use by persons and entities
involved in terrorist and criminal activities. Romania’s
extensive network of bilateral and multilateral
agreements in the area of preventing and combating
terrorism demonstrates our willingness to help establish
a broader and deeper international legal framework that
will enable us to respond effectively to the evolving
terrorist threat. We support concerted international
efforts to combat the financing of terrorism, geared
towards building upon the measures provided for in
the International Convention for the Suppression of
the Financing of Terrorism, which Romania ratified,
and resolution 1373 (2001). An additional meaningful
demonstration of Romania’s support for the joint
commitment of the entire international community in
the fight against terrorism is its sponsorship of today’s
resolution 2462 (2019), on preventing and combating
the financing of terrorism.
We hope to continue cooperation within the
European Union so as to deepen a comprehensive
approach to the combat terrorism financing. We also
believe that it is necessary to improve and update our
data on the sources and methods used by terrorist
groups to acquire financing. We commend the work of
all United Nations agencies with expertise in the fight
against terrorism and remain open to dialogue and close
cooperation with them on this subject.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Minister of Defence of Estonia.
Mr. Jüri Luik (Estonia): Allow me to thank France
for organizing this timely debate, which can strengthen
our collective approach towards the financing of
terrorism. Estonia welcomes the adoption of resolution
2462 (2019) on countering the financing of terrorism.
We align ourselves with the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union (EU).
Terrorist acts can destabilize the society and
attack the values that lie at the heart of the Charter
of the United Nations. We must step up our efforts to
combat those growing threats to peace and security. An
effective response to combating terrorism and terrorism
financing requires a comprehensive approach.

S/PV. 8496

It is clear that while the military operation Inherent
Resolve in Syria and Iraq was a success, the challenge
of fighting terrorism financing remains as relevant as
ever. Da’esh and all terrorist organizations will continue
to need money to spread their ideologies and to carry
out attacks, especially those that operate clandestinely.
We believe that, despite it being a global challenge,
the fight against terrorism financing starts at the
national level. Only States themselves can ensure
that their national counter-terrorism and anti-moneylaundering legislation has been successfully established
and enforced. Only States can ensure that the relevant
international legal instruments have been fully integrated
within their own national legal systems. Only States
can ensure that they have sufficient national capacity
and up-to-date information technology solutions to
tackle the challenge of terrorist financing effectively.
At the same time, effective counter-terrorism measures
and the protection of human rights are complementary
and mutually reinforcing objectives.
We recognize that the financing of terrorism goes
beyond State borders and that legal, administrative
and operational frameworks vary among States.
International cooperation, the exchange of information,
the development of data interoperability and operational
synchronization are therefore key. In that regard,
we believe that the role of the Financial Action Task
Force (FATF) and its regional body, the Committee of
Experts on the Evaluation of Anti-Money Laundering
Measures and the Financing of Terrorism, are of
crucial importance, together, of course, with the United
Nations, the Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development, the International Monetary Fund
and the World Bank. The global implementation of the
FATF international standard allows us to better identify,
mitigate and share information on terrorism financing.
Focusing on the implementation of counterterrorism financing legislation in Estonia, we joined
the International Convention for the Suppression of
the Financing of Terrorism. We support all United
Nations, NATO, Council of Europe and EU initiatives
to combat terrorism and to freeze the funds and
economic resources used by terrorists or provided by
their supporters.
Estonian legislation enables the full implementation
of all Security Council resolutions concerning the
fight against terrorism. Only two years ago, a court
case in Estonia showed that terrorism financing as a

19-0887927/78

S/PV.8496

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

phenomenon was not just an abstract, distant problem,
even in our region. It is a dynamic and continuously
evolving threat that requires vigilance and constant
attention. In that respect, in February this year our
Parliament passed the new International Sanctions
Act, which will further support our entrepreneurs’
compliance with the 2018 United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the need to
continue to invest towards technological solutions in
the financial sector as terrorist organizations adapt very
quickly. Our responses need to reflect the reality and
adjust constantly to stay one step ahead of the terrorists
in new emerging fields, such as cryptocurrencies.
As civil society becomes increasingly dependent on
digital technology, we must protect our civil society
organizations by ensuring that they are well aware
of the threat of terrorism financing. We must use the
existing channels of information exchange between the
public and private sectors.
Estonia is eager to continue participating in the
international fight against the financing of terrorism.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Georgia.
Mr. Darsalia (Georgia): Let me express my sincere
gratitude to the French presidency for convening
today’s important debate. Georgia was happy to
co-sponsor resolution 2462 (2019). My country aligns
itself with the statement to be delivered by the observer
of the European Union. Meanwhile, allow me add few
remarks in my national capacity.
With regard to the global security architecture,
the fight against international terrorism remains one
of the main priorities for Georgia. In that regard, the
Government is actively working to detect the constantly
changing threats of international terrorism and to
improve ways of responding to them. The effective
and targeted policy of the Government of Georgia has
reduced the number of supporters of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant and their influences in Georgia.
The extremist and terrorist ideological propaganda has
also been minimized.
The potential threats in Georgia from the
counter-terrorism perspective are not exclusive and
are similar to the most visible trends evolving in the
world. As in many other countries around the globe,
the potential threats are related to persons connected
28/78

28/03/2019

with international terrorism in various forms, such as
supporters of extremist ideologies and those involved in
the ongoing conflicts in the Middle East, for example,
self-radicalized persons, foreign terrorist fighters and
so on. The Government regularly assesses and identifies
the major challenges related to them and takes specific
steps in dealing with them.
At the same time, the occupied territories continue
to represent the major challenge for the Government
of Georgia in its efforts to combat terrorism. Given
Georgia’s important transit role and potential, there is
a danger that the occupied territories could be used for
illegal activities such as the trafficking and trade in
arms and components of weapons of mass destruction,
which can be used for terrorist purposes that threaten
security in the entire region.
In recent years we experienced several recorded
attempts of smuggling nuclear and radioactive
materials through Georgia’s occupied regions. That
further amplifies the sense of danger. Fortunately,
those illegal activities were duly prevented by Georgian
law enforcement agencies. However, in the absence of
an international presence in those territories, it has
become virtually impossible to conduct any kind of
verification activities on the ground. In parallel to that,
we had cases where the occupied territories were used
of the illegal transport of funds, which could potentially
be used there to finance terrorism as well.
Georgia has substantially enhanced its counterterrorism legislation since 2013. Moreover, Georgia was
among the first States Members of the United Nations
to explicitly criminalize travel by foreign terrorist
fighters in accordance with resolution 2178 (2014).
The Government of Georgia adopted a national
counter-terrorism strategy and its action plan for 20192021 in January. The strategy is composed of the seven
pillars that are the main elements of the fight against
terrorism in Georgia. Among them is the prevention
and protection pillar, which sets out the actions that
Georgia will carry out with regard to issues such as
deradicalization and countering the terrorist narrative
and combating terrorist financing, as well as foreign
terrorist fighters. In the strategy, special attention is
given to international cooperation. We need to focus
on joint efforts to address the financing of terrorism.
Conducting terrorist activities, whether in Syria and
Iraq or beyond these territories, is greatly dependent on
19-08879

28/03/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

financial ability. Therefore, the fight against financing
of terrorism should be one of the most important goals.
Over recent years, Georgia has, inter alia, amended
its criminal legislation in relation to terrorism financing,
adjusted its legislative framework for the application of
targeted financial sanctions, empowered the Financial
Monitoring Service of Georgia to temporarily suspend
suspicious transactions, introduced the requirement
for reporting entities to understand the ownership and
control structure of their clients, and enhanced client
due diligence measures through the application of a
risk-based approach.
Georgia has created an adequate legal framework
for freezing terrorist assets pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001). The Government established an inter-agency
commission for the implementation of the Security
Council resolutions, which consists of all the relevant
stakeholders, represented at the ministerial level.
The commission conducts its work in three major
directions — asset freezes, travel bans and arms
embargoes on individuals and legal entities suspected
of terrorism and designated as such, in line with
Council resolutions.
Bearing that in mind, we need to mobilize joint
efforts to address the challenging security situation in
the region and worldwide. As a reliable partner country,
Georgia reiterates its commitment to doing its utmost
to contribute to common security and stability.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovenia.
Ms. Leskovar (Slovenia): Allow me first to
thank Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian, Minister for Europe
and Foreign Affairs of France, and the three main
briefers at today’s debate. I would also like to take this
opportunity to acknowledge the presence of Mr. Borut
Pahor, President of the Republic of Slovenia, in the
Chamber today.
Slovenia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union
(EU). Allow me now to add a few remarks in my
national capacity.
Terrorism, including its financing, requires the
permanent attention of the international community, as
it remains a changing and evolving threat. Prevention
and suppression of the financing of terrorism
therefore requires strong cooperation in the interest of
international, regional and national peace and stability.

S/PV. 8496

We welcome this open debate and the Arria Formula
meeting that France, together with Australia, Indonesia,
Peru and Tunisia, organized in January, as a clear effort
to keep this item high on our political, security and
development agendas.
Every response to terrorist acts is quickly followed
by the adaptation of means, ways and approaches on
the part of the terrorists, including the evolving use
of technology, all of which also apply to the financing
of terrorist activities. New technologies that enable
many activities in cyberspace are welcomed and
used by us all, but also offer a space for terrorists to
more effectively spread their propaganda, recruit new
members, coordinate actions, better evade surveillance
and arrange the provision, collection and distribution of
funds for their activities.
Slovenia is one of the co-sponsors of resolution
2462 (2019), adopted today, which clearly reaffirms our
obligation as Member States to prevent and suppress the
financing of terrorism and to demand accountability
for the perpetrators of terrorists acts, including those
who finance them. In addition to the resolution adopted
today, other resolutions and documents adopted within
this and other organizations clearly show the need for
every Member State to adopt and implement adequate
legislation to combat the financing of terrorism and, if
needed, to develop national plans. We need effective
partnerships with the private sector and continuous
training of the relevant stakeholders.
In the past years Slovenia adopted specific
measures in three areas — amendments to legislation,
enhanced international and national cooperation and
the education of stakeholders. At the end of 2016,
Slovenia, as a member of the European Union, adopted
the new Act on Prevention of Money Laundering and
Terrorist Financing, which introduced the EU directive
on preventing the use of the financial system for money
laundering or terrorist financing into our national
legal system.
The new law brought a new approach based on
analysis and threat assessment to the national and
international levels. It requires that national threat
assessments on money laundering and the financing of
terrorism be carried out and periodically updated. One
of the important features of the new legislation is an
obligatory review of individual transactions exceeding
€1,000 and the introduction of a register of real owners,

19-0887929/78

S/PV.8496

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

which is also a significant achievement in the prevention
of terrorism.
In every aspect of combating terrorism and its
financing, international and regional cooperation are
of the utmost importance. National cooperation links
have been established in Slovenia between special units
for the fight against terrorism within the Slovenian
Intelligence and Security Agency, the Ministry of the
Interior — the police — the Ministry of Defence and
the Ministry of Finance. As a result of that cooperation,
between 2010 and 2015 the Ministry of Finance
received an annual average of four reports related to
terrorist financing. There were 14 in 2016 alone, as
well as nine notifications submitted to the competent
authorities with reasonable grounds for the suspicion of
a criminal offence.
We also put strong emphasis on educational
activities. The Ministry of Finance has organized
training courses for persons in a position to prevent
terrorist financing. They learn about the types of
terrorist financing, its indicators, as well as about
the process of radicalization and relevant legislative
amendments. The courses are attended by people in
the banking sector, insurance companies, brokerage
companies and foreign-exchange offices.
With regard to regional cooperation, Slovenia
devotes special attention to the region of the Western
Balkans. Since the links between terrorism and
organized crime, through which terrorism is also
financed, are well established, Slovenia proposed the
development of one of its initiatives — the Western
Balkan Counter-terrorism Initiative — into the
Integrative Internal Security Governance framework,
an EU initiative that focuses on national security
cooperation, combating terrorism and tackling serious
and organized crime.
Slovenia welcomes all initiatives that seek to limit
the space for potential terrorist activities. Nevertheless,
we should not limit the space for humanitarian actors
in the process of implementing measures to counter the
financing of terrorism, which must be carried out in full
respect for international law, particularly international
humanitarian law, human rights law and international
refugee law.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
30/78

28/03/2019

Ms. Bird (Australia): At the outset, on behalf of
all Australians, I would like to express our deepest
sympathies to those affected by the devastating
terrorist attack in Christchurch. Events in New Zealand
are a painful reminder that our protective systems
must continue to be flexible and evolve to address the
ever-changing threat environment with which we are
all confronted.
Terrorists need money to carry out their
atrocities — money for weapons and explosives, for
supplies, for travel and for shelter. Terrorists, like
criminals, constantly adapt how and where they move
their funds in order to circumvent safeguards that
countries have put in place. The evolution of financial
payment systems, while fostering economic growth
and efficiencies, provides ever-more alternatives for
terrorists and their supporters to finance their senseless
attacks. Global bodies such as the Financial Action
Task Force (FATF) agree that we urgently need to take
concerted action to strengthen global counter-terrorist
financing regimes to combat the financing of serious
terrorist threats and contribute to strengthening the
financial and economic system.
Australia has a robust and dynamic anti-moneylaundering and counter-terrorism financing system
built upon close relationships among law enforcement
and intelligence agencies, policymakers, industry and
our international counterparts. Australia is committed
to upholding our obligations under the International
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism, resolution 1373 (2001), the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant/Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions
regimes, as well as the Financial Action Task Force’s
standards and best practices in this area. We are
continually reviewing our domestic laws to further
strengthen those systems and enhance compliance with
our international obligations and the FATF standards.
Partnerships at all levels are critical if we are to
respond effectively to evolving threats. In partnering
with the United Nations and the Financial Action Task
Force, we can uncover new methodologies and tactics
used by terror financiers and make them visible to the
private and non-profit sectors.
Increasingly, direct engagement between the
public and private sector is augmenting the intelligence
and risk picture. Public-private partnerships such as
Australia’s Fintel Alliance are facilitating collaboration
and intelligence-sharing in near to real-time, providing
19-08879

28/03/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

alternative options for disruption. The Fintel Alliance
allows law enforcement agencies and the private sector
to share high-priority information to identify targets
or disrupt potential transactions that could finance
terrorist activities.
Australia was delighted to co-host with France,
Indonesia, Peru and Tunisia an Arria Formula meeting
of the Security Council on 31 January, which explored
ways to strengthen our efforts to combat the financing
of terrorism. We look forward to continuing that
important work as host of the second “No money for
terror” ministerial conference to be held in November.
We intend to explore four proposed themes — analysing
the current threat environment associated with
terrorism financing, public-private partnerships, virtual
currencies and the misuse of non-profit organizations
for terrorist financing purposes. In hosting the second
conference, following on from France’s hosting of the
first conference, Australia reinforces its commitment
to starving terrorists of the funds needed to carry out
their senseless attacks.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Al Arsan (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): The Syrian Arab Republic welcomes the
adoption of resolution 2462 (2019) and looks forward to
a genuine international and collective commitment to its
implementation. The credibility and the effectiveness
of the United Nations in implementing such a resolution
depend primarily on the implementation of previous
Security Council resolutions related to preventing and
combating the financing of terrorism, and on preventing
certain Governments and parties from exploiting such
resolutions to exert political and economic pressure on
other Member States.
My country, Syria, stresses that the mandate of
the resolution adopted by the Council today focuses
exclusively on preventing and combating the financing
of individuals, groups, entities and institutions that are
designated by the Council as terrorists. Based on that
clear legal understanding, the Syrian Arab Republic
categorically rejects the politicized assessment made
by Mr. Marshall Billingslea, President of the Financial
Action Task Force (FATF).
The Syrian Arab Republic implemented the action
plan developed by the FATF and the Middle East and
North Africa Financial Action Task Force to address
any shortcomings in combating money-laundering and

S/PV. 8496

the financing of terrorism. That was recognized by
FATF in June 2014. It declared that Syria had fulfilled
the technical aspects of the plan. However, some
members of the Task Force insisted on keeping Syria’s
name on the list of the ongoing process to improve
global compliance with anti-money-laundering and
combating the financing of terrorism, under the
pretext that the Task Force was unable to visit Syria for
security reasons. Today, my country, Syria, welcomes
and expects an expert group of the Task Force to visit
Damascus in the near future to oversee Syria’s full
implementation of the required reforms.
My country’s Government believes that addressing
the various tools and mechanisms for financing
terrorism is a decisive factor in eliminating terrorism
once and for all. However, we and other Member
States are concerned about the inaction and inability
of the United Nations, as well as the failure of the
international community, to hold accountable certain
Governments that are directly involved in financing
and arming groups designated by the Security Council
as terrorists. Those Governments have helped to create
the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters and have
fuelled extremist ideology and violent extremism,
leading to terrorism throughout the world.
The United Nations does not lack the legal
instruments necessary to combat the financing of
terrorism, even though such instruments need to be
developed and improved. Indeed, the Security Council
has adopted clear and decisive resolutions on combating
the financing of terrorism. The problem lies with the
absence of mechanisms for holding to account the
Governments involved in financing terrorism, either
directly or indirectly.
One such example is the Government of Qatar,
which has publicly violated resolutions 2133 (2014),
2161 (2014), 2253 (2015) and 2368 (2017) by providing
more than $1 billion in cash — I repeat, in cash — to
terrorist groups, such as Da’esh and the Al-Nusra Front,
in Syria and Iraq, under the pretext of paying ransoms
to release foreign abductees. However, no Member State
has even lifted a finger to ensure the implementation
of the relevant measures set out in Security Council
resolutions condemning and prohibiting ransom
payments to terrorists and armed terrorist groups.
In its war against Da’esh, the Al-Nusra Front
and other terrorist groups, the Syrian Arab Republic
has lost tens of thousands of Syrian lives. The Syrian

19-0887931/78

S/PV.8496

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

people have suffered immensely as a result of terrorism,
in addition to huge economic losses that no country in
the world can endure by itself. It is no exaggeration to
say that Syria is the main partner of the international
community in the global war against terrorism within
the context of the United Nations. Despite that fact, my
country has received no financial or technical support
from the United Nations to combat terrorism. On the
contrary, we are being subjected to an unprecedented
economic blockade imposed by the Governments that
either financed terrorism or ignored its financiers.
Unfortunately, some Member States would rush to
describe those Governments, including the Government
of Qatar, as genuine partners of the United Nations
in combating terrorism, for the sole reason that those
Governments have donated a few million dollars to the
United Nations under the pretext that it is countering
terrorism. A former Prime Minister of one of those
Governments, namely, Hamad bin Jassim bin Jaber
Al Thani, of Qatar, has admitted that his country’s
Government spent $137 billion in financing, arming
and training armed groups in Syria.
In conclusion, given such practices, we remain
concerned about the professional and balanced
implementation of the provisions of Security Council
resolutions on combating terrorism and financing it, as
well as the seriousness and independence of the United
Nations role in combating terrorism.
The President (spoke in French): I remind speakers
to kindly limit their statements to no more than four
minutes in order to enable the Council to carry out its
work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative
of Guatemala.
Mr. Castañeda Solares (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank the Republic of France for convening
this open debate, which gives us the opportunity to
exchange views on an issue that continues to have a
damaging impact on the world. We also welcome
the concept note (S/2019/239, annex) that has been
circulated as a basis for our deliberations.
We have recently been shocked to see the effects of
terrorism, which has been used not only as a threat but
also as a direct attack against the most basic elements
of human dignity. Innocent civilians are attacked by
radical extremists who snatch innocent lives in an
atrocious and cowardly way, driven by a perversity
32/78

28/03/2019

that knows no bounds. The severity of terrorist acts
generates a huge sense of insecurity, the consequences
of which affect us globally. The issue that brings us
together today — the threat to international peace and
security caused by terrorist acts and combating the
financing of terrorism — remains a critical one.
My delegation has repeatedly stated that terrorism
is a global phenomenon that must be addressed at its
very origins. All States are vulnerable to terrorist acts,
which represent a threat to international peace and
security, undermine democracy and create instability.
Terrorism represents an equally serious threat to all
States. With regard to my country’s region, we are
deeply concerned about the growing links between
transnational organized crime and terrorism and we
believe in the importance of strengthening cooperation
to effectively prevent and combat such illicit activity.
Despite the fact that the international community
has innovative legal instruments to combat terrorism
and organized crime, in many cases the general
perception of our populations is that those instruments
are insufficient. Here, at the heart of the United
Nations and within the Security Council, it is therefore
necessary to harmonize efforts to implement the four
pillars of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy in a balanced manner.
We welcome the coordinated efforts of the Office
of Counter-Terrorism and the implementation of its
Strategy. We also call for efforts to converge with
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in the
field of prevention, because increasing the visibility
of United Nations activities to prevent terrorism will
improve international cooperation to identify sources
of financing, anonymous transactions and the misuse
of financial resources.
Before the Council, we also urge the international
community to resort to a more rigorous control of the
illicit market of small arms and light weapons and
their respective ammunition, since the trade in those
weapons and their indiscriminate use helps terrorist
and organized crime networks to acquire them for
malicious use. The Arms Trade Treaty provides
explicit and specific regulations to prevent the misuse
of such weapons.
In addition to small arms and light weapons,
weapons of mass destruction are also one of the main
causes of death around the world and their impact on
civilian populations is indiscriminate. The commitment
19-08879

28/03/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

of our countries to ensure the proper implementation
of Security Council resolutions must therefore take
centre stage. The full implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) requires States to adopt and apply laws
that would effectively prohibit the provision of any
type of support to non-State actors that seek to develop,
acquire, manufacture, possess, transport, transfer or
use nuclear, chemical or biological weapons and their
delivery systems, in particular for terrorist purposes.
To conclude, Guatemala once again reiterates its
strong and unequivocal condemnation of terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations, regardless of its
perpetrators, where it is committed and for what
purpose. Our position is that terrorism and violent
extremism cannot be justified by beliefs, ideology or
religion. That not only plainly contravenes the rules
of public international humanitarian law but also
undermines human dignity.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ireland.
Mr. Kehoe (Ireland): Let me begin by thanking
Minister Le Drian for chairing this important debate on
preventing and combating the financing of terrorism.
Nearly one year ago, Ireland was one of the 70 States
that convened in Paris for the high-level International
Conference on Combating the Financing of Da’esh and
Al-Qaida, on the theme “No money for terror”. I thank
France for its continued leadership in that critical area.
I would also like to acknowledge the leadership
of the Financial Action Task Force and to thank
Mr. Billingslea for the challenging but important work
that his organization is undertaking. The Task Force
recommendations have become the global standard for
countering money laundering and terrorist financing.
Its evolution into a committed public and political tool is
welcome. We now need to work together internationally
to ensure that its recommendations are applied.
As others have said, the financing of terrorism is a
complex and evolving phenomenon. Money launderers
exploit complicated financial structures to mask their
funding sources and avoid punitive sanctions regimes.
Given the borderless nature of the threat, Ireland
strongly believes that multilateral engagement and
collaboration are critical if we are to effectively counter
the financing of global terrorism.
That is why we see a central role for the United
Nations in leading the coordinated and inclusive

S/PV. 8496

response of Member States to the financing of terrorism.
We need to continue to make a concerted effort to
increase the visibility and effectiveness of United
Nations counter-terrorism activities. As a candidate
for a non-permanent seat on the Security Council for
the 2021-2022 term, Ireland believes that the Council
has a central role to play in preventing and countering
the financing of terrorism. We therefore welcome
resolution 2462 (2019), adopted today, which represents
another important step in that evolving fight.
Ireland’s response to the issue of money laundering
and terrorist financing is multifaceted and brings
together a range of Government departments and
agencies, including the Central Bank of Ireland, the Irish
police force, our Criminal Assets Bureau and the Irish
Revenue Commissioners. That coordinated approach
is key to effectively tackling money laundering and
terrorist financing in Ireland.
Ireland also participates actively at the international
level in developing the most effective and appropriate
standards to apply in countering the financing of
terrorism, including at the Financial Action Task Force
plenaries. As co-creators of the Task Force standards, we
are not only actively improving our domestic Financial
Action Task Force framework but we have also been
at the forefront in developing international standards.
Ireland is also an active participant in the European
Union’s work to combat the financing of terrorism.
We believe that our efforts to dismantle the
transnational and borderless financial mechanisms
used by terrorists should include appropriate sharing
of information across sectors and across borders.
Aside from our enhanced communication, concrete
steps must also be taken to ensure transparency and
clarity around the ownership of legal companies, trusts
and organizations. Obscuring ownership allows for
easy manipulation of the system and is an open door
for the channelling of funds around the world for
terrorist means.
Importantly, we also believe that counter-terrorism
measures should never undermine our obligations
under international law, including human rights and
international humanitarian law. Ireland acknowledges
and welcomes the significant impact that civil society
participation can have in countering the financing of
terror and we encourage further efforts to strengthen
that partnership. Building and maintaining trust among

19-0887933/78

S/PV.8496

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

public, private and non-governmental organizations is
the bedrock upon which we must take that fight forward.
To conclude, let me once again thank you, Madam
President, for the opportunity to speak here today and
to underline Ireland’s firm commitment to counter
terrorist financing in all its forms and our readiness
to actively contribute to United Nations efforts in
this area.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mrs. Zappia (Italy) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank France and Foreign Minister Le Drian for
taking the initiative to convene this open debate and
for promoting resolution 2462 (2019), adopted today, of
which Italy had the honour to be a sponsor. I also want
to thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov for the
information that he kindly shared with us from Rome,
and the other briefers for their important contributions
to this debate.
Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union.
(spoke in English)
Today Italy’s Foreign Minister said once again
that terrorism exploits globalization and the digital
revolution. Countering the financing of terrorism should
therefore be a priority for all national Governments and
international organizations. The resolution that the
Council adopted unanimously today makes a significant
contribution to that by emphasizing the importance of
harmonizing existing rules and recommendations and
strengthening important operational aspects. In that
context, I would like to highlight four points.
First, greater attention should be paid to
complementing each and every investigation related to
terrorism with specific financial investigations. Even
minor and low-budget crimes can leave financial traces
that can be usefully exploited to better comprehend
the terrorist environment and take more effective
operational action. We should therefore constantly
encourage and promote closer cooperation between law
enforcement and financial intelligence.
Secondly, the analysis and recommendations of
the Financial Action Task Force (FATF), in particular
the new counter-terrorist financing operational plan
adopted in February 2018, are of key importance.
We greatly value the paragraphs of today’s resolution
34/78

28/03/2019

pertinent to this area and encourage all Member
States to implement the provisions coherently while
cooperating with one another as fully as possible.
Thirdly, Italy is doing its part wholeheartedly, as
we are strongly committed to countering terrorism
financing both nationally and internationally. We have
actively implemented all the United Nations and FATF
measures and recommendations, including by taking
preventive action and rigorously implementing United
Nations sanctions regimes. We have adopted a national
risk assessment strategy that has been accompanied
with a strong coordination effort among all the relevant
national bodies. Italy’s counter-terrorism prosecution
office works according to a comprehensive protocol that
includes pre-investigative and systematic exchanges of
information with financial intelligence units and other
relevant controlling bodies. It focuses specifically on
suspicious operations and persons included on relevant
lists, with hundreds of thousands of names and numbers
matched and checked yearly.
Equally importantly, our Guardia di Finanza shares
its know-how with all other relevant national bodies and
actively provides cooperation and capacity-building
at the international level. In that respect, I would
like to highlight the importance of the memorandum
of understanding signed today in Rome between
the Office of Counter-Terrorism and the general
headquarters of the Guardia di Finanza, and mentioned
by Under-Secretary-General Voronkov this morning
in his videoconference briefing. The memorandum
establishes coherent and structured collaboration in
the field of capacity-building. Dedicated courses on
countering the financing of terrorism and related
matters will be provided to law-enforcement officials
and civil servants of Member States that request
such support.
Fourthly and finally, I want to underline that
the right balance between security concerns and
the protection of all people’s fundamental rights and
dignity remains a priority for Italy. Non-governmental
organizations and associations that are committed to
humanitarian action and advocate fundamental human
rights play a critical role in alleviating the suffering
of entire populations, families and individuals. Such
crucial activity could suffer from inappropriate and
unnecessary limits and obstacles.
Italy remains committed to addressing the
scourge of terrorism and its related financial threats
19-08879

28/03/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

in a determined and comprehensive way, while
also continuing to enhance its cooperation with
Member States that may need assistance in capacitybuilding projects.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let me start by saying that
terrorism remains one of the most complex and imposing
challenges of our time, claiming innocent lives, causing
widespread destruction, undermining social stability
and disrupting State structures. The recent terrorist
attack in Christchurch showed that terrorism cannot
be associated with any faith, ethnicity or nationality.
We express our solidarity with the Government and the
people of New Zealand. Nine of the victims who died in
that terrorist attack were from my country.
Pakistan has been a principal victim of terrorism,
including terrorism that is supported, sponsored and
financed from abroad. We have lost tens of thousands
of lives, and many more have been injured or maimed.
But those losses have not diminished our resolve to
eliminate this scourge. They have in fact reinforced our
will to fight until the last terrorist is eliminated from
our country.
Pakistan has adopted a multi-pronged strategy
to counter terrorism that includes a military-led
enforcement campaign and a comprehensive plan.
Our 20-point national action plan focuses as much
on countermeasures as on preventive approaches,
including confronting the risks arising from terrorist
financing. By conducting the largest counter-terrorism
operation anywhere in the world, deploying 200,000
of our troops, our security forces have turned the
tide against this scourge. Today terrorist incidents in
my country are at a record low — their lowest point,
in fact, in more than a decade. That is a testimony to
our success.
Pakistan fully supports international efforts to
counter the financing of terrorism and has therefore
criminalized terrorist financing in accordance with
the International Convention for the Suppression of
the Financing of Terrorism. One of the most important
elements of our national action plan is countering the
financing of terrorism. Being a largely cash-based
economy, my country initially faced significant
challenges in implementing it. However, over the past
decade we have overcome those obstacles by, first,
enacting laws to eliminate terrorism-financing risks and

S/PV. 8496

implementing our international obligations, including
Financial Action Task Force (FATF) recommendations
and the obligations of the sanctions regime of the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities; secondly, strengthening financial institutions,
including our Central Bank, the Securities and Exchange
Commission of Pakistan and the Financial Monitoring
Unit; and thirdly, building the capacities of financial
regulatory institutions and law-enforcement agencies.
While we have fully aligned Pakistan’s
anti-terrorism-financing
regime
with
FATF
recommendations, we are paying particular attention to
monitoring non-profit organizations. My Government
has issued specific guidelines and enacted procedures
for auditing the accounts of non-profit organizations
to ensure that no funds collected by any charitable
organization are at risk of being used for terrorist
financing. Through such efforts to combat terrorist
financing, we have managed to achieve a sevenfold
increase in the number of arrests, cases registered and
persons convicted on charges of terrorism financing
over the past year alone.
As we reaffirm the international consensus on
countering the financing of terrorism today, it is
important to identify and plug the gaps that remain. In
that regard, it is important that current structures such
as the FATF and the 1267 sanctions regimes are not
used by anyone as political tools to advance geopolitical
objectives. There is also a need to make those
institutions more inclusive of the wider membership in
their decision-making roles.
Pakistan has always advocated that international
efforts should be geared to fighting the root causes of
terrorism, not just the symptoms. Let me point out three
specific gaps in the current approach.
First, the international community should still
focus attention on foreign intervention, foreign
occupation and the continuing denial of the right to
self-determination to people living under foreign
occupation, as well as violations of international law
and the Charter of the United Nations. Such obvious
causative factors are usually ignored or cast aside.
The international community agrees that continued
and persistent violations of human rights contribute to
violent extremism, yet killings continue in occupied

19-0887935/78

S/PV.8496

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Jammu and Kashmir and occupied Palestine. The
brutalization and oppression of people struggling for
the legitimate right to self-determination constitutes
State terrorism.
Secondly, as we all know, conflicts undermine
development, break down governance, create a sense of
injustice and fuel violence. Prolonged and unresolved
conflicts therefore continue to do that for generations.
Yet in the context of preventing violent extremism,
the international community continues to ignore longstanding situations of conflict and injustice.
Thirdly, while there is international consensus that
terrorism cannot be associated with any religion, we
see extreme right-wing groups and white supremacists
in some Western countries seeking to reap political
dividends by fanning Islamophobia. Action must also
be taken against that deliberate hate-mongering, which
often leads to violence.
Let me conclude by re-emphasizing the importance
of a holistic approach to combating and defeating
terrorism and the need for international collaboration
to achieve our shared objective.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the observer of the International Committee of
the Red Cross.
Mr. Mardini: Today the Security Council adopted
resolution 2462 (2019), thereby upholding international
humanitarian
law
and
protecting
principled
humanitarian action. It shows that States remain
committed to their obligations under international
humanitarian law and to ensuring that people in need
can be reached and protected in times of armed conflict.
I am addressing the Council today because the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) is
concerned about the growing impact that counterterrorism measures can have on impartial humanitarian
action. We understand States’ legitimate concerns and
their need to take necessary measures to ensure security
and eliminate terrorism. But certain measures, most
notably counter-terrorism legislation and sanctions,
can criminalize and restrict humanitarian action. What
is at stake is our ability to cross front lines in order to
deliver humanitarian assistance for communities living
in areas controlled by armed groups and individuals
designated as terrorists. Counter-terrorism measures
can have a negative impact on our ability to visit people
who have been detained, recover dead bodies, train
36/78

28/03/2019

armed groups on international humanitarian law and
facilitate mutual detainee releases and swaps. In short,
our ability to carry out our mandate is increasingly
hampered. As a consequence, people are suffering at
the very moment when international humanitarian law
should be protecting them.
The ICRC has always condemned violence,
including acts of terrorism, against protected persons.
However, the international community must find the
right balance between the legitimate concerns of States
providing security and the importance of international
humanitarian law and impartial humanitarian action.
We welcome the efforts to find that balance in the
resolution adopted today. The next step is to walk the
talk. The commitments to safeguarding humanitarian
action in the resolution mean nothing to populations
in need if they are not implemented. When States take
resolution 2462 (2019) back home and incorporate it into
their domestic legal order, we ask that they take effective
measures to protect principled humanitarian action and
preserve the humanitarian space. We also encourage
States to engage with humanitarian organizations
to find concrete solutions to this very critical issue.
That would be a tangible way to demonstrate their
commitment to the 1949 Geneva Conventions in their
seventieth anniversary year.
Counter-terrorism measures remain a critical issue
for the ICRC. Our President, Mr. Peter Maurer, will be
here to brief the Council next week and will reiterate
the great importance of this matter.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this important meeting.
We commend France’s leadership on this issue and
welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution 2462
(2019) this morning, of which we were a sponsor. I also
want to express my gratitude to the briefers for their
insightful remarks.
Despite the progress made in the fight against
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, we continue
to face the threat of terrorism, and it is vital that we
mobilize and concentrate our resources in order to
continue to combat international terrorism. Cutting
off the money flow is the crucial element in preventing
terrorism at its source, and we must cope with a wide
range of financing methods, new and old. In order to
address the complicated issue of terrorist financing
19-08879

28/03/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

holistically, the strict implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, including the one we just
adopted, is key. For effective implementation, action
should be taken both locally and globally. Japan will be
hosting a number of major sporting events in the next
few years, including the 2020 Olympic and Paralympic
Games in Tokyo, and it goes without saying that we
will take every measure to counter any potential threat.
Japan has always stood against terrorism, but with 2020
ahead, we are intensifying our activity even more.
Regarding the combating of terrorist financing,
Japan is taking firm and appropriate steps both locally
and globally. Domestically, we are actively cooperating
with the private sector. We have established a publicprivate dialogue with banks and firms dealing with
financial activities that encourages the exchange of
information and ideas not just between the Government
and the private sector, but among private-sector actors
as well. We have set up guidelines for the private
banking sector that endeavour to provide a clear
picture of the rules and regulations that it is obliged
to follow, thereby encouraging an effective response
to any suspicious transfers. We are also reaching out
actively, through events and seminars, to staff-level
personnel, the people actually dealing with day-to-day
transactions, in order to share best practices and build
the capacity to counter the financing of terrorism at the
ground level.
Globally, cooperation with the United Nations and
the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) is crucial.
Japan strives to contribute to strengthening our
approach to combating the financing of terrorism in
alliance with organizations such as FATF. For example,
in 2017, Japan introduced a registration system in
order to link an individual with any account used in
the exchange of cryptoassets, consistent with the FATF
recommendations. Furthermore, capacity-building is
important. Through multi-donor trust funds such as the
International Monetary Fund and the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, Japan is contributing to
projects aimed at closing potential loopholes that could
be used for financing terrorism. It will be crucial to
further strengthen the sharing of information among
States in order to keep up with evolving technology and
the expansion of the areas in which terrorists operate.
In conclusion, I want to reiterate the importance
of the strict implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions and FATF recommendations in our
efforts to combat the financing of terrorism. Japan will

S/PV. 8496

continue to engage with this issue both domestically
and internationally, including as Chair of the Group of
20 this year.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.
Mr. Fernández de Soto Valderrama (Colombia)
(spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to
welcome the presence here today of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of France and congratulate the French
delegation on its work in presiding over the Council,
as well as on its initiative in convening this important
debate. I am also grateful for the briefings we heard
today, which have provided a clear overview of the
challenges we face in preventing and combating
the financing of terrorism. My delegation considers
resolution 2462 (2019), which the Council adopted
today, to be extremely important. We fully concur with
its spirit and value.
Colombia has firmly and resolutely assumed the
task of strengthening its capacities for the prevention
and punishment of terrorism. It is a State purpose
that requires moving forward in the adoption of the
relevant international instruments and of updated and
appropriate domestic regulations.
We are fully aware that crimes such as corruption,
illicit drug trafficking, illicit arms trafficking, human
trafficking, migrant smuggling and money-laundering
have allowed the strengthening of terrorist organizations
in size and scope, making them more dangerous and
giving them the technical, operational and financial
support that allows them to destabilize countries and
the international community. The fight against terrorist
organizations must include the fight against criminal
groups, with special emphasis on their finances and on
the money obtained through their illicit activities.
To face these challenges, my country is making
headway in strengthening the human and technical
capacities of our police forces, and it will continue
to be imperative to consolidate those of our judicial
system, equipping it with new tools to face equally new
criminal phenomena.
As a member of the Financial Action Task Force
on Latin America, Colombia has been evaluated on
four occasions by the Financial Action Task Force of
the International Monetary Fund, which highlights
some achievements that I would like to share in
this debate. I note, for example, the procedure

19-0887937/78

S/PV.8496

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

applied by the Colombian authorities with regard
to the Security Council’s sanctions committees, in
particular Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL
(Da’esh) Al-Qaida and associated individuals groups
undertakings and entities. The Group also appreciated
the procedure that Colombia has developed to comply
with the recommendations of the Financial Action Task
Force on Latin America on the freezing of assets, which
involves financial institutions, the department in charge
of regulating financial institutions, the Prosecutor
General’s Office and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
It also noted that financial institutions regularly verify
other sources, such as country designation lists, and
apply measures in accordance with our legislation,
which is used to find possible sources of financing for
terrorism.
Organized crime, criminal economies and terrorism
corrupt institutions, impede their normal functioning,
hinder the provision of goods and services, distort the
functioning of the economy and markets, deprecate
natural and human resources and discourage private
initiative. Put another way, they are declared enemies
of legality and entrepreneurship and, consequently,
of equity, which are pillars of the Government of
President Iván Duque Márquez and are reflected in the
new defence and security policy. This policy does not
allow space to justify or validate terrorism and crime
as a means of political action in democracy, nor does it
allow arguments to be maintained in support of crime.
That is why we thank the Security Council for its
condemnation of the despicable terrorist attack on the
Bogotá police academy in January.
Colombia views with concern the progress made
of groups that use violent extremism and terrorism
under ambiguous political and religious pretexts,
threaten international peace and security, and
undermine the values and principles of States. Such
groups have become a global threat that forces us to
develop integrated and coordinated actions within the
framework of international cooperation. In that regard,
the Doha Declaration of the thirteenth United Nations
Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice
in 2015 is a point of reference that indicates some
emerging forms, such as environmental crimes, piracy
and cybercrime, among others. We also have a solid
legal framework to combat terrorism.
Finally, Colombia wishes to reaffirm its rejection
and condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and
38/78

28/03/2019

manifestations, and considers it necessary to emphasize
that this problem cannot and should not be associated
with any particular religion, civilization, ethnicity or
nationality. With special emphasis since the adoption of
resolution 1373 (2001) and its subsequent developments
and supplements, Colombia has updated its legislation
and procedures to fight this scourge, which we suffered
for years, and we will continue doing so in the conviction
that international cooperation is a priority task for the
benefit of humankind.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Lebanon.
Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon): At the outset, I wish to
congratulate you, Madam, and your team on your able
leadership of the work of the Council during the month
of March. I would also like to thank the briefers, UnderSecretary-General Vladimir Voronkov; Mr. Marshall
Billingslea, President of the Financial Action Task
Force (FATF); and expert Ms. Mercy Buku for their
valuable inputs.
I would also like to congratulate France and all
the sponsors on the adoption of resolution 2462 (2019)
today.
Our world today continues to face grave peace and
security challenges, yet terrorism has probably become
the defining security challenge of our time. Lebanon
reiterates its firm condemnation of terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations. Recent tragic, deplorable
terrorist acts — most recently in New Zealand — have
testified to our collective belief that terrorism is not to
be associated with any particular religion, nationality
or ethnicity. It is a global disease afflicting humankind,
threatening the core values of humanity, and thus
requires a global remedy.
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy is a policy tool of paramount importance that
guides the global battle against terrorism. In its four
pillars, it reflects the international conviction that an
effective response to this threat needs to be inclusive
and comprehensive. One key battlefield is countering
the financing of terrorism.
My country has been on the forefront of the
fight against terrorism. Our armed forces succeeded
in defeating Da’esh, the Al-Nusra Front and other
Al-Qaida-affiliated groups militarily, and in disrupting
hundreds of terrorist cells. We joined the Global
Coalition against Da’esh on its inception, and have been
19-08879

28/03/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

active members of several of its working groups. In the
process, Lebanon has put combating the financing of
terrorism at the core of its counterterrorism efforts.
We have taken concrete actions on all fronts, including
the legislative front. Lebanon co-chaired the Working
Group on Countering the Financing of Terrorism of
the Global Coalition. In that capacity, Lebanon played
a crucial role in devising measures to disrupt the
financing networks of that notorious terrorist group.
On 27 October 2016, the Lebanese Parliament adopted
Law No.77, which amended article 316 of the Penal
Code to cover the financing of activities mentioned in
Security Council resolution 2178 (2014), in relation to
foreign terrorist fighters.
In response to the efforts and demand of the Prime
Minister, we have put into effect two targeted financial
sanctions mechanisms, based on the new Anti-Money
Laundering/Counter-Financing of Terrorism Law, with
respect to resolutions 1267 (1989), 1373 (2001) and
successor resolutions. The mechanisms were adopted
by the Lebanese National Committee on Suppressing
Terrorism Financing. The internal security forces now
retain and issue the national list of designated names
on its website.
I am also glad to announce that Lebanon has
acceded to the United Nations International Convention
for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism of
1999. The Special Investigation Commission of the
Lebanese Central Bank, which is our national financial
investigation unit, has been prioritizing terrorismfinancing cases. It is noteworthy that there has been
a considerable increase in the number of terrorismfinancing convictions issued by the relevant courts
in Lebanon.
In terms of capacity-building and awarenessraising, the Special Investigation Commission has been
steadily conducting joint training on terrorism financing
with the General Prosecutor’s Office and other relevant
stakeholders. In parallel, the Lebanese National
Committee on Suppressing Terrorism Financing
continues to meet on a regular basis to discuss the latest
terrorism-financing threats and recommend mitigating
measures. That Committee includes representatives
from relevant judicial, law enforcement and financial
agencies in Lebanon.
Terrorism financing is a transboundary, collective
threat and, as the Secretary-General has rightly said,
transnational threat that cannot be defeated by any single

S/PV. 8496

Government or organization. That is why our response
should be collective and global. The importance of
establishing multilateral resources and forging strong
partnerships at the international and regional levels
cannot be overemphasized. Significant work has been
done in that regard by relevant intergovernmental
agencies, such as the Financial Action Task Force,
INTERPOL and EUROPOL, to name a few. Their
efforts should be commended and supported.
However, we should never forget that
comprehensive and sustainable action against the threat
of terrorism should seek to address its root causes. We
should work hard to foster economic development and
social inclusion and counter oppression and foreign
occupation. Recent cases have shown that failed States
have constantly provided fertile soil for terrorism.
Bolstering democratic governance and the rule of law
is one effective, preventive way to guarantee a world
free of terrorism and the violent extremism that gives
rise to it.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to express my gratitude to France for its
initiative and for having submitted the draft resolution
that was adopted today, which Egypt (resolution 2462
(2019)). The issue of preventing and combating the
financing of terrorism is of great importance in general,
and for Egypt in particular.
Effectively combating the financing of terrorism
requires that we comprehensively combat all terrorist
groups without distinction, especially in the light of the
overarching ideology uniting all those terrorist groups,
whatever they may be called, and their belonging to the
same extremist Takfiri ideology inciting terrorism. In
order to combat the financing of terrorism in line with
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 2368 (2017), it is necessary
to firmly and resolutely confront States and terrorist
groups that use certain non-governmental organizations,
community institutions and relief organizations fronts
for raising funds to finance terrorism.
Moreover, it is necessary to strengthen international
mechanisms to combat terrorism financing and cut off
its sources by monitoring and tracking the financial
transfers of terrorist groups and elements. It is also
necessary to address the relationship between such
groups and transnational organized crime networks,
while strengthening international cooperation with

19-0887939/78

S/PV.8496

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

a view to collecting digital evidence related to such
crimes in order to assist in the prosecution process.
Furthermore, it is necessary to strengthen
coordination at the national, regional and international
levels in order to implement effective and innovative
measures to support the rapid advances in technology,
which is also being used by terrorist groups to finance
their activities. In the light of the increasing use of
cryptocurrencies by terrorist groups in their financial
transfers, we call on the United Nations and its various
agencies, in particular the United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism and the United Nations CounterTerrorism Centre, to redouble and intensify their efforts
in assisting States to build their capacities in combating
and preventing the financing of terrorism through clear
projects that will have a practical impact.
At the national level, I would like to refer to the
most important counter-terrorism measures that Egypt
has taken in the area of preventing and combating
terrorism financing.
Egypt has ratified the majority of the relevant
international and regional conventions on this issue,
having also established the Egyptian anti-moneylaundering and combating the financing of terrorism
unit several years ago. Egypt has also developed special
mechanisms to implement relevant Security Council
resolutions, as well as those issued by international
technical organizations such as the Financial Action
Task Force (FATF), the Egmont Group and other
financial intelligence units.
As a result of Egypt’s efforts in that regard,
there were positive outcomes from a questionnaire
that was submitted to the FATF regarding Egypt’s
efforts in the fight against terrorism financing. The
report of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate also commended the effective role played
by the Egyptian anti-money-laundering and combating
financing of terrorism unit both at the domestic and
international levels.
Furthermore, Egyptian financial institutions,
especially those conducting financial transfers, are
bound by identification regulations issued by the
Egyptian anti-money-laundering and combating
financing of terrorism unit, in accordance with
international measures, with a view to combating the
financing of terrorism through the banking sector.
Concerning the measures taken to prevent the misuse
of informal financial services providers, we emphasize
40/78

28/03/2019

that the system for transferring funds in Egypt is
limited to licensed financial institutions. The Egyptian
anti-money-laundering and combating financing of
terrorism unit is actively working to eliminate any
cases that may involve informal financial transfers
or transactions.
In the context of the new methods being used to
finance terrorism, especially by exploiting modern
technological means, Egypt has taken several preventive
measures. The anti-money-laundering and combating
financing of terrorism unit has alerted the public to
the possible dangers of cryptocurrencies, and there is
close cooperation with law enforcement agencies to
strengthen their capacity to counter those developments
by holding joint training courses. The Egyptian unit also
distributed a guiding list indicating the most popular
websites used in the circulation of cryptocurrencies,
which is regularly updated by the unit.
Moreover, the Egyptian unit has issued regulatory
controls to deal with Internet payments and established
rules for the identification of customers with regard to
prepaid cards as well as operating rules for payments
via mobile phone. The unit also obliges relevant
institutions to provide these services with reliable
methods of establishing the identity of customers using
those payment services.
As part of the efforts of the Egyptian anti-moneylaundering and combating financing of terrorism unit
to keep abreast of all international developments,
especially those related to the requirements of financial
inclusion and measures adopted towards a digital
society, the unit has prepared a guidebook for banks to
help them assess the risks of money laundering.
Lastly, we once again welcome the adoption of
today’s resolution 2462 (2019). We underscore the
importance of implementing that resolution as well
as all other Security Council resolutions relating to
the fight against terrorism. It is essential that the
Security Council hold accountable countries that are
not committed to the full implementation of those
resolutions and continue to violate them.
Not holding those States to account will perpetuate
the financing of terrorism, the spread of foreign terrorist
fighters and their free movement from conflict zones
to other States and regions, as well as ongoing support
for terrorists, the provision of safe havens for them
and incitement to terrorism through media channels,
19-08879

28/03/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

sometimes even through filming the perpetrators as
they carry out their terrorist attacks.
I thank you once again, Madam President, and wish
you all success in achieving our goal.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the observer of the European Union.
Mr. Martin Prada: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Georgia,
Montenegro, North Macedonia, the Republic of
Moldova, Serbia, Turkey and Ukraine also align
themselves with this statement.
At the outset, I would like to thank the Minister for
Europe and Foreign Affairs of France, Mr. Jean-Yves
Le Drian, the Under-Secretary-General, United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism, Mr. Vladimir Voronkov
and the President of the Financial Action Task Force,
Mr. Marshall Billingslea, for their contributions to this
debate. Combating the financing of terrorism remains
an utmost concern for the EU and its member States.
We very much welcome this opportunity to discuss this
important topic today.
I would like to start by thanking France for
putting terrorism financing in the spotlight with the
organization of the Arria Formula meeting in January
and for introducing resolution 2462 (2019), which was
adopted today as a concrete follow-up to the high-level
International Conference on Combating the Financing
of Da’esh and Al-Qaida, held in Paris last year on the
theme “No money for terror”. The resolution has clearly
given new political impetus to policies on the counterfinancing of terrorism. It is important to maintain this
political momentum, and the European Union is ready
to contribute to it.
The resolution adopted today is an opportunity
to reaffirm the principles and obligations already
established under the existing counter-financing of
terrorism framework, which deals with terrorism and
its financing and has been effective in limiting the
capacity of terrorist organizations to finance their
activities. It is also an opportunity to respond to the
evolution of the threat. Terrorism financing is a
dynamic and continuously evolving phenomenon. New
challenges emerge constantly and terrorists change
their modus operandi to be able to circumvent existing
controls. Terrorists use new financing streams, such as
through small foundations; they use new techniques,

S/PV. 8496

such as crowd-funding platforms; and they also use
new sources, such as organized crime. We therefore
need to be vigilant and update our counter-measures
where necessary.
For the European Union, it is important to improve
the transparency of the beneficial ownership of
companies and trusts, as criminals are known to exploit
opaque structures as a means to hide their sources of
funding or circumvent sanctions regimes.
It is also very important to enhance inter-agency
cooperation. In that regard, the EU has strengthened its
anti-money-laundering directive and the criminalization
of terrorism financing; developed a new asset-freezing
regime against Al-Qaida and the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant in 2016; and is in the process of
adopting legislation to ensure that law enforcement has
access to bank account information in specific cases
of serious crime or terrorism and to promote stronger
cooperation between law enforcement and financial
intelligence units.
Terrorist attacks by small cells and small actors
have been carried out in the European Union with
very small amounts of funding. Those low-amount
transactions may not be easy to detect by financial
entities. Therefore, we need to bridge the intelligence
gap and improve the use of financial information
in counter-terrorism investigations. In that respect,
we support intensifying and accelerating the timely
exchange of information and financial intelligence, as
reflected in resolution 2462 (2019).
Several countries have established public-private
partnerships in the area of financial intelligence, such
as among public prosecutors, the police, financial
intelligence units and private companies. The
European Union is providing substantial financial
support to projects looking at the developments of
such partnerships in the EU and beyond, and we are
glad to see that resolution 2462 (2019) also calls for
the establishment of public-private partnerships in the
financial sector.
While it is important to counter the financing of
terrorism, we should ensure that any measures taken
do not limit the space in which humanitarian actors
can operate in a principled manner, in particular in
high-risk and fragile contexts in which their assistance
is greatly needed. We therefore underline that the
implementation of measures to counter the financing of
terrorism should be in full compliance with international

19-0887941/78

S/PV.8496

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

law — in particular human rights law, international
humanitarian law and international refugee law — and
that mitigating measures, including where there are
relevant humanitarian exceptions, should be introduced
to reduce the impact on humanitarian actors.
Moreover, all States should ensure that activities
by non-profit organizations, including those working
on gender-related issues and women’s rights as
well as reconstruction and stabilization, are not
unduly restricted.
In conclusion, we would like to reiterate that
coordination and international cooperation between
Member States and United Nations entities in the field
of counter-terrorism are key to learning from each
other and supporting targeted technical assistance and
capacity-building efforts. We believe that combining
our international efforts can help us all to move closer
to our objective, which is to prevent and counter the
financing of terrorism.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Favre (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank the organizers for this opportunity to
address the important topic of combating the financing
of terrorism.
The fight against terrorism, and in particular
its financing, as well as preventing the violent
extremism and radicalization conducive to terrorism,
are priorities for Switzerland. As a financial centre
of global importance, Switzerland has a particular
responsibility. Its commitment has been recognized
by the Financial Action Task Force (FATF), to which
it has demonstrated the strength and effectiveness
of its anti-money-laundering and counter-terrorismfinancing mechanisms. Switzerland is actively involved
in the development and implementation of international
standards in this area. I would like to highlight two
points and make an appeal.
First, in order to be effective at the global level,
combating the financing of terrorism requires a strong
commitment on the part of all States, particularly within
specialized multilateral forums such as the FATF and
FATF-affiliated regional entities. The key strength of
those bodies, which makes them undeniably effective,
is the system of mutual assessment based on a common,
precise and transparent methodology of evaluation
and monitoring. In that regard, we must be careful so
42/78

28/03/2019

as not to duplicate evaluation efforts, but rather make
them complementary, share results and ensure a followup process in put in place.
Secondly, although laws against terrorism and
terrorist financing are critical, they do not address
the root causes of terrorism, including poverty, the
lack of governance, corruption, inequality, the lack
of education and a dearth of future prospects for
people. Efforts to combat terrorism must therefore be
deployed upstream and targeted at preventing violent
extremism and radicalization, which are conducive to
terrorism, as well as fostering economic development
and international cooperation.
The strengthening of standards in the fight against
the financing of terrorism in recent years, together
with the sanctions system, in some cases has led to
disengagement within the financial sector, particularly
among international banks. That has a considerable
impact on the capacities of humanitarian organizations
to fund their activities in line with international
humanitarian law, particularly in regions controlled
by listed terrorist groups. Switzerland recalls that
humanitarian activities that are neutral, impartial and
independent should never be considered as lending
support to terrorism.
However, disengagement on the part of the
financial sector not only affects people in need of
humanitarian aid but also legitimate international trade
in general and the fragile economies of developing
countries in particular. For those reasons, Switzerland
calls upon the international community, including the
Security Council and its subsidiary bodies, to ensure
that counter-terrorism measures are as focused as
possible and in line with international law, particularly
international humanitarian law.
Switzerland regrets that today’s resolution 2462
(2019) is not more explicit concerning those aspects.
It must therefore be ensured that the implementation
of the resolution is fully consistent with international
humanitarian law. In that regard, Switzerland calls on
Member States to take all the necessary precautions to
avoid any counter-productive or detrimental effects,
both on the essential work carried out by humanitarian
organizations and legitimate economic activities
that drive the development of the States concerned.
To that end, Switzerland encourages all States, the
financial sector, donors and humanitarian actors to
bolster dialogue on managing and sharing the risks and
19-08879

28/03/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

responsibilities linked to the fight against the financing
of terrorism.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Singapore.
Mr. Gafoor (Singapore): I thank France for
convening this important open debate. Singapore was
very pleased to co-sponsor resolution 2462 (2019),
adopted this morning. As a country with an open
economy, international transport hub and responsible
financial centre, Singapore has always strived to do its
part in the global effort against terrorism financing.
In our view, there are three key elements to a strong
regime to counter the financing of terrorism.
First, there must be good governance. Given the
cross-sectoral nature of terrorism financing, Singapore
adopts a whole-of-Government approach to put a strong
legal, institutional, policy and supervisory framework
in place. In that regard, we established a high-level
steering committee on anti-money-laundering and
terrorism financing in 1999 to drive the development of
our national policies for terrorism financing and ensure
that our systems adhere to the latest international
standards and best practices.
Our domestic legislation enables our enforcement
authorities to take swift action against terrorists,
terrorist entities and their supporters, including
financiers of terrorism. In particular, the terrorism
suppression of financing act was enacted in 2002 to give
effect to the United Nations International Convention
for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism, as
well as resolution 1373 (2001). The act criminalizes
the provision of property and services for terrorist
purposes and confers powers to seize and confiscate
terrorist property.
We regularly review our legislative measures to
ensure that our regime for countering the financing
of terrorism remains effective. In November 2018,
we passed the serious crimes and counter-terrorism
act in Parliament. To deal with money laundering and
terrorism financing risks from the precious stones
and metals dealers sector, we passed another act in
Parliament as recently as last month. Singapore has also
passed the payments systems act to tackle similar risks
from the use of virtual assets.
The second pillar of Singapore’s strategy is active
partnerships with industry. National efforts cannot be
driven by the Government alone. Governments must

S/PV. 8496

engage industry and the private sector to be better
aware of the practical challenges on the ground. That
builds a deeper sense of trust and shared ownership,
which in turn fosters a stronger culture of compliance.
Singapore established the Anti-Money-Laundering
and Countering the Financing of Terrorism Industry
Partnership in April 2017, which brings together
Government and private sector stakeholders to identify,
assess and mitigate key and emerging money-laundering
and terrorism-financing risks in Singapore.
The third pillar of our action is international
cooperation, because ultimately an effective response
cannot be limited to the national level. Given the
global nature of the terrorist threat, the international
community is only as strong as its weakest link.
We must work with one another through bilateral,
regional and international mechanisms to boost our
collective security.
Singapore has participated actively in such
mechanisms at the international level. We have been
a member of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF)
since 1992. We are also a founding member of the Asia
Pacific Group on Money Laundering — an FATF-style
regional grouping established in 1997. The Suspicious
Transactions Reporting Office is Singapore’s equivalent
of a financial intelligence unit. We have also been a
member of the Egmont Group of Financial Intelligence
Units since 2002. We participate actively in the Financial
Intelligence Consultative Group under the regional
Counter-Terrorism Financing Summit organized by the
financial intelligence units of Australia and Indonesia.
Our authorities maintain close working relationships
with various enforcement and intelligence agencies
internationally. The FAFT has been a key node,
contributing to the fight against terrorism and terrorism
financing. Its work in identifying typologies — for
example, in Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
A1-Qaida — has been invaluable and should continue
to be strongly supported.
Let me conclude by reiterating Singapore’s
unwavering commitment to combating the financing
of terrorism. Maintaining domestic vigilance and
broadening international cooperation are important for
our collective success.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Akbaruddin (India): We applaud France for
convening this open debate during its presidency and

19-0887943/78

S/PV.8496

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

28/03/2019

are grateful for its leadership in piloting resolution 2462
(2019), adopted today to combat terrorist financing.

more than a decade. Now is the time to reiterate the
need to address that shortcoming.

Terrorism is a scourge that is tearing at the fabric of
societies across the globe. It is a menace that is restricted
to any given region. People now live in fear of terrorist
threats in countries across the world. Combating
terrorism is viewed by many States and their people as
one of the most fundamental security policy priorities
that requires global responsiveness. The Council’s
response today, in some measure, answers a felt need.

Secondly, while we welcome the resolution’s
focus on ensuring full compliance with the measures
imposed by the Security Council, no effective action
is taken on instances of reported non-compliance with
the sanctions measures. The Council can — and needs
to — do a better job at overseeing the implementation
of its resolutions relating to terrorist financing. The
report of the 1267 Committee Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team dated 15 January (see
S/2019/50) notes that Member States have reported to
the Monitoring Team on an ad hoc basis on the issue
and that a comprehensive review of frozen assets has
not been undertaken. The report recommends that the
Committee write to Member States in that regard. We
hope to see action on such recommendations.

Terrorists rely on resources to sustain themselves
and their activities across the world. Effective and
sustained efforts aimed at countering terrorist
financing is at the heart of the issue of addressing
terrorism. We therefore welcome this initiative to
bring together various existing norms and regulations
in a comprehensive manner. It is a milestone in global
efforts to set up a normative framework to criminalize
terrorist financing.
We specifically welcome the recognition in
resolution 2462 (2019) of the essential role of the
Financial Action Task Force (FATF) in setting global
standards, especially in the context of preventing and
combating money laundering, terrorist financing and
proliferation financing. India appreciates the work
done by the FATF and the regional FATF-style bodies.
As the saying goes, the proof of the pudding is
in the eating; the utility of any Council resolution
will therefore be in its implementation. The Council,
Madam President, has made a start today under France’s
leadership. We hope that it will follow through on the
various crucial provisions of today’s resolution with
focus and perseverance towards its implementation.
In that context, let me give an example of precept not
being followed in practice.
First, many Council resolutions, including the
various sanctions measures under the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999), concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities, and the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1988 (2011), where and asset freeze is a core part of
States’ obligations, call for regular reporting under
those measures. A cursory look at the publicly available
information on the website would reveal that the
implementation reports on the sanctions measures have
not been updated for years — and in some cases for
44/78

Thirdly, we welcome the Council and its various
bodies taking note and rectifying such instances of
non-implementation so as to enhance awareness and
the effective implementation of the various Council
resolutions on counter-terrorism. We believe that work
could be strengthened with more cooperation between
the FATF and the various United Nations entities,
including the Office of Counter-Terrorism. Bodies such
as the FATF have listed risks posed by Da’esh, Al-Qaida,
Jama’at-ud-Da’wah, the Falah-e-Insaniat Foundation,
Lashkar-e-Taiba, Jaish-e-Mohammed, the Haqqani
Network and persons affiliated with the Taliban.
Those are a few instances where more, not less,
focus is needed. Non-compliance with crucial sanctions
measures in the case of United Nations-proscribed
terrorists and entities places all of us Member States
at a high risk of facing challenges from terrorist
organizations that are well-funded and armed, despite
international measures. Terrorists are going to be ever
more creative in finding ways to violate the rulebook.
Furthermore, the unfortunate reality is that States that
are terrorist apologists will continue to provide alibis
to justify their actions, as well as their inaction, as was
done by a serial offender earlier today.
Nevertheless, we, the international community,
must remain determined. We need to continue evolving
our toolbox and follow our rulebook, instead of getting
distracted and straying from our path. Our toolbox,
consisting of the effective implementation of United
Nations measures, could assist in curtailing terrorist
activities. The global community is impatient for action.
19-08879

28/03/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Going forward, the United Nations collectively needs
to do more and do it much more effectively. For its part,
India will be a willing partner in this endeavour.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Sparber (Liechtenstein): I thank you, Madam
President, for this opportunity to address this important
topic in an open debate. We welcome the fact that a
new Security Council resolution (resolution 2462
(2019)) provides an updated basis for the prevention
and countering of the financing of terrorism. At the
same time, we would like to put our view on record
that open debates should inform the drafting process,
and therefore be conducted before the adoption of a
resolution as a way of increasing accountability and
inclusion of the wider membership.
Liechtenstein is steadfast in its commitment to
ensure that its financial centre is not involved in any
form of criminal activity. The prevention and countering
of terrorist financing remains a top priority. Strong
domestic legislation must be promoted. Well-funded
and operationally independent financial intelligence
units are instrumental in the effective implementation
of such legislation.
The Liechtenstein financial intelligence unit has
been the backbone of our domestic efforts to counter
terrorism financing over the past 16 years. As part of its
activities, the Liechtenstein unit, through the Egmont
Group of Financial Intelligence Units, assists other
countries in increasing the capacities of their units,
appreciating that capacity-building is a vital component
in the joint global effort to curb terrorism financing.
Liechtenstein, as a member of the Committee of
Experts on the Evaluation of Anti-Money-Laundering
Measures and the Financing of Terrorism, also
underlines the importance of properly resourced FATFstyle regional bodies.
Liechtenstein is particularly alarmed by the
growing link between terrorism, human trafficking and
modern slavery. Human trafficking and slavery-related
crimes are increasingly employed as a terrorist tactic
and as a fundraising instrument for terrorist groups.
The Security Council has recognized that link by listing
human traffickers under the sanctions regime of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya. Liechtenstein
supports a more consistent practice in that regard and

S/PV. 8496

encourages further discussion, including on a possible
thematic sanctions regime.
In order to tackle modern slavery and human
trafficking, Liechtenstein — together with its partners,
Australia and the United Nations University — has
launched a financial sector commission, also known as
the Liechtenstein initiative. That was partly in response
to the Council’s appeal for collaboration between
States and the financial sector in the fight against
these crimes. In the commission, actors from retail
banks, hedge funds, global regulators, institutional
investors and survivors, as well as the United Nations
and the anti-slavery movement, are brought together to
elaborate actionable measures for the global financial
sector. The outcome of the work of the Liechtenstein
initiative will be presented during high-level week
in September.
We are keenly aware that the increased use of new
technologies, in particular blockchain, provides both
risks and opportunities in the fight against terrorism
financing. Liechtenstein is currently introducing a
regulatory framework in this area, including ensuring
that existing and future due diligence standards are
applied to new technologies with a view to avoiding legal
and regulatory gaps. Liechtenstein also continues to
strongly advocate for upholding rule-of-law standards,
human rights law and international humanitarian law
when countering terrorism.
We appreciate the work of the Ombudsperson for
the sanctions regime of the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011)
and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da’esh) Al-Qaida
and associated individuals groups undertakings and
entities. We support the institutional strengthening
and expansion of the office to other sanctions regimes.
The Council also has a responsibility to ensure that its
sanctions do not unduly restrict humanitarian action.
The Council’s policy in that regard remains sketchy
and inconsistent. We share the concerns that certain
provisions of Security Council resolutions may lead to
the de facto or de jure obstruction of humanitarian action.
Liechtenstein encourages the Council to issue
consistent guidance to States to avoid unintended
consequences in the implementation of its resolutions
and to adopt a more coherent approach to ensure that
humanitarian actors are given the necessary space
to operate.

19-0887945/78

S/PV.8496

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I present this statement on
behalf of the Nordic countries — Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Sweden and my own country, Norway. We
would like to thank France for its continued efforts in
preventing and combating the financing of terrorism
and for keeping this issue high on the international
agenda. We see today’s meeting as an important
follow-up to the high-level International Conference
on Combating the Financing of Da’esh and Al-Qaida,
hosted by President Macron last year.
Networks such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) and Al-Qaida continue to rely on external
funding, which is essential to run their organizations,
recruit fighters, buy weapons, disseminate their
propaganda and move across borders. That financing
must be cut off. To identify and stop illicit financial
flows to terrorist organizations and criminal networks,
we must disrupt the link between organized crime
and terrorism. To that end, we believe in combining
measures targeted at the proceeds of crime and
measures targeting financial flows to terrorists.
International cooperation is crucial. All countries
must implement the relevant Security Council
resolutions. To ensure comprehensive and effective
cooperation, we must utilize regional instruments and
existing legal mechanisms to exchange information,
provide mutual legal assistance and form joint
investigative teams.
To effectively counter terrorist financing, it is vital
to strengthen the exchange of information and financial
intelligence and respond quickly to requests for
cooperation. When evidence of value to another country
is uncovered, it should be speedily shared, while paying
particular attention to the quality of the information.
By assisting each another in developing our national
counter-terrorist financing systems, we can secure
a holistic approach to international cooperation. We
need to make sure that our financial intelligence units
have the technology needed to analyse information and
recognize and uncover trends, patterns and indicators
of terrorist financing, as well as the ability to share that
information across borders.
We need to improve our partnership with civil
society and the private sector in that regard and ensure
that our efforts avoid discouraging or disrupting
legitimate civil society activities. We must also take
46/78

28/03/2019

into consideration the concerns raised by humanitarian
actors about the unintended negative impact that
measures to prevent and counter terrorism financing
can have on their ability to address humanitarian
needs and implement programming according to
humanitarian principles.
We encourage expanding the toolbox and
developing initiatives to deal with the nexus between
terrorism and organized crime more effectively. Such
tools may include information-sharing, criminal justice
and border controls and addressing radicalization. The
different aspects of these global security challenges
are connected. They must be addressed both within
the security pillar and as part of advancing the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. Roux.
Mr. Roux (spoke in French): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate France, home to INTERPOL
headquarters, on organizing the high-level International
Conference on Combating the Financing of Da’esh
and Al-Qaida, held in Paris last year on the theme
“No money for terror” in April 2018, the holding the
recent Arria Formula meeting and on the adoption of
resolution 2462 (2019), on combating the financing of
terrorism. The resolution is an essential component of
the mechanism to counter this threat, which our member
States will now be able to combat with new tools.
I would also like to thank Council members
for including INTERPOL in the provisions of the
resolution, which encourages them to make the best
use of the databases and analytical tools available to
the 194 States members of INTERPOL. I have heard
clear appeals for the concrete implementation of
the resolution, which will be the subject of my brief
statement today.
The fight against the financing of terrorism is one
of the five pillars of the INTERPOL global counterterrorism strategy, which runs alongside, and remains
at the disposal of, law enforcement and financial
intelligence units to trace and take down financial
mechanisms for the financing of terrorism. In addition
to that specific paragraph of the resolution, references
to the mandate and know-how of INTERPOL are found
throughout the text. With regard to the text’s call upon
States to enhance the exchange of information between
police and financial intelligence units, our criminal
analysis file on foreign terrorist fighters — which
19-08879

28/03/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

currently includes 50,000 profiles — contains financial
information, personal data and information on social
networking accounts, thereby allowing cross-checks
useful to criminal investigations.
In line with paragraph 19 of resolution 2462 (2019),
we have also long been recommending providing direct
access to our I24/7 secure network and our 17 databases
to financial intelligence units. INTERPOL also has
observer status within the Egmont Group of Financial
Intelligence Units, as well as the Financial Action Task
Force, enabling common multilateral action in this area
and maintaining closer cooperation with the World
Customs Organization.
Within the United Nations framework, INTERPOL
is an active member of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Coordination Compact, further strengthening our
cooperation with key United Nations entities such as
the Office of Counter-Terrorism, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999), concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities, the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and UNESCO, to name but
a few.
I would like to mention the INTERPOL services
referred to in paragraph 31 of resolution 2462 (2019).
Our member States, first of all, can benefit from
and make use of our database of lost or stolen travel
documents, which to date contains 85 million entries.
Terrorists often use such falsified — or genuine but
stolen — documents in conflict zones to carry out
illegal financial transactions.
Member States may also request the issuance of an
INTERPOL notice regarding any actor, or to report any
modus operandi relating to the financing of terrorism.
That will make the information available to all or some
of our member States, each State always retaining full
control over the dissemination of its information via
our secure communication channels. As I have already
mentioned, we currently have 50,000 foreign terrorist
fighters on file with information gathered from those
notices on each of them.
In conclusion, I wish to recall — as does resolution
2462 (2019) — the importance of sanctions regimes.
Today INTERPOL is distributing, for the benefit of 10
of the 14 United Nations sanctions committees, more
than 600 special notices concerning sanctioned entities
or individuals, more than half of which are for the 1267

S/PV. 8496

Committee alone. That facilitates both travel bans and
the seizing of criminal assets.
Our headquarters, based in Lyon, France, and my
Office here in New York are at the disposal of any
delegation seeking further information or clarifications
on this matter.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.
Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to speak on behalf of the
120 member States that make up the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries. Due to lack of time, I shall
read out a summarized version of our statement.
The Non-Aligned Movement takes this opportunity
to renew its commitment to the fight against terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations, considering it one
of the gravest dangers and threats to international
peace and security. Any act of terrorism is criminal
and unjustifiable, regardless of its motivation as well as
where, when and by whom it is committed.
Acts of terrorism are among the most blatant
violations of international law, including international
humanitarian law, in particular the right to life, as
they deprive people of the full enjoyment of their
human rights and fundamental freedoms. Such acts
endanger both the territorial integrity and stability of
States, as well as national, regional and international
security, while destabilizing legitimately constituted
Governments, existing constitutional order and the
political unity of States.
Against that backdrop, we believe it is necessary
to address in a comprehensive way the conditions that
facilitate the spread of terrorism. Experience shows
us that terrorist groups are fuelled by, among other
things, hopelessness, injustice, frustration, the lack
of opportunity and the denial of human rights and
fundamental freedoms in order to promote their criminal
agenda based on hatred, intolerance, sectarianism and
extremism. Poverty, social and economic inequalities;
political, ethnic and religious intolerance, as well as the
imposition of unilateral coercive measures, colonial
and foreign domination and foreign occupation, as well
as violations of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of States, among others factors, are also part of the
fabric of so-called determining drivers of terrorism.

19-0887947/78

S/PV.8496

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

28/03/2019

The Movement expresses its determination to
take prompt and effective measures to eliminate
international terrorism and, in that context, urges all
States, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, to comply with their obligations, under
international law and international humanitarian law,
in the fight against terrorism by prosecuting or, where
appropriate, extraditing the perpetrators of acts of
terrorism; preventing the organization, instigation or
financing of acts of terrorism against other States from
within or outside their territories or by organizations
based in their territories; refraining from organizing,
instigating, assisting, financing or participating in
acts of terrorism in the territories of other States;
and refraining from encouraging activities within
their territories aimed at the commission of acts of
terrorism and from allowing the use of their territories
to plan, train or finance such acts; and refraining from
supplying arms or other weapons that could be used in
terrorist acts in other States.

combating terrorism and its financing. Our resolve
is all the greater today, given that our country is a
victim of terrorist attacks, including against our vital
infrastructure, including our national electric system,
in flagrant violation of resolution 2341 (2017), and
against our own Head of State, as occurred in August
2018 when there was a failed assassination attempt
was carried out against President Nicolás Maduro
Moros. In that regard, we conclude our statement by
denouncing before the international community the
fact that the terrorist activities against Venezuela are
planned, instigated, implemented and financed using
resources that have been stolen from our nation as part
of a campaign of aggression that has the backing of
foreign Powers whose policies and practices are a threat
to peace and security, both at the international level and
for my country. We therefore urge the Security Council
to insist that its resolutions be implemented to the letter
and to reject the use of terrorist practices as a political
weapon against our legitimate Government institutions.

The Member States of the Movement note that
the financing of terrorism is a matter of great concern
that must be fought with determination. We therefore
reiterate the obligation of the international community
to prevent and suppress the financing of terrorist
acts and to criminalize the intentional provision or
collection, by any means, directly or indirectly, of
funds by their nationals or in their territories with the
intention that they be used, or with the knowledge that
they might be used, to commit terrorist acts. On that
point, it is worth noting the increase in recognized
potential links between transnational organized crime
and the financing of terrorism. We therefore stress the
need to promote cooperation in the fight against those
criminal activities.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
representative of Qatar.

We encourage United Nations entities to cooperate
with Member States and continue to provide assistance,
upon request, to implement their international obligations
in the fight against the financing of terrorism. We also
recognize the importance of sharing information and
good practices, through our financial intelligence units,
domestically and among Governments, in order to
effectively combat the financing of terrorism.
In conclusion, the 120 Member States that make up
the Movement express their full solidarity with those
countries that recently suffered from terrorist acts.
Allow us now to make a few comments in our national
capacity. We reaffirm our unwavering commitment to
48/78

Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate your country,
Mr. President, on its presidency of the Security Council
and to welcome the participation this morning of His
Excellency Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian, Minister for
Europe and Foreign Affairs of France. I would like also
to thank Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-SecretaryGeneral, United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism;
Mr. Marshall Billingslea, President of the Financial
Action Task Force (FATF); and Ms. Mercy Buku for
their valuable participation.
Combating the financing of terrorism is an essential
part of the comprehensive approach to combating
the scourge of terrorism. It requires concerted and
collective efforts within relevant international and
regional arrangements. It also requires defining and
combating the various ways used by terrorist groups to
finance their activities, such as transnational organized
crime, trafficking in cultural property, kidnapping,
extortion and drug trafficking. Attention must also be
paid to the evolving methods of financing, including
cryptocurrencies and online gambling.
Human trafficking is one of the methods used by
terrorist groups to fund their terrorist activities. In that
connection, I would like to note the study conducted
by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
19-08879

28/03/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Directorate with regard to the links between human
trafficking and the financing of terrorism, the results of
which were presented on 6 February. The State of Qatar
supported that study as it is aware of the importance of
such studies in determining the most effective counterterrorism policies.
The State of Qatar has played an effective role as
part of the collective efforts of the global coalition
to defeat Da’esh. Those efforts recently succeeded in
pushing Da’esh out of its last stronghold in Syria. That
is part of our firm position against terrorism in all
its forms and in support of the Syrian people in their
fight against terrorism — be it the terrorism of Da’esh
or the terrorism of the Syrian regime, whose policies
were behind the emergence of that terrorist group in
the first place.
The State of Qatar seeks to comply fully with all
international commitments on combating the financing
of terrorism, including the major Security Council
resolutions. The State of Qatar joined the International
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism of 1999 and other international conventions
related to counter-terrorism. We have also stepped
up our cooperation with regional and international
partners, including the signing of bilateral and regional
agreements on combating the financing of terrorism and
the signing of a memorandum of understanding with
the United States in 2017, which is the first of its kind
in the region. The memorandum of understanding was
implemented as a reflection of our commitment to joint
action and the exchange of information and expertise.
The State of Qatar also participated in the highlevel International Conference on Combating the
Financing of Da’esh and Al-Qaida, held in Paris last
year on the theme “No money for terror”, which resulted
in important decisions and measures with regard to
identifying funding sources, information exchange,
combating suspicious transactions and the misuse of
new financial instruments.
The State of Qatar actively participates in regional
and international arrangements related to combating the
financing of terrorism, including the FATF, and seeks to
implement the 40 recommendations issued by it. We are
one of the founding members of the FATF in the Middle
East and North Africa region, as well as a member of
the centre for combating terrorist financing. We are
also cooperating with the International Monetary Fund
and other United Nations specialized agencies.

S/PV. 8496

In order to strengthen our partnership with the
United Nations in fighting terrorism and to support
the priorities of the Secretary-General in that regard,
we have signed an agreement with the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism to support strategic
initiatives aimed at combating the scourge of terrorism
and strengthening the mandate of the Office. The
State of Qatar will support the budget of the Office by
providing $75 million over the next five years, namely,
more than 70 per cent of its extra-budgetary resources.
At the national level, the State of Qatar continues to
strengthen the necessary legislation to combat terrorism
and terrorism financing. The 2010 law on combating
money-laundering and terrorism financing is the first
of its kind in the region whose standards are a model
to follow. We improved the law in 2018 to bring it in
line with recent developments. In 2014 we issued Law
No. 14 on combating cybercrimes and Law No. 15 on
establishing charitable organizations. We established
a national anti-money-laundering and terrorism
financing committee, which includes representatives
from law enforcement agencies, oversight agencies
and other governmental institutions. The committee
has adopted the national strategy to combat moneylaundering and terrorism financing. It monitors
relevant international developments and coordinates
national training programmes. We also established
an agency to organize charity work. Relevant State
authorities seek international advisory expertise to
develop national capacities.
In conclusion, we stress the need to take advantage
of international expertise of governmental and
private sectors. We pay full attention in my country
to this issue. The national anti-money-laundering and
terrorism financing committee has taken advantage
of international expertise in order to include the
most prominent international standards for achieving
financial integrity.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the observer of the Holy See.
Archbishop Auza: I would like to thank the French
presidency for convening today’s debate on combating
the financing of terrorism.
At the outset, let me pay homage to the memory of
all victims of terrorism, in particular the victims of the
recent attacks on two mosques in Christchurch, New
Zealand — brothers and sisters of ours who died due to
a senseless act of violence.

19-0887949/78

S/PV.8496

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Regrettably, in today’s world the scourge of
terrorism has become almost commonplace. Our
peoples live under constant fear of violent acts motivated
by extremist ideology. Terrorists cause indiscriminate
harm, often claiming as their victims the most
vulnerable members of the human family. They target
peacekeepers and peacemakers and humanitarian and
development actors. They strike hotels, concert venues,
public squares and places of worship.
Terrorists must be denied access to the means
that facilitate their criminal activities. Indeed, no
one should be permitted to finance or to provide
arms and ammunition to terrorists. Those who abet
violent extremism or who shelter members of terrorist
groups must be held accountable before a court of law.
Similarly, all violations of international humanitarian
law and crimes against humanity committed by terror
groups must be vigorously pursued. As Pope Francis
and the Grand Imam of Al-Azhar, Sheikh Ahmad
Al-Tayyeb, jointly declared:
“This is why it is so necessary to stop supporting
terrorist movements fuelled by financing, the
provision of weapons and strategy, and by attempts
to justify these movements even using the media.
All these must be regarded as international crimes
that threaten security and world peace. Such
terrorism must be condemned in all its forms
and expressions.”
To that end, all the relevant Security Council
resolutions, as well as the recommendations of the
Financial Action Task Force, should be carefully
implemented to follow the money and therefore prevent
the profits of money-laundering, human trafficking, the
illicit sale and trafficking in antiquities and the sale of
weapons and ammunition from being used for terrorist
purposes. One must also think of the scores of girls and
women used and abused by terrorist groups to spread
their dangerous ideologies.
To effectively prevent the financing of terrorism,
it is therefore indispensable to break its link with
transnational organized crime, which both profits from
it and favours its activities. Breaking those criminal
networks and bringing criminals to justice would of
course require regional and international cooperation.
Vital to combating international organized crime and
terrorism is the disruption of their cybercapabilities,
which they use to recruit new members and raise funds.
50/78

28/03/2019

When resources are exploited for evil purposes,
they are diverted from legitimate goals. Young people
are deprived of education and learning and the elderly
are deprived of care and medicines. People as a whole
are deprived of their right to develop in peace and
safety. To prevent terrorism, that cycle of misery must
also be broken. Integral human development is key to
preventing terrorism in the long term.
At the same time, it is indispensable to ensure that
measures to prevent and counter terrorism scrupulously
respect human rights, the rule of law and international
humanitarian law. In particular, there should be no
conflict between preventing the financing of terrorism
and providing humanitarian assistance.
On the contrary, legitimate humanitarian activities
by charitable organizations, including by faithinspired organizations, contribute positively to the
prevention of terrorism. The Council must therefore
ensure that counter-terrorism measures do not limit
or inhibit the capacity of non-governmental and
charitable organizations to provide humanitarian aid
to vulnerable groups or persons, such as emergency
relief for refugees and displaced persons and medical
services for the wounded.
The Holy See unequivocally condemns terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations, as no ideological,
political, philosophical, racial, ethnic or religious
reasons can justify or excuse terrorist acts. It is
indispensable that effective measures be adopted
to prevent terrorism in all its forms, including by
draining and cutting off its financial resources. It is my
delegation’s ardent hope that today’s debate will be an
added catalyst for the international community to offer
a coordinated response to such a serious threat to peace
and security.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Portugal.
Mr. Vaultier Mathias (Portugal) (spoke in
French): Allow me to thank you, Sir, for convening
today’s debate and to commend the excellent work done
by France during its presidency of the Security Council.
Portugal fully supports the statement made on
behalf of the European Union and wishes to make some
additional comments in its national capacity.
Collective reflection on how to better combat
and prevent the financing of terrorism is essential.
Terrorists and their supporters constantly seek new
19-08879

28/03/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

ways to finance their activities and bypass existing
mechanisms. Our response must therefore be as
agile as the evolution of the threat. We must adapt
instruments and measures to prevent terrorist groups
from engaging in criminal activities. In that regard, we
commend the work of the Security Council in recent
years, which has laid the foundation for a normative
framework and created an environment conducive to
stronger international cooperation. I would also like to
highlight the deepening of that normative framework
through resolution 2462 (2019), adopted today, which
we co-sponsored.
Let me also commend the Secretary-General for
his efforts to strengthen the counter-terrorism capacity
of the United Nations. The Office of Counter-Terrorism
plays a pivotal role in the implementation of the overall
strategy, in particular by strengthening the capacities
of Member States in that context.
Portugal has a strong and effective regime in place
for combating terrorist financing, in line with the
recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force.
My country is also active within the European Union
in its efforts to improve the collective response to this
constant threat. The operational authorities responsible
for terrorist-financing investigations have access
to a wide range of financial intelligence, including
comprehensive national databases, and cooperate
proactively with each other and with their foreign
counterparts for investigative purposes. Portugal has
adopted all the relevant international legal instruments
on terrorism, with the exception of the Convention
on the Suppression of Unlawful Acts Relating to
International Civil Aviation, whose ratification process
is ongoing.
In conclusion, terrorism is a serious and complex
threat. To end it, we must work together in a flexible and
coordinated manner. Portugal undertakes to support
measures to strengthen international cooperation
in that regard, including the effective prevention of
its financing.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mrs. Furman (Israel): We thank Minister Le Drian
of France for convening today’s important debate. We
also thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov, the
President of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF)
and Ms. Mercy Buku for their presentations.

S/PV. 8496

Terrorism financing and money-laundering is
the fuel that fires the engine of terrorism. Therefore,
to combat terrorism effectively, we must cut off
the financial lifeline for terrorism and shut down
its financers.
Our region has witnessed the destabilizing and
destructive role of terrorism financing. Palestinian
terrorism continues to derail any hope or opportunity
for peace. Hamas uses and abuses charitable
organizations and humanitarian aid to fund its terror,
while the Palestinian Authority spends hundreds of
thousands of United States dollars annually to reward
terrorists who have killed innocent Israelis, rather
than use these critical funds to support economic
development and pave the way to a brighter future for
the Palestinian people.
When it comes to the Iranian regime, it would
take an entire day to outline how the number-one State
sponsor of terrorism uses sophisticated methods to
evade sanctions regimes and finance terrorism and
its proxies worldwide. Its leading proxy, Hizbullah, is
known to use and abuse international financial systems
to illicitly fund its stockpiling of advanced weaponry
and construction of terror-attack tunnels that infiltrate
Israel. Many delegations today noted Hizbullah’s
abuse of otherwise legitimate businesses, particularly
in the pharmaceutical sector, to finance their terrorist
activities throughout the region.
Israel is taking active and proactive steps to
combat the unrelenting threats of terror that we face
and the flow of funding that sustains them. These
steps include drafting legislation and establishing
institutions, infrastructure and mechanisms carefully
designed to address this alarming phenomenon. In
2016, Israel enacted an innovative and comprehensive
new anti-terrorism law that takes a holistic approach to
fighting terrorism using legal tools. Beyond providing
harsher sentencing for perpetrators of terrorism and
enhanced due-process safeguards, this law introduces
something new: it criminalizes the circles of influence
that provide material and other support to terrorists and
terrorist acts. Therefore, rather than targeting only the
acts of terror themselves, the new law addresses the
very pillars and foundations that support and finance
terrorism. We hope this comprehensive anti-terrorism
law can serve as a model worldwide.
Beyond adopting domestic legislation, Israel has
worked effectively to combat terrorism financing on the

19-0887951/78

S/PV.8496

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

international front as well. Two years ago, Israel gained
observer status with the FATF. In December 2018, the
FATF published a national evaluation report in which
Israel received the highest possible ratings in the areas of
combatting terrorism financing and the effective use of
financial intelligence. The report praised Israel’s strong
and extensive anti-terrorism-financing institutions and
positive inter-agency coordination, particularly among
Israel’s Money-Laundering and Terror Financing
Prohibition Authority, its security authorities, the
national police, the Tax Authority and the Corporations
Authority. It also highlighted our highly effective use
of financial intelligence, leading to a large number of
successful investigations and prosecutions, as well as
Israel’s active and effective confiscation of proceeds of
terrorism financing. As the FATF President noted in his
briefing, Israel recently shared its experience and best
practices in these areas in a recent FATF workshop.
The report also noted that Israel is properly and
wisely approaching the issue of the financing of
terrorism holistically, as it looks not only at acts of
terrorism financing themselves, but also their related
activities, including cross-border smuggling, the abuse
of charities and non-profits, trade-based financing of
terrorism and vulnerable money-transfer mechanisms.
As stated in the report,
“Israel effectively deprives terrorists, terrorist
organizations and terrorist financers of their
assets and instrumentalities related to terrorism
financing activities.”
In the face of the Iranian regime’s State-sponsored
terrorism worldwide, Israel has enacted comprehensive
and effective counter-proliferation finance-targeted
financial sanctions, which was also noted in the FATF
evaluation. Overall, as the FATF report underlines,
Israel implements targeted financial sanctions without
delay, effectively implementing terrorist designations
under resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 1988
(2011).
Finally, Israel was an active participant at the
high-level International Conference on Combating the
Financing of Da’esh and Al-Qaida, held in Paris last
year on the theme “No money for terror”. We look
forward to contributing in future meetings, including
the upcoming meeting in Australia.
As noted by many of my colleagues, positive
cooperation between the public and private sectors
and early communication between national security
52/78

28/03/2019

authorities and financial institutions is key to effectively
combating this phenomenon. Fostering this cooperation
should be a priority. I would also like to highlight a
number of existing and emerging threats that, in our
view, must be given priority and addressed by the
global community, including the threat of countries and
entities that have the ability to collect funds and provide
them to terrorist organizations; the abuse of charitable
organizations by terrorist organizations; se1f-financing
terrorist organizations supported by seemingly
legitimate business operations; the smuggling of funds,
goods and valuables through border crossings; and the
abuse of emerging technologies to finance terrorism,
including the use of electronic wallets and virtual assets.
I am here today to share Israel’s knowledge of
counter-terrorism — an expertise we have unfortunately
gained due to decades of terrorism against our people.
We hope to provide the United Nations, counterterrorism bodies and fellow peace-seeking nations with
best practices, practical solutions and cutting-edge
technologies, so that together we can overcome this
evil force.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Canada.
Ms. Freeland (Canada) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking France for organizing today’s
open debate. Canada is proud to have co-sponsored
resolution 2462 (2019) adopted this morning. We believe
that it will contribute to strengthening our collective
efforts to combat terrorism in all its forms.
Today I would like to highlight one of the most
serious terrorist threats of our time: white supremacy.
(spoke in English)
White supremacism and Islamophobia are among
the gravest terrorist threats that the world is facing
today. We were all reminded of this tragic reality on
15 March, when a white-supremacist terrorist killed 50
Muslims gathered in two mosques for Friday prayers
in Christchurch, New Zealand. This attack was all too
familiar to me, a Canadian. Two years ago, a terrorist
killed six people in a Quebec City mosque.
Neo-Nazis, white supremacists, incels, nativists
and radical anti-globalists who resort to violent acts are
a threat to the stability of my country and countries
around the world. These attacks need to be at the top of
our agenda when we talk about confronting terrorism.
And when violence like this occurs in mosques,
19-08879

28/03/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV. 8496

churches, synagogues or on the streets of our major
cities, we must not be afraid to specifically condemn
it for what it is: neo-Nazism, white supremacism,
Islamophobia, anti-Semitism, terrorism.

country’s accession to the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of March and on the convening of
this very important debate on preventing and combating
the financing of terrorism.

We cannot hide behind euphemisms that distract
from truth. In fact, doing so puts our citizens,
especially those from religious minorities and
racialized communities, in greater danger. In the wake
of acts of terrorism carried out by Muslim extremists,
Western countries often call upon Muslim countries
and Muslim leaders to condemn those attacks in the
name of their people and their faith. It should follow
that, as the Foreign Minister of a majority white and
majority Christian country, I feel a specific and
personal responsibility to denounce white-supremacist
attacks in the same way. As my prime minister, Justin
Trudeau, said in our House of Commons following
the Christchurch attack, “[w]hen we fail to denounce
hatred with total conviction, we empower those people
and legitimize their violence”.

I would also like to thank Mr. Vladimir Voronkov,
Under-Secretary-General of the United Nations Office
of Counter-Terrorism; Mr. Marshall Billingslea,
President of the Financial Action Task Force; and
Ms. Mercy Buku, expert in anti-money-laundering
and countering the financing of terrorism, for their
enriching briefings on the subject.

Hatred, unfortunately, is eternal, but the ways in
which it spreads change. Today, hatred is increasingly
spread through the Internet — in online forums and on
social media. We must be aware of this and work to
stop it.
Our work cannot be undertaken in isolation. Each
of our countries will of course address this issue in
different ways, but we need to recognize that this is
ultimately an international problem, and we need to
act collectively to address it. The Internet and social
media know no borders, so we must work together to
find ways to address online radicalization.
And, on a final note, on behalf of Canada and
Canadians, I would like to offer our support and
compassion for the people of New Zealand. As fellow
members of the Commonwealth, Canada and New
Zealand have a close and historic relationship. We are
more than friends; we are family. And Canadians felt
great compassion and real pain following the terrible
attacks in Christchurch. In particular, I would like to
salute the moral leadership of Prime Minister Jacinda
Ardern, who has distinguished herself not only to the
people of New Zealand but to the whole world.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Atlassi (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I congratulate you, Mr. President, on your

Various countries have suffered despicable
terrorist acts in recent months, the latest of which was
perpetrated, to everyone’s disbelief, in two mosques
in Christchurch, New Zealand. Morocco condemns
that terrorist act in the strongest terms and expresses
its solidarity with New Zealand and the families of the
victims. On this occasion, we wish to reiterate our firm
condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and stress
that nothing can justify a terrorist act. We reaffirm
that terrorism must not be associated with any religion,
civilization, nationality or ethnic group.
To counter the international community’s efforts to
curb terrorist financing, terrorist groups are constantly
adapting and renewing their financing methods.
Between 2014 and 2016, terrorist groups led by Da’esh
and Al Qaida spared no effort to secure the financing
of their terrorist operations and recruitment activities
for foreign terrorist fighters. Recruitment through
incentives, including financing travel to areas of
tension and issuing monthly payments, has enabled the
flow of more than 40,000 terrorist fighters from more
than 100 countries to Iraq and Syria.
Terrorists have made every effort to ensure the
financing of their despicable activities. They have
found recourse, notably, in robbing banks and people
and imposing taxes within the territories under
their control; the illicit sale of cultural property and
natural resources, such as oil; kidnapping for ransom;
trafficking of all kinds, including in drugs, weapons
and human beings, including women and children for
sexual purposes; and money-laundering, among others.
In addition, they have forged links with
transnational organized crime networks to ensure
the financing of their macabre projects. Hence, the
importance of strengthening coordination efforts at
the national, subregional, regional and international
levels to address that serious problem, while respecting

19-0887953/78

S/PV.8496

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

international law, human rights, fundamental freedoms
and the rule of law.
The international community has taken the
overall fight against terrorism, including its financing,
seriously. The Security Council, through the adoption
of a wide range of resolutions, including resolution
1373 (2001); resolution 2178 (2014), adopted at the
peak of the influx of foreign terrorist fighters into
Iraq and Syria; resolution 2199 (2015), concerning the
illicit trade in oil; and resolution 2253 (2015), aimed
at extracting the sources of terrorist financing, has
therefore created the regulatory framework to address
the financing of terrorism.
The measures taken and the sanctions committees
that have been established under the relevant Security
Council resolutions have had an undeniable impact on
the drying up of terrorist financing sources, including
through the freezing of assets and the travel ban on
individuals involved in terrorist financing. However,
without the implementation of the provisions of the
aforementioned resolutions and the intensification of
cooperation between the private sector, especially the
banking sector and the State, on the one hand, and
States at the regional and subregional levels, on the
other, tangible results cannot be achieved.
To that end, the United Nations should provide
guidance to Member States, including through
capacity-building in technical cooperation programmes
supervised by the United Nations Office of CounterTerrorism, in particular through the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre. The Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate should also remain
in contact with Member States, in particular through
country visits, to assess and identify gaps in order to
address them, including upgrading existing counterterrorism laws.
Morocco has a legal and regulatory arsenal for
the implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, including measures to restrict financial
transactions and immediately freeze assets held
in the names of individuals and entities subject to
United Nations sanctions on the grounds of terrorism.
Pursuant to article 37 of Law No. 43-05, on the fight
against money-laundering, as amended, the Moroccan
legislation gives full competence to the financial
intelligence unit to receive and process requests
from the Security Council concerning the freezing of
property and assets for terrorist offences.
54/78

28/03/2019

Moreover, the Kingdom of Morocco, pursuant
to resolution 2253 (2015), prepared a national report
and submitted it to the Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011).
The report provided updated information on the
actions and initiatives taken by the Kingdom with a
view to ensuring the optimal implementation of the
provisions of the relevant Security Council resolutions.
It complements previous documents submitted by
Morocco to the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism
and highlights Morocco’s political commitment to its
strategy in the fight against terrorism and its approach
to implementing its obligations under the provisions of
the aforementioned resolutions.
Lastly, we welcome today’s unanimous adoption of
resolution 2462 (2019), which Morocco co-sponsored,
as it has done with other relevant Council resolutions,
and paves the way to bridge any loopholes that terrorists
may exploit.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): I congratulate France
on its successful stewardship of the Council in March
and its decision to address this very timely and critical
issue. We thank all our briefers, especially UnderSecretary-General Voronkov, speaking on behalf
of the United Nations, for their contributions to
today’s discussion.
We applaud today’s adoption of the important
resolution 2462 (2019), submitted by France, which we
co-sponsored as we believe that the document provides
great added value.
We also share the view of the presidency that
cooperation must be strengthened among the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and INTERPOL,
other global and regional organizations, as well as
banks, to enhance capacities to identify, analyse,
investigate and share information about the financial
sources and flows of terrorism.
However, more needs to be done, above all
with respect to effective implementation, including
innovative practical measures to identify, track and
take action against unregulated money-transfer
services, as well as financial flows. Our efforts should
19-08879

28/03/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

include capacity-building, the utilization of financial
investigative techniques in law enforcement, teaching
prosecutors to win money-laundering cases and training
financial supervisory and regulatory authorities to
identify suspicious activity.
We should also examine charities, underground
banking entities and registered money-service
businesses, among other entities. Likewise, there should
be close and coordinated interaction between financial
intelligence units and law enforcement agencies, with
measures to curb crowd-funding, cryptocurrency and
various gaming platforms that are widely used today as
camouflage, under anonymity.
Against that critical juncture, it is important that
all Member States enact legislation that designates
the financing of terrorism as a criminal liability, and
should be in full compliance with the United Nations
sanctions regime. Laws should be harmonized at
the regional and global levels for reciprocal action,
prosecution and extradition. We also need to ensure the
support of media and civil society watchdogs to make
our efforts successful.
Turning to Kazakhstan’s work on today’s pressing
topic, our national list to that end — prepared, inter
alia, on the basis of the Security Council’s sanctions
lists — consists of 2,000 persons and 90 organizations
as of this month.
Kazakhstan has concluded some 35 bilateral
cooperation agreements with the financial intelligence
units of other Member States. As a result, 46 supporters
of radical religious ideologies were brought to justice
for financing terrorist activities in Kazakhstan. The
amounts sent abroad had been concealed through
trade operations involving consumer goods and food,
entrepreneurship, work on construction sites and
camouflaged means. It is noteworthy that this involved
tranches ranging from $150 to $2,000. In addition,
in September 2018 our delegation officially launched
and opened here in New York for signature a political
document aimed at achieving a world free of terrorism
by 2045. That instrument, which was signed by
approximately 80 Member States, serves as an impetus
to fulfil their obligations in countering the financing of
terrorism. It calls for greater cooperation between border
and customs control and criminal-justice structures,
with early-warning systems and intelligence-sharing.
To conclude, I would like to reiterate Kazakhstan’s
commitment to confronting international terrorism and

S/PV. 8496

its financing in compliance with the relevant United
Nations resolutions.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cuba.
Ms. Rodríguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
The Cuban delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the delegation of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela speaking on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
Our country, in seeking to defend its independence
and sovereignty, has suffered the consequences of
heinous terrorist acts — externally organized, financed
and implemented — that took the lives of 3,478 people
and left a further 2,099 disabled. Those acts were in
the main organized, financed and greenlit by the
Government of the United States and committed by
persons operating under its control and protection.
Having been a victim of State-sponsored terrorism
for decades has only strengthened Cuba’s position of
principle and unshakeable determination to tackle
terrorism, as reaffirmed once again in the recently
adopted Constitution of the Republic.
Cuba rejects and condemns all acts, methods
and practices of terrorism in all their forms and
manifestations, by whomever, targeting whomever and
wherever they may be committed, irrespective of their
motives, including State terrorism. We reiterate that the
revolutionary Government of Cuba has never permitted,
nor will it ever permit, the use of its national territory for
the carrying out, planning or financing of terrorist acts
against any other State, with no exception whatsoever.
We condemn the harmful and illegal practices,
which contravene the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations, of certain States that finance,
support and promote subversive terrorist acts aimed at
undermining the constitutional order of other States,
imposing regime change and spreading messages of
intolerance and hatred against other peoples, cultures
and political systems. To that end, they resort, inter
alia, to the misuse and abuse of modern information and
communication technologies as a tool to misrepresent
and manipulate the facts to further their own ends.
In that context, we reiterate our strong condemnation
of the sabotage of the Venezuelan electricity grid,
which constitutes a terrorist act aimed at harming the
defenceless people of an entire nation, who are being
held hostage in the unconventional war unleashed by

19-0887955/78

S/PV.8496

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

the United States against the legitimate Government
headed by comrade Nicolás Maduro Moros and the
civil-military union of the Bolivarian Chavista people.
The international community cannot allow certain
States, under the pretext of an alleged combat against
terrorism, to commit acts of aggression, undermine
national sovereignty, interfere in the internal affairs
of other States and commit flagrant violations of
human rights or international humanitarian law. We
strongly condemn the use of double standards, political
selectivity and unilateral acts by some who attempt
to justify their behaviour and draw up politically
motivated lists, in violation of international law. All
of this undermines the central authority of the General
Assembly in the fight against terrorism.
Cuba reiterates its commitment to continuing to
cooperate and participate actively in the efforts of the
United Nations to combat the scourge of terrorism,
in keeping with the purposes and principles of the
Charter and international law, as it is firmly convinced
that that it is up to the Organization to lead the fight
against terrorism. In compliance with the commitments
it undertook as a State party to 18 international
conventions in the field of counter-terrorism, Cuba has
put in place various kinds of legislative, institutional
and administrative measures to prevent and punish all
terrorist acts and activities, including those linked to
the financing of terrorism.
Cuba has a specific criminal code for tackling
criminal behaviour of a terrorist nature, Law 93 against
acts of terrorism. In addition, Cuba’s penal code has
criminalized money-laundering and the financing of
terrorism. The Cuban State has set up a coordinating
committee for the prevention and tackling of the
financing of terrorism and the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, as well as asset laundering and
its predicate offences. In addition, the Central Bank
of Cuba has a general directorate for investigations
into financial operations, which acts as a financial
intelligence unit and is charged with receiving,
investigating and analysing reports of suspicious
transactions linked to the financing of terrorism.
Following Cuba’s joining the Financial Action
Task Force of Latin America (GAFILAT), in December
2012, the Central Bank of Cuba signed a memorandum
of understanding for cooperation between the States
members of GAFILAT. As part of this mechanism,
Cuba is a signatory to 19 cooperation agreements in
56/78

28/03/2019

the field of financial intelligence and participates in the
Asset Recovery Network.
Cuba’s commitment and institutional capacity
to prevent money laundering and the financing of
terrorism was acknowledged by the Financial Action
Task Force in 2014. Our country has been a part of the
global network of financial intelligence units since
2015, when it joined the Egmont Group of Financial
Intelligence Units.
In concluding, we wish to reiterate that the combat
against terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
requires an integrated approach, through direct action,
prevention and concrete actions to eradicate its root
causes. It is also crucial to provide international
financial assistance and cooperation in order to create
and build capacity for the combat against terrorism.
Cuba has demonstrated, through practical examples,
its ongoing readiness to cooperate with any State at
the bilateral or multilateral level in the prevention and
tackling of international terrorism, on the basis at all
times of mutual respect and of the norms and standards
of international law.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Ahmad Tajuddin (Malaysia): At the outset,
let me join all who spoke before me in thanking you,
Mr. President, for having convened this open debate on
combating the financing of terrorism.
Malaysia sees this meeting as timely amid our
grave concern at the escalation in terror incidents in
recent weeks, which has resulted in the loss of innocent
lives and injury to many people, including Malaysians.
Malaysia condemns in the strongest terms the senseless
acts of terror carried out against innocent civilians
and believes that those responsible must be brought
to justice.
There is an upward trend in the financing of terrorism
in Malaysia owing to the fact that Da’esh and foreign
terrorist fighters have adapted and decentralized. In
Malaysia we have learned that this type of funding’s
primary sources come through legitimate means,
including self-funding from legitimate income, savings
accounts, social-security withdrawals, financial support
from family members and donations from the public.
Self-funding is the most common way of raising funds
for travel to conflict zones or conducting operations
there. Cash is also moved physically across borders for
19-08879

28/03/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

terrorism-financing activities within our region and
for foreign fighters travelling to or from conflict zones
by taking advantage of Malaysia’s porous borders.
Malaysian foreign terrorist fighters based overseas
who want to return to Malaysia are also exploiting
that vulnerability of our borders in order to re-enter
the country illegally and undetected. We are seeing an
increase in the use of bank accounts to receive donations
from sympathizers, move money from fundraisers to
leaders of terrorist organizations and withdraw funds
when terrorists are in conflict zones. In addition to the
financial institutions concerned, remittance operators
and hawala brokers are also reported to be preferred
channels for moving funds abroad.
However, while the risks of terrorism and terrorist
financing are rising, they are being adequately contained
by the relevant authorities. Malaysia emphasizes a
number of strategic areas — a comprehensive regulatory
framework, targeted preventive measures, focused
enforcement action, public-private partnerships and
domestic and international cooperation. We have
established a comprehensive legal and regulatory
framework that encompasses legislation such as our
penal code and laws on the prevention of crime, on
special measures against terrorism in foreign countries
and on money-laundering, terrorism financing and
proceeds of unlawful activities. That legislation has
been put in place and amended to expand enforcement
agencies’ investigative scope and power.
Malaysia’s financial institutions continue to
implement measures, including reporting suspicious
transactions, to prevent their institutions from being
used as a conduit by terrorists. In order to facilitate
financial institutions’ ability to detect and disrupt
terrorism activities at an early stage, the Financial
Intelligence Unit issues red flags, typologies, weekly
news bulletins and regular updates on terrorism-related
resolutions and trends. A public-private sector platform
was established in 2017 between the Royal Malaysia
Police’s financial intelligence unit and select financial
institutions, to enable a targeted approach involving
the submission of higher quality and operationally
focused suspicious transaction reports related to
terrorist financing, resulting in a surge in high-quality
suspicious transaction reports.
Malaysia also enjoys a robust framework for
national coordination and cooperation at both the
policy and operational levels through our national
coordination committee to counter money-laundering.

S/PV. 8496

With regard to action plans for terrorist financing,
the focus includes integrating financial and terrorism
investigations and prosecuting terrorist financing in
parallel with terrorist offences. Concerning regional
and international engagement, Malaysia remains
committed to the agenda on anti-money-laundering
and combating terrorist financing led by the Financial
Action Task Force, the Asia/Pacific Group on Money
Laundering and the Egmont Group of Financial
Intelligence Units. Malaysia has an effective regulatory
system and directly implements targeted financial
sanctions against United Nations-designated persons
and entities. We maintain our domestic designation
of individuals and entities pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) and conduct effective oversight of both the
financial and non-financial sectors.
Malaysia joins other Member States in our common
endeavour to enhance the work of the Office of CounterTerrorism and other United Nations entities and
support their important initiatives. Malaysia believes
that it is important to realize that combating terrorist
financing requires the commitment and determination
of all countries.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Viet Nam.
Mr. Dang Dinh Quy (Viet Nam): I thank you,
Madam President, for giving me the opportunity
to participate in this open debate. I would like
express my appreciation to Under-Secretary-General
Voronkov, Mr. Billingslea and Ms. Buku for their
insightful briefings.
Over the past few months, the world has continued
to witness and suffer from heinous attacks of terrorism.
Innocent civilians continue to be killed in many corners
of the world. The landscape of terrorism has become
more complicated than ever before. The financing of
terrorism, including its fundraising tactics, is becoming
increasingly diversified and sophisticated. In that
context, I commend the holding of today’s open debate
and will focus on several issues outlined in the concept
note (S/2019/239, annex).
First of all, it is crucial to implement the legal
framework for counter-terrorism financing laid out
in the various relevant Security Council resolutions.
Resolution 2462 (2019), just adopted this morning, is
an important tool for filling gaps and a timely response
to the challenges we face. In that regard, Viet Nam
has gradually harmonized its normative framework in

19-0887957/78

S/PV.8496

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

order to align it with those resolutions, including by
criminalizing all acts of terrorism and its financing,
with serious penalties in our revised penal code and
relevant specific laws for countering terrorism and
money-laundering. We have also strengthened our
international cooperation in that area. Facing the new
challenges related to terrorist financing, we are of the
view that the Security Council could consider further
strengthening the implementation of existing sanctions
regimes, including those under today’s resolution, with
a view to effectively addressing new and emerging
risks and trends related to the financing of terrorism.
Secondly, we should consolidate collaborative
action at all levels and through all channels. Viet Nam is
actively participating in international efforts to prevent
and combat the financing of terrorism. We became a
member of the Asia/Pacific Group on Money Laundering
in 2007. In 2014, we implemented a national plan of
action for the period from 2015 to 2020, on moneylaundering prevention and control and on terrorism
financing, in order to fulfil the recommendations of the
Financial Action Task Force. At the regional level, we
have joined the efforts of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) to implement the ASEAN
Convention on Counter Terrorism and the ASEAN
Plan of Action to Prevent and Counter the Rise of
Radicalization and Violent Extremism for the 20182025 period. Bilaterally, we have concluded several
mutual legal assistance agreements in criminal matters.
We have also established a network for cooperation
and information-sharing and exchange with the lawenforcement agencies of more than 20 countries. Given
the current complexity of the financing of terrorism,
my delegation stresses how vital it is to intensify
cooperation among States in sharing information on
suspected transactions, capacity-building and the
transfer of technology to address the threats posed by
new financing methods.
Thirdly, Governments should maintain effective
collaboration with the private sector and the relevant
stakeholders. The State Bank of Viet Nam, our
central bank, works closely on regulatory inspection
with all institutions to monitor, inspect and ensure
their transactions’ safety, security and preparedness
with regard to counter-terrorism. Information
regarding suspected transactions is regularly
exchanged between law-enforcement agencies and our
international counterparts.
58/78

28/03/2019

In conclusion, I would like to once again reaffirm
my Government’s commitment and determination
to work closely with States and other international
partners in the fight against terrorism, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant
international obligations.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): I would like to thank
the French presidency of the Council for convening
this open debate on the important issue of preventing
and combating the financing of terrorism. I also want
to commend France’s leadership in facilitating the
adoption of resolution 2462 (2019) this morning. We
are pleased to join the international community in
fulfilling all its obligations. I congratulate all Security
Council members for their important contribution
to the resolution. I would also like to thank UnderSecretary-General Voronkov and the other briefers for
sharing their insights on the issue at the beginning of
the meeting.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, and I would like to add the following points
in my national capacity.
Terrorism and violent extremism are major
challenges to global peace and security and development.
Bangladesh is no exception to the suffering from that
menace. As I speak, five Bangladeshi families still
mourn the deaths of their near and dear ones who were
killed in the terrorist attack carried out in a mosque in
New Zealand on 15 March.
As our Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina has
reiterated time and again, Bangladesh maintains
a policy of zero tolerance towards all forms of
terrorism, including the financing of terrorism, both
nationally and internationally. Bangladesh believes
that no act of terrorism shall be condoned because
of its circumstances, method or objective. In other
words, a terrorist must be identified only as a terrorist,
irrespective of his or her race, colour, creed or religion.
As a matter of principle, Bangladesh does not allow its
territory to be used by any individual, group or entity
against any other State or individual. Bangladesh also
continues to adhere to the relevant human rights and
humanitarian principles in counter-terrorism efforts.
19-08879

28/03/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV. 8496

I would like to share with the Council what
Bangladesh has done and is doing at the national and
international levels to prevent and combat terrorism
financing. We formulated and enacted the Money
Laundering Prevention Act and Anti-terrorism Act in
2002 and 2009, respectively. Those Acts later went
through several amendments to meet the international
standards. They contain appropriate provisions to
respond to the request of foreign countries to identify,
freeze, seize and confiscate the proceeds of crime and
related property. Our Government has also established a
Cabinet-level task force to strengthen the investigation
and to coordinate the activities on countering
extremism, terrorism and terrorist financing.

to resolution 1373 (2001), the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team and the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force.

To complement those policy efforts, we have
also brought about reforms at the operational level to
implement the provisions of such Acts and rules and
on countering illicit financing. We have set up and
redesigned the relevant institutions. The Bangladesh
Financial Intelligence Unit is one such organization,
which works as the national central agency for
receiving, analysing and disseminating suspicious
transactions reports, cash transaction reports and
any information related to money laundering and the
financing of terrorism.

The first is awareness-raising and knowledge
sharing. In view of sustainable development approaches
and the promotion of inclusive financing mechanisms,
the risk of the misuse of funds is increasing. We therefore
need to expand and broaden awareness against terrorist
financing to reach a wider public.

A counter-terrorism and transnational crime unit
was also established within our police authorities to
deal with any form of cybercrime and transnational
crimes such as making fake currency notes, drug
trafficking and smuggling firearms. For the necessary
coordination among intelligence and law enforcement
agencies on the counter-terrorism and anti-terrorist
financing drive, a high-powered working group was
formed with representatives from all intelligence and
law enforcement agencies.

With regard to capacity-building, further training
and capacity-building to equip Governments and
institutions with the necessary knowledge to counter
modern technology-oriented Internet-based terrorist
financing are necessary.

As part of our international cooperation and
obligations, Bangladesh has taken all possible
measures in compliance with the International
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism and resolutions 1373 (2001), 2178 (2014),
2347 (2017) and 2396 (2017), including updating our
domestic laws and setting up the mechanisms that
I have just shared with the Council. As part of our
commitment to the eventual elimination of terrorism
in all its forms, Bangladesh acceded to all 14 United
Nations and international anti-terrorism conventions
and protocols. Bangladesh is very much engaged with
the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate pursuant

In order to provide broader international
cooperation, our Financial Intelligence Unit works
very closely with the Asia/Pacific Group on Money
Laundering, the Financial Action Task Force and the
Egmont Group of Financial Intelligence Units.
Although the influence and financial strengths of
terrorist outfits are diminishing to a certain extent,
we cannot underestimate their potential capacity.
Therefore, we must remain vigilant. In that regard, we
may consider the following elements.

Secondly, to fill the existing knowledge gap, we
can work to build a new financial security toolkit based
on the field-level experiences of different countries and
share that new knowledge with all relevant stakeholders.

On the coordination front, coordination among
field-level mechanisms within and among countries,
including coordination across sectors such as money
laundering, drug trafficking, human trafficking
and organized crime, can be increased. National
Governments should devote more efforts to coordinating
with non-governmental organizations and charitable
organizations to prevent the misuse of their funds for
terrorism-financing purposes
In conclusion, let me once again affirm that
Bangladesh, as a responsible and responsive nation,
will work closely with the international community to
deny transit, sanctuary or safe haven to foreign terrorist
groups and to develop and implement further global
standards to combat terrorism and terrorist financing.
We also look forward to working closely with the
United Nations system, in particular with the Security
Council, to facilitate the full implementation of the

19-0887959/78

S/PV.8496

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

28/03/2019

resolutions relating to terrorism and terrorist financing,
including the one adopted today.

to facilitate the implementation of those four counterterrorism projects.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Iraq.

My Government has taken a number of actions
and measures to limit the financing of terrorist Da’esh,
including, first, breaking the link between financial
institutions in Iraq and the international financial
institutions, especially those under the control of
terrorist Da’esh or present in territories controlled by
Da’esh or near its areas of control. Secondly, we have
created a blacklist of financial institutions that are
managed by the terrorist group Da’esh or involved in its
financing, which we share with the 70 countries taking
part in the international coalition to combat ISIL and
other terrorist groups. Thirdly, we have signed a number
of memoranda of understanding with international
financial intelligence units in order to exchange
information on the practices used by the terrorist group
Da’esh in financial transactions. Fourthly, we have
created a high-level committee in the secretariat of our
Cabinet with the aim of freezing terrorist funds. The
committee issues internal decisions, to be implemented
locally, on freezing the funds of internationally
designated individuals and entities included in the
lists contained in decisions adopted by the Security
Council’s sanctions committees. Lastly, we have
developed a media strategy to raise awareness among
practitioners of the ways and means that the terrorist
group Da’esh uses to transfer money, with the aim of
ensuring that those practitioners can avoid becoming
involved in such activities.

Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate the Republic
of France and to thank you, Madam President, for
convening this important meeting at which the new
resolution 2462 (2019) was adopted. My country
welcomes this resolution as a new and important step
in preventing and combating the financing of terrorism.
I would also like to thank Equatorial Guinea for its
efforts during its presidency of the Security Council
last month. I thank as well Mr. Vladimir Voronkov,
Under-Secretary-General, United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism, Mr. Marshall Billingslea, President
of the Financial Action Task Force, and Ms. Mercy
Buku, expert on money laundering, for their briefings
this morning.
The Government of my country reaffirms its
condemnation of the terrorist attack against the two
mosques in Christchurch, New Zealand, which led
to the death of many worshippers. We commend the
Government of New Zealand for its wise measures
against terrorism in all its forms and whatever its source.
Despite the military victory against the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) terrorist group by
all the units of the Iraqi forces, with the support of
the international coalition and friendly countries, that
victory is not enough to eliminate that group. In order
to do that, we must adopt a comprehensive, structured
and incremental approach, including by promoting the
necessary measures to prevent and combat the financing
of terrorism. The newly adopted resolution 2462 (2019)
represents an important and practical step towards
preventing and combating the financing of terrorism.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Lithuania.
Ms. Plepytė (Lithuania): Lithuania aligns itself
with the statement delivered on behalf of the European
Union and its member States earlier today.

The Government of my country does its utmost to
combat terrorism, particularly to prevent its financing.
In cooperation with the United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism, we have launched four important
projects, including one on measures to be taken to
combat and prevent the financing of terrorism. We
have also agreed on appointing a special adviser for
those four projects. In addition, we have adopted and
developed a national counter-terrorism strategy.

We would like to express our gratitude to France and
its Foreign Minister, Jean-Yves Le Drian, for convening
this open debate on preventing and combating the
financing of terrorism, as well as for their continuing
efforts to create opportunities to find responses to
this chameleon of an international threat. I would
also like to thank Under-Secretary-General Vladimir
Voronkov, Mr. Marshall Billingslea, President of the
Financial Action Task Force (FATF), and Ms. Mercy
Buku, the anti-money-laundering expert, for their
valuable insights.

A United Nations team visited Baghdad recently to
take part in a national workshop, held on 4 February,

We are pleased to note the new impetus given to
the guidelines for countering terrorism financing by

60/78

19-08879

28/03/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

today’s resolution 2462 (2019), submitted by France, as
one of the most constructive outcomes to the high-level
International Conference on Combating the Financing
of Da’esh and Al-Qaida, held in Paris in April 2018 on
the theme “No money for terror”.
The threat posed by terrorist financing in Lithuania
has been assessed as low, and only one terrorist
financing-related conviction has been recorded.
However, no State is immune to terrorist activity within
its borders, and the global nature of this threat requires
a comprehensive response at every level, national,
regional and international. Lithuania attaches great
importance to full compliance with and implementation
of the relevant security Council resolutions and
appropriate recommendations of the United Nations
bodies and FATF, as well the strengthened European
Union regulations. Our national legislative framework
has also been reinforced. In May 2015 our Parliament
adopted a public security development programme for
the period from 2015 to 2025. It focuses on security
policy and public security planning, including counterterrorism and terrorism financing. An inter-agency
working group was established as a result, bringing
together regulators, law-enforcement agencies and
other Government entities to jointly identify, assess
and mitigate key and emerging money-laundering and
terrorism financing risks.
In addition, in 2018 the Council of Europe’s
Committee of Experts on the Evaluation of Anti-Money
Laundering Measures and the Financing of Terrorism
(MONEYVAL) completed its assessment of Lithuania’s
compliance with the principal international standards
to counter money-laundering and the financing of
terrorism and the effectiveness of its implementation
of them. In its report, MONEYVAL concluded that
Lithuania had resilient coordination mechanisms in
place, including an anti-money-laundering coordination
group and numerous active agreements on the exchange
of information among authorities at the operational
level. The evaluation team also reported positive
feedback from the global network for combating moneylaundering and the financing of terrorism with regard
to the quality and relevance of Lithuania’s assistance.
MONEYVAL also acknowledged that Lithuania had
a sound legal and procedural framework for exchanging
information with foreign partners in a comprehensive,
proactive and timely manner, both upon request and
spontaneously, and in line with its low-risk profile.
Lithuania actively seeks international cooperation with

S/PV. 8496

other States, which has resulted in convictions and the
seizure and confiscation of proceeds of crimes. The
Bank of Lithuania has also rolled out a set of innovative
consultation tools for financial-market participants on
anti-money-laundering issues with a view to deepening
their understanding of the implementation of the
relevant supranational and national regulations.
It is clear that cryptocurrencies have the potential
to be used to finance terrorism and other forms of
online crime. Even though bitcoin and similar digital
assets were not used to fund any of the recent terrorist
attacks, there is a worrisome trend of attempts to use
them to finance online terrorist infrastructure. It is
crucial to deter terrorists from conducting fundraising
activities via social media, abusing pre-established
crowd-funding networks and web-based services. We
consider this an area of excellent opportunities for
public-private partnerships and initiatives.
The international community has countered
the financing of terrorism with broad cooperation
in tracking and cutting off funds through a range of
initiatives that limit access to legitimate financial
channels. However, it will remain essential to continue
monitoring and enforcing all of our commitments, and
it will continue to be vital to maintain political will,
particularly when dealing with non-State actors and
terrorists who are increasingly turning to new methods
of financial support that are ever more difficult
to curtail.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): I would like to thank
the French presidency for convening this open debate
and initiating the Security Council’s adoption of a new
resolution on countering the financing of terrorism
(resolution 2462 (2019)). We need to better understand
the link between financial activities and terrorism,
despite the fact that the nexus between financial and
terrorist activities is becoming more complicated,
with the emergence of new technologies and tools
such as cryptocurrencies. We therefore attach great
importance to strengthening international cooperation
and mechanisms in the area. In that understanding, we
were glad to be a sponsor of today’s resolution.
Countering the financing of terrorism is an
important element in Turkey’s overall counterterrorism policies. Turkey is a committed member
of the Financial Action Task Force, which sets the

19-0887961/78

S/PV.8496

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

international standards on countering the financing
of terrorism and money-laundering. Turkey’s national
financial intelligence unit, MASAK, oversees the
implementation of our national and international legal
frameworks for countering the financing of terrorism
and money-laundering. As a member of the Egmont
Group’s international financial intelligence sharing
platform, it works closely with its counterparts in this
field. The Turkish National Police and MASAK work
extensively together to prevent terrorists’ access to the
Turkish financial system and to disrupt illegal money
transactions. As in other areas of countering terrorism,
Turkey also contributes to strengthening international
efforts to counter the financing of terrorism and
money-laundering through its constantly improving
national capacity. Turkey supports the Security Council
resolutions in this field, and we integrate them fully
into our legal system. Accordingly, updates on United
Nations sanctions lists pursuant to Council resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) are integrated
expeditiously. Turkey has supported and sponsored
a number of resolutions that included entities and
individuals in those updates, and we will continue to
play an active role in that area.
We should also bear in mind that many terrorist
organizations, such as Da’esh, the Kurdish Workers
Party and its Syrian branch, Partiya Yekitiya Demokrat/
People’s Protection Units, also resort to conventional
methods for money transactions, such as hawala, to
finance their activities through front organizations.
Other terrorist organizations, such as the Fethullah
organization, benefit greatly from illegal monetary
activities under the pretext of being legal entities, and
engage heavily in shadowy criminal activities.
In line with Security Council resolution 1373
(2001), asset freezing has proved to be an effective
tool for depriving individuals and entities of their
financial capabilities and preventing them from using
and abusing legal financial systems. We believe that
selective approaches in the implementation of this tool
only promotes the degeneration of the system envisaged
in resolution 1373 (2001). In that regard, consistency
should be our guiding principle if we are to have an
effective system to prevent financing of terrorism and
bridge the gaps in this field.
Clearly, the task of addressing financing of
terrorism of is daunting. It requires ever-increasing
international cooperation. We deem this resolution to
be a step forward in the right direction. Turkey will
62/78

28/03/2019

continue to do its utmost to achieve further progress in
this field in the period to come.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the observer of the African Union.
Ms. Mohammed: Allow me at the outset to
congratulate France on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for this month and to thank you,
Madam, for presiding over this important open debate
on combatting the financing of terrorism.
I would like to also thank all briefers for their
insightful presentations.
Today’s debate is indeed all the more relevant as it
takes place against the background of ever-increasing
challenges to international peace and security. And
obviously, terrorism and violent extremism remain
the most serious threat to our world’s stability
and development.
I wish to reiterate the African Union’s strong and
unequivocal rejection of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, as well as its strong condemnation of
all terrorist acts, which cannot be justified under any
circumstances. I would like to reaffirm our full solidarity
with the affected countries and victims, whose plight
should be fully acknowledged and addressed. It is also
our strong belief that terrorism cannot and should not
be associated with any religion, race or nationality.
In this regard, we note with major concern the
growing capacity of terrorist groups to finance their
activities by, among other things, running criminal/
illicit economies in areas under their control, engaging
in the illegal exploitation of and trade in natural
resources, kidnaping for ransom, arms, drugs and
human trafficking, and other types of transnational
organized crime. In this regard, permit me to elaborate
on the following four points.
First, financing remains the major vulnerability
of the different terrorist groups. Indeed, the success of
these groups in causing more atrocities largely depends
on their ability to adequately and sustainably finance the
preparation, planning and execution of terrorist attacks.
Therefore, there is an urgent need for more concerted
and coordinated efforts on the part of Member States to
effectively deny terrorist groups any source of funding,
including payment of ransom, as well as any form of
military, logistical or political support.
19-08879

28/03/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Secondly, if we are to effectively prevent and
suppress the financing of terrorist acts, we need
to take fully into account the terrorists’ continued
ability to adapt their methods and innovate to meet
their financing needs. In this vein, there is increasing
evidence that terrorists are turning to transnational
organized crime networks to generate funding and
acquire logistical support to carry out their violent acts.
They are taking advantage of existing financial systems
and technologies, which they seek to float in order to
transfer large amounts of cash to intended recipients.
Similarly, there is evidence that terrorist groups
use legitimate private and non-profit sectors to channel
funding. However, the non-profit sector remains largely
ill-informed about its vulnerability to exploitation by
these extremist groups, and non-profit organizations
are often small, informal and not properly regulated.
Terrorist and extremist groups therefore take
advantage of these weaknesses to illicitly move large
amounts of money under the guise of implementing
non-profit activities.
Thirdly, continued efforts are required to ensure
full compliance with the international and regional
legal frameworks on combating the financing of
terrorism. The African Union (AU) is fully committed
to supporting its member States in implementing the
already agreed measures and meeting the international
standards in this regard. It will be recalled that the
African Union had played a critical role in raising
international awareness about the danger posed by the
payment of ransom to terrorist groups, as illustrated by
the decision adopted by the African Union Assembly on
the issue in July 2009 and subsequent efforts to enhance
the existing international frameworks.
Fourthly, financial intelligence, including from the
private sector, has been instrumental in tracking down
terrorists behind most attacks globally, and also in
Africa, and this has contributed to both the disruption
of terrorist financing and to preventing further
attacks. In this context, the strengthening of finance
intelligence units remains a major component of the
AU strategy to defeat terrorism and violent extremism.
The establishment of the Eastern and Southern Africa
Anti-Money Laundering Group is a reflection of the
importance that the countries of the region, and beyond,
attach to the need for cooperation and coordinated
efforts in ensuring compliance with the regional and
international standards against money-laundering and
terrorist financing.

S/PV. 8496

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize once again
the critical importance of cooperation among the Member
States, both at the regional and international levels.
Let us not forget that we are dealing with a borderless
threat of global reach and that in our globalized society,
no country is immune to its devastating impact. The
international approach to reversing this scourge must
be as comprehensive and as integrated as possible,
while focusing on preventing and disrupting financial
flows to terrorist and extremist groups.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I would
like to thank France, and Foreign Minister Le Drian
in particular, for convening today’s open debate on
a critically important issue. France continues to be
a leader in the fight against terrorism financing, and
we applaud the new resolution 2462 (2019), which was
adopted earlier today. The United Arab Emirates was
proud to co-sponsor the resolution, and France can rely
on our continued support in this area, but as Foreign
Minister Le Drian said this morning, it is a strong
political, not an end in itself, and much work remains to
be done by the international community.
As we have heard today, terrorism has no religion,
race or nationality. It occurs everywhere, as we saw two
weeks ago when 50 Muslims were viciously murdered
and another 50 wounded during Friday prayers in
Christchurch, New Zealand. The victims included four
children, one of them just three years old. Despite the
tragedy, the response of New Zealanders is an example
for us all of how to remain resilient in the face of such
abject horror.
Fighting terrorism requires a multi-pronged
strategy. It requires efforts to curb the hate that fuels the
spread of extremist ideologies to individuals, such as the
terrorist in New Zealand, or to groups, such as Al-Qaida
or Da’esh. It requires action to dismantle the terrorist
networks and support systems — whether offline or,
increasingly, online in the digital sphere — that allow
terrorists to organize. Crucially and most relevant
to today’s discussion, it requires constant vigilance
and monitoring of financial networks to prevent
terrorists from acquiring weapons, recruiting fighters
or launching attacks. Member States must therefore
tackle the abuse of financial institutions and non-profit
organizations for terrorist-financing purposes.

19-0887963/78

S/PV.8496

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The United Arab Emirates fully understands this
obligation, especially given that our country is a trade
and financial services hub in the Gulf. We have taken a
number of practical steps to secure our financial system
that I would like to share with Council members today.
These steps include strengthening our existing legal
frameworks to combat terrorist financing, as we did in
2018 by implementing the latest Financial Action Task
Force (FATF) recommendations; providing our financial
intelligence units with the equipment, resources and
training they need to analyse and investigate suspicious
transactions; monitoring financial transactions and
charitable activities with private and non-profit actors,
which are required under United Arab Emirates law to
continuously identify, evaluate and document the risk
of misuse of their services for criminal and terrorist
activity; raising domestic awareness through various
media platforms to prevent domestic funding of
terrorism; and implementing laws and regulations to
freeze terrorists’ funds, in accordance with resolution
1373 (2001).
Despite our best efforts, the threat of terrorist
financing remains, and there is more to work we can
do in learning about and collaborating with partners to
counter this threat.
First, certain Member States continue to support
and finance terrorist activity, undermining the Security
Council’s efforts to maintain international peace and
security. That has forced us and other concerned States
to take sovereign measures.
Secondly, there is a growing link between organized
crime and terrorism. For example, Da’esh, Al-Qaida and
other affiliated terrorist groups have looted, smuggled
and sold cultural artefacts to finance their destructive
operations. To combat this threat, the United Arab
Emirates worked with France and UNESCO to establish
the International Alliance for the Protection of Heritage
in Conflict Areas. Through that organization and other
such programmes, we are working to rebuild and
restore the invaluable cultural heritage of Mosul, Mali
and other places where terrorists have sought to erase
the very history of tolerance and inclusion that they
so despise.
Terrorism is a transnational threat that requires
international and coordinated action. The United Arab
Emirates is a member of the Middle East and North
Africa Financial Action Task Force, and we are working
diligently to implement the FATF recommendations
64/78

28/03/2019

after each evaluation. The United Arab Emirates’
Anti-Money Laundering and Suspicious Cases Unit is a
member of the Egmont Group and has signed more than
45 memorandums of understanding with national and
international counterparts.
These efforts, however, are just one step and
part of a bigger picture. As combating terrorist
financing requires constant international vigilance and
improvement, we think that the United Nations system
itself could strengthen its efforts by taking the three
following steps.
First, it must hold Member States accountable for
their financing of terrorism when it occurs, especially
when such actions violate relevant Security Council
resolutions and their obligations under the International
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism. Secondly, it should provide training to
Member States when the Security Council adopts
resolutions that create new obligations to curb terrorist
financing. Thirdly, it should explore ways to curb the
financing of extremism, particularly media platforms
that spread hateful messages and create an environment
where terrorist ideologies can thrive.
The United Arab Emirates once again reiterates that
it is committed to upholding its obligations to combat
terrorist financing under international and regional
treaties, as well as Security Council resolutions. We are
ready to strengthen our global partnerships in this area
and we will continue to share our expertise with our
partners, and we very much look forward to learning
from their experiences and best practices.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Mlynár (Slovakia): I thank you, Madam,
for organizing this important debate on preventing
and combatting the financing of terrorism. I also
wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov,
Mr. Marshall Billingslea and Ms. Mercy Buku for their
inciteful briefings.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union. Allow
me to make a few additional observations.
It is crucial that the Security Council, as the primary
organ responsible for the maintenance of international
peace and security, continue to attach the highest
attention to the issue of counter-terrorism, including
by responding to the changing nature of the terrorist
19-08879

28/03/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

threat and the ways in which terrorists finance their
activities. In this respect, we welcome the adoption of
resolution 2462 (2019) today. Expressing its support,
Slovakia co-sponsored the resolution and is committed
to ensuring its full implementation.
The Slovak Republic condemns all forms and
manifestations of terrorism and is engaged in counterterrorism, both individually and as a part of the
international community.
All States have obligations to respond to the
global threat of terrorism, including by preventing
and eliminating funding for the travel and activities of
terrorist entities, groups and individuals. We reaffirm
our commitment to tackling all sources, techniques and
channels of terrorist financing and call for the effective
worldwide implementation of legal instruments,
including the 1999 International Convention for the
Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism, relevant
Security Council resolutions and the Financial Action
Task Force standards. Slovakia has also participated
in the Counter-Da’esh Finance Group of the Global
Coalition against Da’esh. We use that particular
platform to exchange information in order to improve
our national terrorist assets freezing system as well.
The Security Council has affirmed the importance
of international, regional, and subregional counterterrorism cooperation in a number of its resolutions.
Earlier this week, Slovakia as the country currently
exercising the chairmanship of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), organized
the OSCE-wide Counter-Terrorism Conference. More
than 300 high-level participants — including political
representatives, national counter-terrorism coordinators
and experts from the 57 participating countries and
partners for cooperation, as well as representatives
from the United Nations and other international,
regional and subregional organizations, academia and
civil society — met in Bratislava.
Under
our
leadership
of
the
OSCE
chairmanship-in-office,
the
Counter-Terrorism
Conference highlighted advances made in identifying
impactful and human rights-compliant programs, as
well as platforms and mechanisms for governmental
and non-governmental cooperation. The presentation of
best practices in preventing the violent extremism and
radicalization that can lead to terrorism focused most
specifically on multi-stakeholder efforts to disengage
individuals from violent extremism and terrorism.

S/PV. 8496

To conclude, we believe that a robust framework,
its rigorous implementation and effective international
cooperation can significantly contribute to preventing
and countering the financing of terrorism. In that
context, I should like once again to thank the French
presidency’s efforts at this particular juncture.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Vieira (Brazil): At the outset, allow me to
thank you, Madam, for organizing this timely open
debate on preventing and combating the financing of
terrorism. I would also like to extend my appreciation
to the Under-Secretary-General of the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism, the President of the
Financial Action. Task Force and to the expert in
anti-money-laundering and countering the financing of
terrorism for their informative briefings.
Every terrorist attack, no matter where it happens
and whom it targets, affects each one of us. Terrorism
challenges our sense of humanity and attempts to create
an environment of fear and despair. Only through our
collective effort can we counter this scourge and prevent
further attacks. Combating the financing of terrorism is
a good example of an area where cooperation is key and
where results may have direct impacts on the ability of
terrorist groups to continue to operate.
Brazil is committed to the elimination of terrorism,
including its financing. Our Constitution establishes
the repudiation of terrorism as one of the guiding
principles of our foreign policy. We updated our
legislation to typify the crimes of preparatory acts
of terrorism and of recruitment of foreign terrorist
combatants. Particularly with respect to financing, we
have been working to simplify the procedures to block
assets of terrorists listed by the Council. Two weeks
ago, Brazil adopted a law to facilitate the immediate
implementation of Security Council resolutions
concerning sanctions against individuals and entities
affiliated with terrorist organizations. Coupled with
previous legislative changes, this legislative piece brings
the Brazilian regulatory framework completely within
the standards of the Financial Action Task Force. It is
imperative that we intensify our work on cutting off the
sources of terrorism financing. As a related measure,
we should also sharpen our focus on combating money
laundering. Although there is no evidence of automatic
operational links between terrorism and crime, money

19-0887965/78

S/PV.8496

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

launderers may work for both indistinctively. There are
two issues that I would like to address in today’s debate.
First, we should always keep in mind that any
counter-terrorism action, including on financing, must
abide by international law, in particular human rights
law, humanitarian law and refugee law. That might
seem to be common sense, as the Council consistently
stresses that point throughout its resolutions. However,
practice has shown that sometimes well-intended
legislation ends up causing international law violations
when applied.
Broad
interpretations
of
counter-terrorism
legislation by national courts have hindered
humanitarian action in the past. As recognized in the
sixth review of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, it is imperative that Member
States ensure that their counter-terrorism measures
do not impede humanitarian and medical activities
or engagement with all relevant actors. That is key
to ensuring that our actions effectively contribute to
eradicating terrorism. If counter-terrorism efforts
disregard basic notions of humanity and the shared
values that inspire humanitarian law, they risk
reinforcing rather than countering the narratives of
terrorist groups.
The second point I would like to make relates to
prevention. As the concept note (S/2019/239, annex)
accurately points out, a number of terrorist attacks have
been perpetrated by individuals with limited financial
resources. That raises a question about the limits of
strategies focused on cutting off the financial sources
of terrorism. As history has taught us, terrorism is
hardly about money. Financial sources are certainly an
enabler of those terrible acts, and as such they need to
be addressed accordingly. Nevertheless, when a group
or an individual seeks to find the means to perpetrate
a terrorist act, the damage is already done because the
decision to resort to violence and terror has already
been made. That is why we must cut off the deeper
sources of terrorism by addressing its root causes.
Terrorist groups have been attracting recruits by
offering them an illusory sense of purpose, belonging
and identity. Social exclusion and youth unemployment
have been increasing the vulnerability of people to
the recruitment tactics of terrorist groups. Moreover,
expressions of xenophobia, discrimination and
prejudice not only contribute to social exclusion but
also fuel extremist narratives that are conducive to
66/78

28/03/2019

terrorism. We must react against speech and any action
that is inconsistent with the respect for diversity, such
as those associating terrorism with specific cultures,
religions or ethnic groups.
There is no justification for terrorism. Brazil
condemns terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
and is engaged in counter-terrorism efforts at the
United Nations, as the main Organization that
can bring universal consensus to the efforts of the
international community against that scourge. In
particular, the Council has a special role in condemning
terrorism and preventing its spread in a coherent and
universal manner, while always ensuring full respect
for international law. It is our hope that the discussions
that we have in this Chamber today will contribute to
bringing the scourge of terrorism to a definitive end.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bahrain.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Madam President, for
holding this open debate and for choosing its important
topic to enhance the efforts to combat terrorism and
terrorism financing and support in all its forms. I would
also like to congratulate your friendly country on its
successful presidency of the Security Council this
month and on the adoption of resolution 2462 (2019). I
also thank the briefers for their valuable contributions.
When we talk about combating extremism and
terrorism we always hear that we need to address the
root causes that allow terrorists to spread their extremist
ideology and pursue their destructive acts. Terrorism is
spreading mainly because it continues to receive funds
and support from individuals, entities and countries.
Despite the best efforts of the international community to
put in place strategies to track and eradicate the sources
of financing for terrorism — and despite national,
regional and international legislation to hold those who
fund terrorism accountable — supporters of terrorism
continue to find new means of funding terrorist acts and
avoiding censorship. Therefore, financing terrorism
remains one of the obstacles to saving the world from
this scourge. The Islamic Republic of Iran continues to
support and finance terrorism in the region.
The Kingdom of Bahrain has had successful and
long experiences in combating terrorism financing and
putting an end to suspicious financial transactions. We
are willing to exchange that expertise with friendly
countries and continue our cooperation with all States
19-08879

28/03/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

and international organizations to end that scourge.
We believe it is important to strengthen international
efforts to combat terrorism financing. We must also dry
up the sources of terrorism because halting terrorism
financing is an important aspect in the overall fight
against terrorism. Therefore, we need deterrent
mechanisms to eliminate all sources of funding for
terrorist groups.
Our frameworks at the national level to combat
terrorism funding in Bahrain include several laws,
mainly Law No. 4 of 2001, on prohibiting and countering
money laundering, and Law No. 25 and Law No. 54. In
addition, Law No. 7 of 2017 deals with ratifying the
Arab Convention on Combating Money Laundering
and Terrorist Financing.
The Kingdom of Bahrain continues to play a role
in countering terrorism. In 2014 and 2015 we hosted
the Manama Meeting on Combating the Financing of
Terrorism, with the participation of representatives
from the United Nations, the International Monetary
Fund, the European Commission and the Financial
Action Task Force (FATF), as well as the Middle
East and North Africa Financial Action Task Force,
whose headquarters is in Bahrain. We are addressing
the challenges related to combating the financing
of terrorist groups and terrorist activities in all their
forms and manifestations. The Manama Meeting issued
recommendations in line with international law and the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
notably with regard to investigating and tracking
terrorism financing by groups and individuals, as well
as fully implementing financial sanctions with the
positive involvement of the private sector in the efforts
pertaining to terrorism financing.
The Kingdom of Bahrain fully participates in the
international framework to combat the financing of
terrorism through many means, including by joining
the international network of regional organizations
similar to the FATF. We also participate effectively in
all the meetings held by the global coalition to defeat
Da’esh and combat terrorism financing in order to dry
up its sources of funding by implementing a joint action
plan among the countries of the coalition.
One of the most prominent activities conducted
by the Kingdom of Bahrain, in cooperation with
the Central Bank, was the eighth Gulf European
workshop on counter-terrorism financing. Another
workshop on charitable contributions and combating

S/PV. 8496

terrorism financing as well as violent extremism was
held in cooperation with the Central Bank, the Gulf
Cooperation Council and the United States of America.
The Kingdom of Bahrain also participated in the tenth
meeting of the Counter ISIS Finance Group, held in
Poland in September 2018. As a member of the Terrorist
Financing Targeting Centre, headed by the United
States and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, we discussed
the guidelines on tracking the sources of terrorism
financing and the role of the Centre’s Executive
Committee and its decision-making mechanism for
designating individuals and entities funding terrorist
actions. During the general meeting of the FATF and
the meetings of the working group in Paris in June
2018, the mutual evaluation report of Bahrain was
adopted, whose aim is to implement measures to combat
terrorism financing worldwide.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Bahrain would like
to highlight its adoption of a comprehensive approach
to combating terrorism and terrorism financing. We
will strengthen our national and collective participation
to combat terrorism financing. We stand ready to work
with the international community to dry up the sources
of terrorist funding and combat terrorist ideologies
so that we can all enjoy safety and security through
our partnership in maintaining international peace
and security.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): At the outset, let me join
the previous speakers in thanking the French presidency
for convening today’s open debate.
I fully align myself with the statement delivered
earlier on behalf of the European Union and would like
to make the following comments in my national capacity.
I will focus on two main issues proposed by the
presidency of our debate, beginning with the one related
to adapting the response of the international community
to the changing nature of the terrorist threat.
There have recently been a number of important
developments in advancing new counter-terrorism
standards and further consolidating and amplifying
international action to counter the threat of terrorism,
which have provided a basis for the introduction of a
more nuanced approach to combating the financing of
terrorism. In that regard, we welcome the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2462 (2019), which was

19-0887967/78

S/PV.8496

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

co-sponsored by 51 States, including Ukraine. We
believe that the resolution will be another practical
tool at our disposal. Indeed, we are witnessing
growing challenges related to the abuse of legitimate
financial institutions and businesses, the emergence
of new payment methods and the use of non-profit
organizations to transfer funds for terrorist purposes. In
addition, the resolution provides specific measures for
assessing and addressing the potential risks associated
with innovations in financial technologies, products
and services.
Despite the efforts undertaken to counter terrorism,
including legal, diplomatic and military measures, more
should be done to eradicate the phenomenon, which has
become rampant at the regional and global levels, and
particular emphasis should be placed on the underlying
causes of terrorism. Therefore, the following further
efforts need to be undertaken.
First, the capacity of States in the area of collecting
credible evidence of terrorist activities should be
enhanced in order to introduce more universal
criminalization of the actions of all perpetrators,
organizers, mentors and sponsors of terrorism and
ensure the eventual prosecution and punishment of
those who provide funding for terrorist activities in any
form and by any means.
Secondly, cooperation should be promoted between
Governments and the private sector, including through
social media.
Thirdly, awareness should be raised regarding
existing risks in the area of the financing of
terrorism and regarding financial flows with links to
terrorist activities.
Fourthly, effective international cooperation and
mutual assistance should be ensured at the level of
financial intelligence and law enforcement agencies.
Such efforts should be based on relevant
international legal instruments, including Security
Council resolutions, as well as recommendations
made within the framework of the Financial Action
Task Force.
That brings me to the issue of compliance with
international obligations in the area of counterterrorism. It is crucial to ensure the effective
implementation of all international instruments for
combating terrorism, including the International
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
68/78

28/03/2019

Terrorism. Unfortunately, not all States respect their
international obligations in that area. For example, by
joining the Convention, States have pledged to suppress
the financing of terrorism, but in reality we continue
to witness the opposite from some States, which has
already caused tragic consequences, including in my
own country.
For already half a decade, the policy of terror has
become one of the key elements of the hybrid aggression
cruelly and shamelessly launched against my country in
2014, in blatant violation of fundamental international
norms and principles, including key counter-terrorism
obligations. The reports of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission
to Ukraine and the United Nations human rights
mission in Ukraine confirm the continuous flow of
ammunition, weaponry and fighters from the Russian
Federation to the temporarily occupied territories of
Ukraine. Those military assets are delivered either
openly or under the guise of so-called humanitarian
convoys. With that and other Russian support, illegal
armed groups attacked Malaysia Airlines Flight MH17, taking nearly 300 innocent lives. With that and other
Russian support, almost 13,000 people were killed in
Donbas, while nearly 1.6 million people were forced to
leave their homes.
In temporarily occupied Crimea, the aggressor
State discredits international efforts, including those
of the Council, to counter terrorism, by producing
fake accusations of terrorist activities and by illegally
sentencing innocent people. Just few days ago, on the
fifth anniversary of the adoption of General Assembly
resolution 68/262, entitled “Territorial integrity of
Ukraine”, the Russian occupation authorities again
chose to use the so-called Hizb ut-Tahrir case — already
used to fabricate cases against Crimean Tatar activists
and their subsequent convictions — as a pretext for
punitive actions against them. Considering that Islamic
extremism had never been part of the history of the
Crimean peninsula before the Russian occupation, the
frequency with which the occupation authorities use
that accusation to justify their searches and detention
of Crimean Tatar individuals strongly suggest that it
is a pretext for discrimination, in blatant violation of
the International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination.
Those and other violations of the international legal
framework prove, time and again, that combating the
activities of individual terrorists and terrorist groups
19-08879

28/03/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

will be insufficient if the problem of State-sponsored
terrorism is not effectively and comprehensively
addressed. The issue of bringing to account not only
individuals and organizations but also those States
responsible for organizing, financing or otherwise
supporting terrorist activities should be duly dealt with.
The sanctions imposed on the aggressor State should be
maintained and further strengthened. The perpetrators
of heinous terrorist acts must be brought to justice.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): I wish
to thank you, Madam President, for organizing today’s
important debate, and to thank the briefers for their
contributions. Allow me also to commend the Security
Council on its unanimous adoption of resolution 2462
(2019), which the Kingdom of the Netherlands proudly
co-sponsored.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands fully aligns
itself with the statement made by the observer of the
European Union. In my national capacity, I would like
to highlight three issues — first, obligations under
international law; secondly, public-private cooperation;
and, thirdly, coordination.
Many of the previous speakers today have said
that the terrorist threat is changing and the technology
with which they finance their operations is developing,
and that we therefore have to change and develop our
approach to terrorism financing. We agree. Resolution
2462 (2019) will guide us in doing so. But changing and
developing our approach does not mean that the rules of
the game have changed. On the contrary, every country’s
obligation under international law, particularly human
rights law, international refugee law and international
humanitarian law, is now more relevant than ever.
This is also why the Kingdom of the Netherlands is a
candidate for a seat on the Human Rights Council for
the 2020-2022 term. If we waver on our commitments
under international law, we will only be playing
into the hands of the terrorists we want to fight. We
therefore have to ensure through fair risk assessment
that non-governmental organizations can continue to
operate in a free space and that humanitarian actors
can continue to deliver aid in line with humanitarian
principles. We call on the Security Council to see to
those aspects when it reviews the implementation of
resolution 2462 (2019), a year from now.

S/PV. 8496

With regard to my second point, on public-private
cooperation, the public and private sectors are natural
allies in the fight against terrorism and its financing.
I applaud France’s efforts to enhance public-private
cooperation in countering the financing of terrorism
through resolution 2462 (2019). In the Netherlands
we have already had good experiences with such
cooperation. For some years now, our public prosecutor,
police, financial-intelligence unit and private
companies, including banks and insurance companies,
have shared information on individuals and transactions
related to terrorism on a basis of civil law. Since its
inception, this public-private partnership has resulted
in more than 300 additional suspicious transactions
reports related to terrorism financing. We encourage
the United Nations and its Member States to engage in
similar efforts to join forces with the private sector.
On my third and final point, coordination, I
commend France’s efforts to bring the important work
of the Financial Action Task Force closer to that of
the United Nations. The coordination of these bodies’
efforts, as well as those of the Global Counterterrorism
Forum, the Egmont Group and the Global Coalition to
Defeat ISIS, is extremely important to us if we are to
stay ahead of the curve. The same goes for international
coordination within the United Nations system. As
United Nations entities, Governments and international
organizations, we have to learn from each other, share
good practices and strengthen capacity-building. Only
by doing so can we be greater than the sum of our parts
in countering terrorism.
In conclusion, two weeks ago, two men were
arrested in Amsterdam in connection with a horrific
terrorist attack that occurred in the capital of your
country, Madam President, in 2015. The two men are
accused of selling Kalashnikovs and explosives that
were used in the Paris attack that killed 129 people.
Four years later, this shows that investigating financial
and other resources is key to holding terrorists and their
accomplices to account. It shows that complacency
in our fight against terrorism is not an option and
cannot be one. And it shows that the Kingdom of the
Netherlands continues to cooperate with its partners
and the United Nations and its Member States to stop
terrorism at its source.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.

19-0887969/78

S/PV.8496

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I thank
the delegation of France for organizing today’s open
debate and the briefers for their input.
Terrorism is a real threat, and the recent terrorist
attacks in New Zealand have shown once again that no
country is immune to this pervasive evil. Combating
it requires a comprehensive preventive approach,
which means that the root causes of terrorism should
be addressed first and foremost. From this perspective,
it is extremely important to prevent and combat the
financing of terrorism.
As a victim of terrorism and as a country that has
lost more than 17,000 of its citizens to terrorist attacks,
Iran is determined to continue combating terrorism in
all its aspects, including financing. To that end, Iran has
enacted a national strategy for countering terrorist acts
and a number of laws that include preventive measures
on the financing of terrorism. The latter is addressed
in several bilateral agreements as well. Iran also has an
active financial-intelligence unit.
Preventing and combating the financing of terrorism
requires the genuine political will of all States as well
as efficient international standards. For several years,
Da’esh received large amounts of petrodollars and other
financial donations. It also derived considerable revenue
through the looting and sale of Iraq and Syria’s cultural
properties as well as by exporting their oil. Even now,
terrorist groups such as the Al-Nusra Front in Syria, in
addition to enjoying the political and military support
of certain countries, are receiving significant financial
contributions. These facts alone show not only that the
existing standards are not efficient enough, but also
that many countries have not implemented them at all,
as one of the briefers pointed out earlier. Interestingly,
however, for clear political reasons, those countries
have never been listed by the institutions that set the
standards. If they are not held accountable, they will be
emboldened to continue financing terrorists. The fact
is that counter-terrorism activities are effective only
when double standards and selective approaches are
avoided and all States cooperate fully and responsibly.
Some countries use both counter-terrorism and
terrorism as a foreign-policy tool, for example by
designating adversaries as State sponsors of terrorism,
which is done exclusively for political motives and
therefore has no legitimacy. That is also the case with
regard to the unilateral labelling of certain popular
political parties in other States as terrorists. The irony
70/78

28/03/2019

is that those who have adopted such policies are those
who have created certain terrorist groups and, based on
their own short-sighted national interest, have delisted
known terrorist groups and given them safe haven.
They even continue to support groups that the Security
Council itself has designated as terrorists.
Finally, we must not forget that foreign invasion
and occupation are the main factors in creating grounds
conducive to terrorism. While a country’s inherent
right to resist foreign invasion and occupation must
not be equated with terrorism, it is clear that in order
to uproot terrorism, occupation and invasion must
come to an end. If unchecked, terrorists and occupiers
will evolve into a coalition. In fact, that has already
happened: Israel supports terrorists in Syria in various
ways, including by healing the injuries of their terrorist
sisters and brothers.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ecuador.
Mr. Gallegos Chiriboga (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank the Permanent Mission of France for
holding this open debate, and I welcomed the presence
in the Security Council this morning of France’s
Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs, Mr. Jean-Yves
Le Drian, to whom I extend my greetings.
We consider it essential for all States to be able to
express their concerns in the Security Council about
the threat that terrorism poses to international peace
and security and, above all, about the importance of
preventing it and combating its financing. No State is
immune to terrorism, but neither can any State respond
to it alone, which is why we are convinced that joint
measures and concerted actions are required to counter
terrorism and its pernicious effects.
The Republic of Ecuador reaffirms that terrorism
is a serious threat to the international community as a
whole. That is why we unequivocally condemn all acts
of terrorism, regardless of their form or manifestation
and regardless of their purpose, their origin or the entity
that carries them out.
Preventing terrorism is as important as suppressing
it, which is why it is essential to identify and eliminate
the causes and factors that may promote terrorist acts,
including their financing, political, ethnic, religious
and racial intolerance, corruption and the social and
economic gap between peoples and nations. Ecuador has
taken important steps to address and combat the threat
19-08879

28/03/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

of terrorism by criminalizing the financing of terrorism
and associated money-laundering through preventive
measures and international judicial cooperation. I
would like to mention a few examples in that regard.
The Ecuadorian Comprehensive Organic Criminal
Code, adopted in 2014, expressly criminalizes
terrorism and its financing by recognizing the direct
relationship between the crime of money-laundering
and the financing of terrorism and shows progress in
controlling those crimes. The law on the prevention,
detection and eradication of the crime of moneylaundering and the financing of offences is aimed at
preventing, detecting in a timely manner, punishing
and eradicating money-laundering and the financing
of offences in their various forms. With the same
objective, the ongoing action plan for the prevention of
money-laundering and the financing of terrorism was
approved. The report of the International Cooperation
Review Group recognized that Ecuador
“has made significant progress in consolidating
its anti-money-laundering regime against the
financing of terrorism.”
That shows that Ecuador is taking concrete action
to comply with the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy and the Secretary-General’s Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism.
It is also essential to highlight the link between
the financing and support of terrorist groups and
transnational organized crime groups, whose acts
affect civilians and innocent people in a similar way. At
the beginning of 2018, my country reported violent acts
resulting from the actions of irregular armed groups
linked to transnational organized crime, including
a dozen terrorist attacks that resulted in a number
of injuries, deaths and displacements and damaged
State infrastructure.
As an immediate response, the Government
of Ecuador established its national committee on
comprehensive border security as the body responsible
for coordinating and developing policies, guidelines,
procedures and actions in the area of comprehensive
border security and implemented a defence plan for
security along its northern border, which provides
guidelines for the strategic planning of comprehensive
defence, security and development policies to address
the complex transnational threat of terrorism in all
its dimensions.

S/PV. 8496

It is also important to point out the connection
between terrorism and corruption. For that reason,
Ecuador unequivocally condemns acts of corruption,
the networks of which seriously undermine the stability
of States and entire regions and jeopardize the peace
and development of our peoples in the Americas and the
world. The United Nations is the only global platform
to carry out an effective fight against terrorism. Before
concluding, I would therefore like to reiterate Ecuador’s
commitment to work towards strengthening the
international fight against terrorism and put an end to
that serious threat to international peace and security.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Afghanistan.
Ms. Raz (Afghanistan): We thank you, Madam
President, and your colleagues for taking the initiative,
under the French presidency, to organize this important
meeting on countering the financing of terrorism.
Enhancing progress on preventing and combating the
financing of terrorism will limit and weaken terrorists
in continuing and expanding their reign of terror and
destruction worldwide. We welcome this meeting to
reinforce the collective efforts of the United Nations
and all Member States to create greater awareness of
ways to minimize the methods terrorists use to finance
their activities.
Afghanistan’s approach to counter-terrorism is a
comprehensive one. As a prime victim of terrorism,
we fight various terrorist groups on the battlefield,
including terrorist fighters who come from outside
Afghanistan. We have also implemented measures to
strengthen our national legislation to meet the provisions
of various treaties, conventions and United Nations
resolutions, including Security Council resolutions, to
combat terrorist financing.
Preventing the financing of terrorism is an
important part of our national counter-terrorism
strategy. Our National Security Council is leading
inter-agency efforts to implement that strategy. We
have established a task force, made up of the Attorney
General’s Office, the Ministry of Finance, the National
Directorate of Security and the Financial Transactions
and Reports Analysis Center. The mandate of the
task force is to ensure the implementation of legal
frameworks to prevent money-laundering and other
unregulated currency flows that help terrorists finance
their activities.

19-0887971/78

S/PV.8496

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Progress in that area has led to our compliance
with international standards. That was recognized
by the Financial Action Task Force, which removed
Afghanistan from its compliance watch list. In the
broader context, our efforts are also in line with
commitments under the International Convention for
the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism and the
United Nations Convention against Corruption.
We are also engaged in efforts to disrupt the links
between terrorism and organized crime. Afghanistan
has long been engaged in the fight against narcotics,
with a special focus on preventing the Taliban and
other affiliated groups from benefiting from the
proceeds of illicit drugs. Under our national counternarcotics strategy, we are taking action across multiple
fronts, such as eradication, public awareness and
alternative livelihoods.
Approximately 3,000 operations were conducted last
year alone, as a result of which close to 3,500 individuals,
including foreign nationals, were apprehended and
prosecuted. Similarly, drug-processing laboratories
and storage facilities were destroyed through joint
military operations. Those operations have disrupted
the Taliban’s ability to benefit from narcotics revenue.
In addition, we also confiscated more than 200 tons of
illicit drugs in the course of one year.
We have improved security at national airports and
border crossings to detect, deter and prevent trafficking,
which demonstrates our strong commitment to root
out the illicit drug economy and address the linkages
between terrorist financing and narcotics. Those
measures led to a decrease in drug production last year,
as also reflected in the most recent survey conducted by
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.
The problem of narcotics in Afghanistan must be
seen in the context of a complex situation. We must
recognize that only a robust and comprehensive effort,
with international and regional partners, geared at
addressing all components, including production,
trafficking and consumption, can achieve the shared
objective, which is to completely eliminate narcotics
production and trade. To ensure our success, we call
for a more cohesive and unified regional approach,
especially given that our immediate neighbours can
play an effective and very strong role in confronting the
nexus of transnational criminal activities. The inflow of
resources that finance and support terrorist activities,
such as the trafficking in weapons and chemical
72/78

28/03/2019

precursors, arrive from outside Afghanistan, which is
why we need a comprehensive regional approach to
combat that menace.
The Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) and the Security
Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011), concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities, were established with a
purpose. However, experience has shown that sanctions
measures, including the freezing of assets of individuals
on the consolidated lists, are often lax and not enforced
properly. We believe that the effective implementation
of those measures would bring pressure to bear on the
terrorist groups and limit their activities. New listings
for individuals, including those involved in the drug
trade as well as wealthy sponsors providing financial
contributions to the Taliban and other affiliated groups,
are necessary.
The sanctions regimes must be thoroughly
enforced in full, with the cooperation of all concerned
States. In this regard, we appreciate the important work
being done by the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team in connection with the sanctions
regime imposed by the 1988 and 1267 Committees.
We have even further enhanced our collaboration
with United Nations entities, including the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED).
In January 2017, during CTED’s visit to Afghanistan,
new areas of collaboration were identified, and,
together with international partners, we look forward
to the implementation of those recommendations.
To conclude, we welcome the adoption today of
resolution 2462 (2019) and reaffirm our full support
for all international efforts to end the dangerous link
between all forms of organized criminal activities
with terrorism, including the financing of terrorism.
Afghanistan remains a committed partner in this
imperative, and its efforts and genuine fight against
global terrorism need to be recognized. We are
committed to fighting for the sake of security and
stability in our country and in our region and beyond.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kenya.
Mr. Masila (Kenya): We wish at the outset to
acknowledge the presence here today of Mr. Marshall
Billingslea, President of the Financial Action Task
Force and Assistant Secretary of the United States
19-08879

28/03/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Department of the Treasury; the Under-SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations Office of CounterTerrorism; and Ms. Mercy Buku, and to thank them for
their informative presentations.
Madam President, I wish to thank you for having
organized this important meeting and also to commend
you for the diplomatic skill and collegial manner with
which you have conducted the affairs of the Council
during your presidency. We take note with appreciation
of the comprehensive concept note (S/2019/239, annex)
that you circulated to guide today’s debate.
I commend the Security Council for having
adopted resolution 2462 (2019) today on preventing and
combating the financing of terrorism, a resolution of
which we, too, were a sponsor. My delegation applauds
the leadership of France in fostering international
cooperation to combat the financing of terrorism,
particularly the Paris Agenda on “No Money for Terror”.
Kenya, like many other countries, has suffered
the horrors of terrorism. The terrorist threat in Kenya
and, indeed, the region emanates from Al-Shabaab,
an affiliate of the Al-Qaida terror network. Kenya has
responded robustly to the terrorist threat by enhancing
its domestic capabilities and embracing deeper
international cooperation.
We have benchmarked best international practices,
integrated all international instruments against
terrorism into our domestic legislation and created
the relevant institutions and mechanisms to ensure the
balanced implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Above all, we participate in the Security Counciland African Union-mandated African Union Mission
in Somalia so as to degrade Al-Shabaab in support of
the Somalia political transition and also as part of our
contribution in the fight against international terrorism.
Kenya wishes to express its deep concern about the
continued threat of terrorism emanating from territories
controlled by terrorist groups and how this contributes
to terrorism financing. Currently, Al-Shabaab in
Somalia is tapping into humanitarian aid by extorting
taxes and enforcing payment for the free passage of
humanitarian aid within its so-called controlled areas.
In addition, that terrorist group maintains a deeply
entrenched and pervasive network that is involved in
activities ranging from illicit trade, foreign remittances
and other transnational criminal activities.

S/PV. 8496

Proceeds from such crimes are used to finance
Al-Shabaab’s activities, both locally and internationally,
as part of the Al-Qaida network. It is therefore obvious
that transnational crime and terrorism are closely
intertwined and mutually self-reinforcing. As a result,
humanitarian assistance ends up being used not only
to finance terrorism but also as a tool for recruitment
into violent extremism. We, the United Nations, must
therefore find ways to systematically deal with this
paradoxical situation in a holistic, uniform manner that
is devoid of double standards. We should never justify
or condone terrorism under any pretext, least of all that
of humanitarian assistance.
In effort to combat the financing of terrorism and
other crimes, Kenya has enacted various laws aimed
at stemming money laundering and curtailing the
proceeds of crime. The Prevention of Terrorism Act
of 2012, amended in 2014, mandates the Financial
Reporting Centre, a statutory institution, to assist
in the identification of the proceeds of crime and the
combating of money laundering. The Centre registers
and maintains a register of reporting institutions,
receives reports on suspicious activities or transactions
from reporting institutions, receives cash-transaction
reports that meet a given threshold from reporting
institutions, and receives reports on the cross-border
conveyancing of monetary instruments. As such, the
Centre coordinates the financial sector and the lawenforcement sector in the prevention and countering of
the financing of terrorism in Kenya.
Tremendous progress has been achieved with the
putting in place of elaborate measures to detect and
report on suspicious transactions in Kenya’s formal
financial sector. Elaborate measures are also in place to
deal with the informal sector.
International cooperation is vital in eradicating
money laundering and other finance-related crimes.
The full implementation by Member States of the
relevant international money-laundering standards and
instruments is thus crucial to achieving progress in
this area.
My delegation believes that the real fight against
the financing of terrorism should also focus on
enhancing the capacities of police and other lawenforcement authorities to effectively police borders
and control illegal activities such as arms smuggling
and human trafficking. Increasing the capabilities of
local businesses to self-monitor and share information

19-0887973/78

S/PV.8496

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

with the authorities through appropriate communitypolicing models would help curb the financing
of terrorism.
In conclusion, my delegation is convinced that
enhancing State effectiveness in the fight against
the financing of terrorism is crucial to success but
not sufficient on its own. We believe that the full
implementation of the resolution adopted today will
reinforce existing measures to curb the financing
of terrorism.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Bougacha (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like at the outset to congratulate France on its presidency
of the Security Council and on its pioneering role.
We welcome the initiative of France to hold this
open debate on combating and preventing terrorism
financing, a phenomenon that continues to threaten
international peace and security. Many terrorist
groups, including Da’esh, have adapted their methods
of carrying out terrorist operations and developed new
funding mechanisms. They are involved in an ongoing
quest for renewable financing resources for their
terrorist activities, including donations, direct extortion
and proceeds from transnational organized crime, such
as ransom, weapons, drugs and trafficking in cultural
property, as well as using modern technology and other
means to transfer funds.
We thank all briefers for their valuable contributions,
which reflect the need to continue our efforts to address
the challenges related to combating the phenomenon of
terrorism financing and drying up its sources.

28/03/2019

delegation therefore welcomes the role of the relevant
United Nations agencies and their contribution to
enhancing the capacities of Member States. We take
note of the report to be issued before the end of the year
on the measures taken by Member States at the national
level, which will provide an opportunity to learn from
best practices in that regard.
I would like to stress that the promotion of national
systems to counter terrorism must not distract us
from the need to address the root causes of extremist
ideologies, while respecting international humanitarian
law and international human rights law, because failing
to pay attention to prevention and solely focusing on
security solutions will jeopardize all other efforts
and hinder development. All Member States should
therefore adopt national strategies that take into account
all security, economic, social and cultural challenges.
Tunisia has taken important legislative and
procedural measures to support its national framework
to counter the financing of terrorism. At the legislative
level, the National Counter-Terrorism Committee
oversees and assesses the implementation of the
relevant United Nations resolutions and makes decisions
with regard to freezing the assets of individuals and
organizations that have been shown to have links
with terrorist crimes. In January 2018, a Government
order was issued concerning measures to implement
the relevant United Nations resolutions to counter
the financing of terrorism. That was an important
legislative step towards the implementation of the basic
counter-terrorism law.

The Security Council’s unanimous adoption of
resolution 2462 (2019), on preventing and combating
the financing of terrorism, reflects the true
commitment of the international community to further
implement international conventions and the relevant
United Nations resolutions and best practices at the
national level in line with the recommendations of the
Financial Action Task Force (FATF). In contributing to
international efforts in that regard, Tunisia co-sponsored
this important resolution.

The Tunisian Government also adopted a plan of
action on anti-money-laundering and combating the
Financing of terrorism in line with the relevant Security
Council resolutions and international norms included in
the FAFT recommendations. A risk-based approach was
also adopted to identify charities that are at the highest
risk of being misused for financing terrorism. Charity
associations were also included in the recent law on
the national charity registry to foster the transparency
of economic and financial transactions of natural and
legal persons while ensuring that national legislation
complies with the relevant international norms.

At the Arria Formula meeting sponsored by France,
Peru, Australia and Indonesia on 31 January concerning
the issue at hand, Tunisia stressed the need to adequately
focus on the matter while jointly addressing terrorism
financing in an effective manner. My country’s

I emphasize the importance that Tunisia attaches
to international cooperation in that regard and the
need to contribute to the relevant initiatives, such as
the Working Group on Countering the Financing of
Terrorism in connection with the global coalition

74/78

19-08879

28/03/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

against Da’esh. We highly value the cooperation with
the relevant United Nations agencies, especially the
Office of Counter-Terrorism and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, in helping our
national system freeze terrorism-related assets. Tunisia
is keen to further and expand that cooperation.
We are faced today with ever-evolving threats at
the structural level and with regard to the way in which
terrorist operations are carried out, as terrorists exploit
existing gaps to achieve their goals. The adoption of
resolution 2462 (2019) is a commendable response in
that regard. In conclusion, Tunisia renews its call on
all Member States and other stakeholders to join those
efforts and further cooperate to effectively fight this
scourge, which we believe continues to represent a
threat to international peace and security. That requires
from us an immediate response, especially with regard
to combating suspicious funding.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
Arabic): First of all, let me express our most heartfelt
congratulations to you personally, Madam President,
and your friendly country, France, on your accession to
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March and your able leadership of the Council’s work
over the past weeks. I also thank you for the initiative
to convene this open debate on the threat that terrorism
poses to international peace and security and on the
financing of terrorism that fuels it.
This debate is taking place following the most
heinous terrorist attacks, which have shaken the
world’s conscience — the crime committed against the
worshippers in two mosques in New Zealand. Although
we are still bereaved as a result of that heinous crime,
we express our appreciation to the Government
and the people of New Zealand, who demonstrated
unparalleled love and sympathy and have remained
united. We commend the Muslims of New Zealand who
reciprocated with love. That reaffirms the tolerance
inherent in the Muslim religion.
The crime committed in New Zealand proves that
terrorism can be financed with either lots of funds or
scant resources. That is why the first step in the fight
against terrorism should be to combat its ideological
root causes in every society. We must also realize that
terrorism is not attributed to any one ethnicity, religion
or nationality. Regardless of terrorism in New Zealand,

S/PV. 8496

terrorism against worshippers at the Al-Ibrahimi
Mosque in Hebron or the terrorist activities of Da’esh,
it all emanates from the same source of hatred and the
rejection of others.
Like other countries and societies, my country
has also suffered from terrorism. We have therefore
tried to eradicate it through various means. We have
fought it everywhere. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is
contributing to the war against Da’esh, we have fought
against Al-Qaida in Yemen and we continue to counter
the machinations of Hizbullah in Syria, Yemen and
elsewhere. Moreover, combating terrorism requires
drying up its financial resources. That is why we have
said that we cannot allow certain countries to carry
out suspicious practices under false pretexts in order
to support political extremism, which is a gateway
for terrorism.
My country has adhered to all the relevant
conventions in that regard and participated in every
conference aimed at diminishing the financing of,
and clamping down on, terrorism financing. For
environment xample, we have set up counsellingservice centres and an anti-ideological war centre. The
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia was a pioneer as one of the first
countries to counter the trend of recruiting, financing
and the incitement of terrorists through cyberspace.
Accordingly, in 2017, we established Etidal Centre
to combat extremist ideologies. We also established,
together with the United States and friendly Arab Gulf
nations, a centre to combat terrorism financing. We
also founded the Islamic coalition to combat terrorism
and terrorism financing. At the international level,
the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre was
established as an initiative of the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, which has financed it.
If we want to defeat terrorism, we must all be in
agreement that the threat of terrorism posed to any one
country constitutes a threat to us all. We must look past
our narrow interests and take into account the interests
and security of all countries.
Transparent and consistent cooperation are
essential in order to be successful in the fight against
terrorism. One of the most important examples in
that regard is the Security Council’s establishment of
sanctions committees against terrorist groups, such as
Al-Qaida and Da’esh, because the Council is aware of
the threat to international peace and security that such
groups represent.

19-0887975/78

S/PV.8496

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The threat posed by Da’esh and Al-Qaida continues
and the combatants of those two entities are still present
in countries and many regions either as part of an
organized group or individually. However, those groups
are diminishing and becoming increasingly weaker
militarily and in terms of ideology. Nevertheless, we
must highlight the fact that there are other terrorist
groups that are as dangerous and as great a threat as
Da’esh and Al-Qaida, and they threaten international
peace and security. Some of those other groups are
the armed Houthi group and Hizbullah militia that
conduct their activities throughout the region. Those
two groups work closely together under the protection
and support of Iran. My delegation therefore urges the
Security Council to start discussing the possibility of
designating the Houthi group and Hizbullah militia as
terrorist groups and to establish a sanctions committee
in that regard.
I would like to affirm that the policy conducted by
my country to combat terrorism and terrorism financing
is based on increasing international cooperation. Among
the most important challenges facing the security forces
in different States is the possibility of infiltration by
foreign groups or foreign terrorist fighters into their
countries without prior knowledge of their background.
That is why the relevant institutions in my country have
called for the sharing and exchange of information on
such individuals fighting with terrorist groups. We
have shared our data with other relevant stakeholders.

28/03/2019

Those lies and accusations against my Government
accusing it of funding terrorism are a repetition of the
false information that we are used to hearing from those
who speak on behalf of the Syrian regime in an attempt
to distract us from its actions. Member States well know
the paradox as we meet today to address this dangerous
issue and the reasons behind the terrorism threats in
recent years, namely, the Da’esh terrorist group. It is a
paradox to hear the representative of the Syrian regime
speaking about playing a key role in fighting terrorism,
while the regime’s policies gave rise to a climate
conducive to the emergence and proliferation of Da’esh
over the past years before other responsible countries
made genuine efforts to address and eliminate that
terrorist group, which has threatened the entire world
from the territories under its control in Syria.
Were it not for the State terrorism practised by
the Syrian regime against its population and the use
of weapons against protesters, including chemical
weapons being repeatedly used against peaceful
civilians on many occasions, we would not be here
today at this meeting to discuss the threat of Da’esh and
its financing. It is unacceptable to see the representative
of the internationally illegitimate Syrian regime, which
was the main reason behind the emergence and the
proliferation of Da’esh and other terrorist groups in
Syria, such as the Al-Nusra Front and other groups that
controlled some Syrian lands, preaching to us today
about the threats of terrorism.

The President (spoke in French): The
representative of Qatar has asked for the floor to make
a further statement.

The representative of the Syrian regime spoke today
about Qatar’s violation of Security Council resolutions.
Those accusations are a figment of the imagination.
We can no longer keep count of the United Nations
reports that document the Syrian regime’s violations
of all Security Council resolutions on Syria, which
continue today. Everyone here knows that Qatar’s
efforts to fight terrorism are clear for all to see, in
particular within the relevant United Nations bodies
and international anti-terrorism forums, such as the
Global Counterterrorism Forum. We have also played
a key role in the Global Coalition to Counter Da’esh.

Mr. Al-Maawda (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation finds itself obliged to take the floor at the
end of the meeting to address the false information
provided by the representative of the Syrian regime,
which was an insult to my country, instead of
addressing the topic of our meeting, which is the threat
of terrorist groups — an important issue for everyone
in the Chamber.

The close cooperation of the State of Qatar with
the relevant United Nations bodies to combat terrorism
has had a significant impact and tangible results that
are in complete contrast to the destructive role played
by the Syrian regime. It is therefore quite usual to
see the representative of that terrorist regime falsely
accusing the State of Qatar after it played a key
role in establishing the International, Impartial and

In conclusion, I would like to affirm that the
occupation of the territories of another State and the
false recognition of that occupation pave the way for
terrorism. That is why combating terrorism cannot
be accompanied by any measure that allows for
increasing the sentiments of injustice and rejection of
the occupation.

76/78

19-08879

28/03/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes Under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. We are keen
to achieve justice and the rule of law and to protect the
rights of the victims of war crimes and crimes against
humanity perpetrated by both the Syrian regime and
the terrorist groups in Syria.
In conclusion, despite the failed attempts against
us, the State of Qatar will continue to play its effective
role in fighting terrorism as a responsible and effective
partner of the international community in order to
uncover all violations against international law and
all forms of terrorism that threaten the region and
the world.
The President (spoke in French): The
representative of the Russian Federation has asked to
make a further statement.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): It is late, so I will not take much of the
Council members’ time. I simply wish to comment on
the statement made by the representative of Ukraine.
He once again told the old tall tale about Russian
aggression, but among other things he accused my
country of violating the International Convention
for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism. In
that regard, I would simply recall the decision of the
International Court of Justice from 19 April 2017, on
the case of Ukraine v. Russian Federation, as it applies
to the Convention. The decision stated that Ukraine’s
claims in that connection were not plausible.
I will not comment on the other issues that the
representative of Ukraine touched upon because they
are totally unrelated to the topic of today’s meeting. I
am very sorry that the delegation of Ukraine continues
to use the Security Council platform to spread
its propaganda.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic has asked to make a further
statement. I give him the floor.
Mr. Al Arsan (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): We did not wish to ask for the floor once
again. However, the response delivered just now by the
representative of the Government and State of Qatar
compelled us to ask for the floor a second time.

S/PV. 8496

We say to our responding colleague, first, that
we should be called representatives of the Syrian
Arab Republic, which is a founding Member of the
United Nations. Even though the representative of
the Government and State of Qatar is ignorant of the
established diplomatic norms at the United Nations,
we will not stoop to his level. We will continue to
respect the Security Council, the rules of procedure
and the Charter and will continue to address him as the
representative of the Government and State of Qatar.
The State and Government of Qatar and the ruling
family there are today the biggest exemplars of moneylaundering and terrorist financing, if only the Financial
Action Task Force (FATF) would study them in a
balanced, objective and neutral way. As we stated this
morning, the Security Council has adopted resolutions
that specifically address the behaviour of the State
and Government of Qatar, which was among the top
countries — and perhaps the only country — to pay
cash, in the form of millions of dollars, to Da’esh and
the Al-Nusra Front in Iraq and in Syria. They paid those
sums of money as ransom so that the terrorist groups
would release foreign individuals they had captured.
These are facts. My colleague the representative of
the Government and State of Qatar should not bristle
at hearing them. They once paid $20 million to ensure
the release of an American journalist, who himself said
on a television interview that the mediator called his
family here in the United States. The mediator was an
Arab national, who told the journalist not to worry,
as the group — later revealed to be the Al-Nusra
Front — would in the days to come receive $20 million
from the State of Qatar as ransom for his release. That
ransom was paid following two resolutions adopted by
the Security Council to prevent the payment of ransoms.
My colleague, the representative of Qatar knows very
well what happened in Iraq, where more than half a
billion dollars were paid for the release of individuals.
I am not here to fabricate stories or to launch
politicized or false accusations, as the Qataris usually
do against Syria to justify what they have done against
the Syrian people. Why is the representative of the
Government and the State of Qatar so sensitive? I ask
him to not be so sensitive about formal statements. He
will recall that one of the most prominent members
of the ruling family of Qatar, former Prime Minister
Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim bin Jaber Al Thani, willingly
appeared on public TV station in Qatar and then on the
BBC to say that they had spent $137 billion in Syria to

19-0887977/78

S/PV.8496

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

28/03/2019

bring about the fall of President Bashar Al-Assad. When
asked how they had spent that money, he responded
that they were not the only ones to pay. Hamad bin
Jassim said that they had reached an agreement with
the Governments of other countries, which had asked
them to be at the forefront of those efforts.

“You ask us about the Al-Nusra Front. We in
Qatar have a different approach from that of the
United Nations. We are realistic. We believe that
only Da’esh is a terrorist group. However, the
Al-Nusra Front, in our opinion, is doing a good job
and we will continue to support it.”

I ask the Council to listen to the rationale behind
the Government of Qatar. Hamad bin Jassim said that
Syria was the prey. Speaking in the Gulf dialect, he said
that Syria was the prey that managed to escape because
we disagreed on things. That is the rationale behind the
policies of the State of Qatar — laundering money and
financing terrorism. I will tell the Council how they
are laundering money and financing terrorism. The
former Prime Minister says they spent $137 billion in
Syria. The former Minister of Foreign Affairs of Qatar,
Khalid bin Mohammad Al Attiyah, explained the issue
by saying after we liberated Aleppo in 2016, alongside
the Russians and other allies,

So, he is telling the United Nations and the Security
Council that they are wrong — that the Al-Nusra Front
is not a terrorist group and that Qatar will continue to
support it. Then they come to the Security Council to
talk about Qatar’s efforts.

“even if the new United States President stops
supporting rebel groups in Aleppo or Syria, we in
Qatar will not stop. We will continue to support
those groups because we believe they will be
victorious and return to Aleppo.”
Another Minister for Foreign Affairs in Qatar, who
later became the Minister of Defence, told Le Monde:

78/78

We officially tell the representative of Qatar today
that every dollar paid by Qatar to the United Nations
to counter terrorism is in itself money-laundering. I
repudiate those who spend $137 billion to destroy a
country and its people, its civilization, its future and
its aspirations, and then come to the United Nations
and pay $75 million to justify their claim that they
are partners in countering terrorism. This is moneylaundering. I would ask everyone in the Chamber to
look closely at the facts. Qatar has paid $75 million
to the United Nations to combat terrorism, but openly
admits to having spent $137 billion to destroy Syria.
However, they differed on the prey.
The meeting rose at 5.10 p.m.

19-08879
