A/68/49 (Vol. III)

Resolutions and Decisions
adopted by the General Assembly
during its sixty-eighth session
Volume III
28 December 2013 – 15 September 2014

General Assembly
Official Records·Sixty-eighth Session
Supplement No. 49

United Nations·New York, 2015

NOTE
The resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly are identified as follows:
Regular sessions
Until the thirtieth regular session, the resolutions of the General Assembly were
identified by an arabic numeral followed by a roman numeral in parentheses
indicating the session (for example: resolution 3363 (XXX)). When several
resolutions were adopted under the same number, each of them was identified by a
capital letter placed between the two numerals (for example: resolution
3367 A (XXX), resolutions 3411 A and B (XXX), resolutions 3419 A to D (XXX)).
The decisions were not numbered.
Since the thirty-first session, as part of the new system adopted for symbols of
General Assembly documents, resolutions and decisions have been identified by an
arabic numeral, indicating the session, followed by an oblique stroke and another
arabic numeral (for example: resolution 31/1, decision 31/301). When several
resolutions or decisions were adopted under the same number, each of them has been
identified by a capital letter placed after the two numerals (for example: resolution
31/16 A, resolutions 31/6 A and B, decisions 31/406 A to E).
Special sessions
Until the seventh special session, the resolutions of the General Assembly were
identified by an arabic numeral followed, in parentheses, by the letter “S” and a
roman numeral indicating the session (for example: resolution 3362 (S-VII)). The
decisions were not numbered.
Since the eighth special session, resolutions and decisions have been identified
by the letter “S” and an arabic numeral indicating the session, followed by an oblique
stroke and another arabic numeral (for example: resolution S-8/1, decision S-8/11).
Emergency special sessions
Until the fifth emergency special session, the resolutions of the General
Assembly were identified by an arabic numeral followed, in parentheses, by the
letters “ES” and a roman numeral indicating the session (for example: resolution
2252 (ES-V)). The decisions were not numbered.
Since the sixth emergency special session, resolutions and decisions have been
identified by the letters “ES” and an arabic numeral indicating the session, followed
by an oblique stroke and another arabic numeral (for example: resolution ES-6/1,
decision ES-6/11).
In each of the series described above, the numbering follows the order of adoption.
*
*

*

The present volume contains the resolutions and decisions adopted by the General Assembly
from 28 December 2013 to 15 September 2014. Resolutions adopted by the Assembly from
17 September to 27 December 2013 appear in volume I. Volume II contains the decisions adopted
by the Assembly during that period.

ISSN 0252–7014

Contents
Section

Page

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee .......................................................................... 1
II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) ..............................................................................................................................................77
III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee ............................................................................79
IV. Decisions............................................................................................................................................................. 151
A. Elections and appointments...................................................................................................................... 153
B. Other decisions .......................................................................................................................................... 158
1.

Decisions adopted without reference to a Main Committee ........................................................ 158

2.

Decisions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee ............................................................ 162
Annexes

I. Allocation of agenda items ............................................................................................................................... 165
II. Checklist of resolutions and decisions............................................................................................................. 167

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee
Contents
Resolution
number

Title

Page

68/261.

Fundamental Principles of Official Statistics............................................................................................................... 2

68/262.

Territorial integrity of Ukraine ................................................................................................................................... 3

68/268.

Strengthening and enhancing the effective functioning of the human rights treaty body system...................................... 4

68/269.

Improving global road safety ................................................................................................................................... 10

68/270.

Second United Nations Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries ................................................................. 15

68/271.

Scope and modalities of the comprehensive review and assessment of the progress achieved in the prevention
and control of non-communicable diseases............................................................................................................... 17

68/272.

Interaction between the United Nations, national parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union ................................. 18

68/273.

High-level meeting of the General Assembly on the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the Convention
on the Rights of the Child ........................................................................................................................................ 21

68/274.

Status of internally displaced persons and refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia, and the
Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia, Georgia................................................................................................................. 22

68/275.

United Nations Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela Prize ..................................................................................................... 24

68/276.

The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy Review ............................................................................... 24

68/278.

Implementation of the recommendations contained in the report of the Secretary-General on the causes
of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa ................................................ 30

68/279.

Modalities for the third International Conference on Financing for Development ........................................................ 36

68/300.

Outcome document of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the comprehensive review
and assessment of the progress achieved in the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases......................... 39

68/301.

New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress in implementation and international support .............................. 44

68/302.

Modalities for the overall review by the General Assembly of the implementation of the outcomes
of the World Summit on the Information Society ...................................................................................................... 51

68/303.

Strengthening the role of mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and resolution ............... 52

68/304.

Towards the establishment of a multilateral legal framework for sovereign debt restructuring processes....................... 56

68/305.

Report of the International Criminal Court ............................................................................................................... 59

68/306.

Enhancement of the administration and financial functioning of the United Nations.................................................... 62

68/307.

Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly.................................................................................................. 63

68/308.

Consolidating gains and accelerating efforts to control and eliminate malaria in developing countries,
particularly in Africa, by 2015 ................................................................................................................................. 68

68/309.

Report of the Open Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals established pursuant to General
Assembly resolution 66/288 .................................................................................................................................... 74

68/310.

Four one-day structured dialogues on possible arrangements for a facilitation mechanism to promote
the development, transfer and dissemination of clean and environmentally sound technologies.................................... 75

1

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 68/261
A/RES/68/261

Adopted at the 73rd plenary meeting, on 29 January 2014, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/68/L.36 and
Add.1, sponsored by: Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belarus, Belgium, Bulgaria, Colombia, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Latvia, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Mongolia, Montenegro, Netherlands, Norway, Palau, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, San Marino, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America

68/261. Fundamental Principles of Official Statistics
The General Assembly,
Recalling recent resolutions1 of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council highlighting the
fundamental importance of official statistics for the national and global development agenda,
Bearing in mind the critical role of high-quality official statistical information in analysis and informed policy
decision-making in support of sustainable development, peace and security, as well as for mutual knowledge and
trade among the States and peoples of an increasingly connected world, demanding openness and transparency,
Bearing in mind also that the essential trust of the public in the integrity of official statistical systems and
confidence in statistics depend to a large extent on respect for the fundamental values and principles that are the
basis of any society seeking to understand itself and respect the rights of its members, and in this context that
professional independence and accountability of statistical agencies are crucial,
Stressing that, in order to be effective, the fundamental values and principles that govern statistical work have
to be guaranteed by legal and institutional frameworks and be respected at all political levels and by all stakeholders
in national statistical systems,
Endorses the Fundamental Principles of Official Statistics set out below, as adopted by the Statistical
Commission in 19942 and reaffirmed in 2013, and endorsed by the Economic and Social Council in its
resolution 2013/21 of 24 July 2013:
Fundamental Principles of Official Statistics
Principle 1. Official statistics provide an indispensable element in the information system of a democratic
society, serving the Government, the economy and the public with data about the economic, demographic, social
and environmental situation. To this end, official statistics that meet the test of practical utility are to be compiled
and made available on an impartial basis by official statistical agencies to honour citizens’ entitlement to public
information.
Principle 2. To retain trust in official statistics, the statistical agencies need to decide according to strictly
professional considerations, including scientific principles and professional ethics, on the methods and procedures
for the collection, processing, storage and presentation of statistical data.
Principle 3. To facilitate a correct interpretation of the data, the statistical agencies are to present information
according to scientific standards on the sources, methods and procedures of the statistics.
Principle 4. The statistical agencies are entitled to comment on erroneous interpretation and misuse of
statistics.
Principle 5. Data for statistical purposes may be drawn from all types of sources, be they statistical surveys or
administrative records. Statistical agencies are to choose the source with regard to quality, timeliness, costs and the
burden on respondents.
_______________
1

These include General Assembly resolution 64/267 on World Statistics Day and Economic and Social Council resolutions 2005/13 on
the 2010 World Population and Housing Census Programme, 2006/6 on strengthening statistical capacity and 2013/21 on the Fundamental
Principles of Official Statistics.
2
For the original preamble used on the occasion of the initial adoption of the Fundamental Principles in 1994, see chapter V of the report
of the Statistical Commission on its special session (Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1994, Supplement No.9
(E/1994/29)). More information on the Fundamental Principles and their history is available from the website of the Statistics Division.

2

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Principle 6. Individual data collected by statistical agencies for statistical compilation, whether they refer to
natural or legal persons, are to be strictly confidential and used exclusively for statistical purposes.
Principle 7. The laws, regulations and measures under which the statistical systems operate are to be made
public.
Principle 8. Coordination among statistical agencies within countries is essential to achieve consistency and
efficiency in the statistical system.
Principle 9. The use by statistical agencies in each country of international concepts, classifications and
methods promotes the consistency and efficiency of statistical systems at all official levels.
Principle 10. Bilateral and multilateral cooperation in statistics contributes to the improvement of systems of
official statistics in all countries.
RESOLUTION 68/262
A/RES/68/262

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 27 March 2014, by a recorded vote of 100 to 11, with 58 abstentions,* on the basis
of draft resolution A/68/L.39 and Add.1, sponsored by: Albania, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Palau, Panama, Poland, Portugal, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, Spain, Sweden, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
* In favour: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados, Belgium, Benin, Bhutan,
Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Latvia, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America
Against: Armenia, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Nicaragua,
Russian Federation, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Zimbabwe
Abstaining: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Bangladesh, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, China, Comoros, Djibouti, Dominica, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Guyana, India, Iraq, Jamaica, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Lesotho, Mali, Mauritania, Mongolia,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Pakistan, Paraguay, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Suriname,
Swaziland, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Zambia

68/262. Territorial integrity of Ukraine
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the paramount importance of the Charter of the United Nations in the promotion of the rule of law
among nations,
Recalling the obligations of all States under Article 2 of the Charter to refrain in their international relations
from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State, and to settle
their international disputes by peaceful means,
Recalling also its resolution 2625 (XXV) of 24 October 1970, in which it approved the Declaration on
Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations, and reaffirming the principles contained therein that the territory of a State shall not
be the object of acquisition by another State resulting from the threat or use of force, and that any attempt aimed at
the partial or total disruption of the national unity and territorial integrity of a State or country or at its political
independence is incompatible with the purposes and principles of the Charter,
Recalling further the Final Act of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, signed in Helsinki
on 1 August 1975, the Memorandum on Security Assurances in Connection with Ukraine’s Accession to the Treaty
3

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (Budapest Memorandum) of 5 December 1994,3 the Treaty on
Friendship, Cooperation and Partnership between Ukraine and the Russian Federation of 31 May 19974 and the
Alma-Ata Declaration of 21 December 1991,
Stressing the importance of maintaining the inclusive political dialogue in Ukraine that reflects the diversity of
its society and includes representation from all parts of Ukraine,
Welcoming the continued efforts by the Secretary-General and the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe and other international and regional organizations to support de-escalation of the situation with respect
to Ukraine,
Noting that the referendum held in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol on
16 March 2014 was not authorized by Ukraine,
1. Affirms its commitment to the sovereignty, political independence, unity and territorial integrity of
Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders;
2. Calls upon all States to desist and refrain from actions aimed at the partial or total disruption of the
national unity and territorial integrity of Ukraine, including any attempts to modify Ukraine’s borders through the
threat or use of force or other unlawful means;
3. Urges all parties to pursue immediately the peaceful resolution of the situation with respect to Ukraine
through direct political dialogue, to exercise restraint, to refrain from unilateral actions and inflammatory rhetoric
that may increase tensions and to engage fully with international mediation efforts;
4. Welcomes the efforts of the United Nations, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and other international and regional organizations to assist Ukraine in protecting the rights of all persons in Ukraine,
including the rights of persons belonging to minorities;
5. Underscores that the referendum held in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol
on 16 March 2014, having no validity, cannot form the basis for any alteration of the status of the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea or of the city of Sevastopol;
6. Calls upon all States, international organizations and specialized agencies not to recognize any alteration
of the status of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol on the basis of the above-mentioned
referendum and to refrain from any action or dealing that might be interpreted as recognizing any such altered
status.
RESOLUTION 68/268
A/RES/68/268

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 9 April 2014, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/68/L.37, submitted by
the President of the General Assembly

68/268. Strengthening and enhancing the effective functioning of the human rights treaty body system
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, and recalling the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights5 and relevant international human rights instruments,
Underlining the obligation that States have to promote and protect human rights and to carry out the
responsibilities that they have undertaken under international law, especially the Charter, as well as various
international instruments in the field of human rights, including under international human rights treaties,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 1985/17 of 28 May 1985,
_______________
3

A/49/765, annex I.
A/52/174, annex I.
5
Resolution 217 A (III).
4

4

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recalling also its resolution 66/254 of 23 February 2012, by which it launched the intergovernmental process
of the General Assembly on strengthening and enhancing the effective functioning of the human rights treaty body
system, and its resolutions 66/295 of 17 September 2012 and 68/2 of 20 September 2013, by which it extended the
intergovernmental process,
Recalling further its relevant resolutions on the human rights treaty bodies,
Reaffirming that the full and effective implementation of international human rights instruments by States
parties is of major importance for the efforts of the United Nations to promote universal respect for and observance
of human rights and fundamental freedoms and that the effective functioning of the human rights treaty body system
is indispensable for the full and effective implementation of such instruments,
Recognizing the important, valuable and unique role and contribution of each of the human rights treaty
bodies in the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms, including through their
examination of the progress made by States parties to the respective human rights treaties in fulfilling their relevant
obligations and their provision of recommendations to States parties on the implementation of such treaties,
Reaffirming the importance of the independence of the human rights treaty bodies,
Reaffirming also that the independence and impartiality of members of the human rights treaty bodies is
essential for the performance of their duties and responsibilities in line with the respective treaties, and recalling the
requirement that they be individuals of high moral standing serving in their personal capacity,
Recognizing that States have a legal obligation under the international human rights treaties to which they are
party to periodically submit to the relevant human rights treaty bodies reports on the measures they have taken to
give effect to the provisions of the relevant treaties, and noting the need to increase the level of compliance in
this regard,
Recognizing also that the promotion and protection of human rights should be based on the principle of
cooperation and genuine dialogue and be aimed at strengthening the capacity of Member States to comply with their
human rights obligations for the benefit of all human beings,
Emphasizing the importance of multilingualism in the activities of the United Nations, including those linked
to the promotion and protection of human rights, and reaffirming the paramount importance of the equality of the
six official languages of the United Nations for the effective functioning of the human rights treaty bodies,
Recognizing that the current allocation of resources has not allowed the human rights treaty body system to
work in a sustainable and effective manner, and in this regard also recognizing the importance of providing, under
the existing procedures of the General Assembly, adequate funding to the human rights treaty body system from the
regular budget of the United Nations,
Recognizing also the importance of continued efforts to improve the efficiency of the working methods of the
human rights treaty body system,
Recognizing further the importance and added value of capacity-building and technical assistance provided in
consultation with and with the consent of the States parties concerned to ensure the full and effective
implementation of and compliance with the international human rights treaties,
Recalling that certain international human rights instruments include provisions regarding the venue of the
meetings of the committees, and mindful of the importance of the full engagement of all States parties in the
interactive dialogue with the human rights treaty bodies,
Taking note of the reports of the Secretary-General on measures to improve further the effectiveness,
harmonization and reform of the human rights treaty body system,6
Noting with appreciation the initiative and efforts of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, in the form of a multi-stakeholder consultation approach for reflecting on how to streamline and strengthen
the human rights treaty body system,
_______________
6

A/66/344 and A/HRC/19/28.

5

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Noting that the multi-stakeholder approach consisted of a number of meetings involving representatives of
Member States, human rights treaty bodies, national human rights institutions, non-governmental organizations and
academia, including events hosted by a number of Member States,
Taking note of the report of the High Commissioner on strengthening the United Nations human rights treaty
body system,7 which includes recommendations addressed to different stakeholders,
Taking note also of the report of the co-facilitators on the open-ended intergovernmental process on how to
strengthen and enhance the effective functioning of the human rights treaty body system,8
Expressing its appreciation for the efforts of the President of the General Assembly and the co-facilitators in
the framework of the intergovernmental process,
Noting the participation and contributions of Member States in the intergovernmental process, as well as
experts of the human rights treaty bodies, national human rights institutions, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and non-governmental organizations,
Emphasizing that strengthening and enhancing the effective functioning of the human rights treaty body
system is a common goal shared by stakeholders who have different legal competencies in accordance with the
Charter and the international human rights instruments establishing treaty bodies, and recognizing in this regard the
ongoing efforts of different treaty bodies towards strengthening and enhancing their effective functioning,
1. Encourages the human rights treaty bodies to offer to States parties for their consideration the simplified
reporting procedure and to set a limit on the number of the questions included;
2. Encourages States parties to consider the possibility of using the simplified reporting procedure, when
offered, to facilitate the preparation of their reports and the interactive dialogue on the implementation of their treaty
obligations;
3. Also encourages States parties to consider submitting a common core document and updating it as
appropriate, as a comprehensive document or in the form of an addendum to the original document, bearing in mind
the most recent developments in the particular State party, and in this regard encourages the human rights treaty
bodies to further elaborate their existing guidelines on the common core document in a clear and consistent manner;
4. Decides, without prejudice to the formulation of the annual report of each human rights treaty body as
laid out in the respective treaty, that the annual reports of treaty bodies are not to contain documents published
separately and referenced therein;
5. Encourages the human rights treaty bodies to collaborate towards the elaboration of an aligned
methodology for their constructive dialogue with the States parties, bearing in mind the views of States parties as
well as the specificity of the respective committees and of their mandates, with the aim of making the dialogue more
effective, maximizing the use of the time available and allowing for a more interactive and productive dialogue with
States parties;
6. Also encourages the human rights treaty bodies to adopt short, focused and concrete concluding
observations, including the recommendations therein, that reflect the dialogue with the relevant State party, and to
this end further encourages them to develop common guidelines for the elaboration of such concluding
observations, bearing in mind the specificity of the respective committees and of their mandates, as well as the
views of States parties;
7. Recommends the more efficient and effective use of the meetings of States parties, inter alia, by
proposing and organizing discussions on matters related to the implementation of each treaty;
8. Strongly condemns all acts of intimidation and reprisals against individuals and groups for their
contribution to the work of the human rights treaty bodies, and urges States to take all appropriate action, consistent
_______________
7
8

6

A/66/860.
A/68/832.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

with the Declaration on the Right and Responsibility of Individuals, Groups and Organs of Society to Promote and
Protect Universally Recognized Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms9 and all other relevant human rights
instruments, to prevent and eliminate such human rights violations;
9. Encourages the human rights treaty bodies to continue to enhance their efforts towards achieving greater
efficiency, transparency, effectiveness and harmonization through their working methods, within their respective
mandates, and in this regard encourages the treaty bodies to continue to review good practices regarding the
application of rules of procedure and working methods in their ongoing efforts towards strengthening and enhancing
their effective functioning, bearing in mind that these activities should fall under the provisions of the respective
treaties, thus not creating new obligations for States parties;
10. Encourages States parties to continue their efforts to nominate experts of high moral standing and
recognized competence and experience in the field of human rights, in particular in the field covered by the relevant
treaty, and, as appropriate, to consider adopting national policies or processes with respect to the nomination of
experts as candidates for human rights treaty bodies;
11. Recommends that the Economic and Social Council consider replacing the existing procedure for the
election of experts to the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights with a meeting of States parties to the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,10 while preserving the current structure,
organization and administrative arrangement of the Committee as set forth in Council resolution 1985/17;
12. Requests the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to include in the
documentation prepared for elections of members of human rights treaty bodies at meetings of States parties an
information note on the current situation with respect to the composition of the treaty body, reflecting the balance in
terms of geographical distribution and gender representation, professional background and different legal systems,
as well as the tenure of current members;
13. Encourages States parties, in the election of treaty body experts, to give due consideration, as stipulated
in the relevant human rights instruments, to equitable geographical distribution, the representation of the different
forms of civilization and the principal legal systems, balanced gender representation and the participation of experts
with disabilities in the membership of the human rights treaty bodies;
14. Encourages the human rights treaty bodies to develop an aligned consultation process for the elaboration
of general comments that provides for consultation with States parties in particular and bears in mind the views of
other stakeholders during the elaboration of new general comments;
15. Decides, in line with established practice with respect to other United Nations documentation, to
establish a limit of 10,700 words for each document produced by the human rights treaty bodies, and further
recommends that word limits also be applied for relevant stakeholders;
16. Also decides to establish word limits for all State party documentation submitted to the human rights
treaty body system, including State party reports, of 31,800 words for initial reports, 21,200 words for subsequent
periodic reports and 42,400 words for common core documents, as endorsed by the human rights treaty bodies,11
and calls upon the treaty bodies to set a limit on the number of questions posed, focusing on areas seen as priority
issues to ensure the ability of States parties to meet the aforementioned word limits;
17. Requests the Secretary-General, through the Office of the High Commissioner, to support States parties
in building the capacity to implement their treaty obligations and to provide in this regard advisory services,
technical assistance and capacity-building, in line with the mandate of the Office, in consultation with and with the
consent of the State concerned, by:
(a) Deploying a dedicated human rights capacity-building officer in every regional office of the Office of
the High Commissioner, as required;
(b) Strengthening cooperation with relevant regional human rights mechanisms within regional organizations to
provide technical assistance to States in reporting to human rights treaty bodies, including through the training of trainers;
_______________
9

Resolution 53/144, annex.
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
11
See HRI/MC/2006/3 and Corr.1.
10

7

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

(c) Developing a roster of experts on treaty body reporting, reflecting geographical distribution and gender
representation, professional background and different legal systems;
(d) Providing direct assistance to States parties at the national level by building and developing institutional
capacity for reporting and strengthening technical knowledge through ad hoc training on reporting guidelines at the
national level;
(e)

Facilitating the sharing of best practices among States parties;

18. Underlines the need to provide further support to States parties through, inter alia, the United Nations
Voluntary Fund for Technical Cooperation in the Field of Human Rights and in conjunction with the provision of
technical assistance, with a focus on measures to build sustainable capacity in their activities to fulfil their treaty
obligations, and encourages all Member States to contribute to the Fund;
19. Encourages the Office of the High Commissioner to work with the agencies, funds and programmes of
the United Nations system and United Nations country teams, in line with their respective mandates and at the
request of States parties, to assist States parties in fulfilling their obligations under international human rights treaties
through:
(a) The provision of advisory services, technical assistance and capacity-building to States parties for the
preparation of reports to human rights treaty bodies;
(b) The development of programmatic responses, in close coordination with the relevant States parties, to
support their compliance with treaty obligations;
20. Recognizes that some States parties consider that they would benefit from improved coordination of
reporting at the national level, and requests the Office of the High Commissioner to include among its technical
assistance activities relevant assistance in this regard, at the request of a State party, based on best practices;
21. Encourages Member States to provide voluntary funds to facilitate the engagement of States parties, in
particular those without representation in Geneva, with the human rights treaty bodies;
22. Decides, in principle, with the aim of enhancing the accessibility and visibility of the human rights treaty
bodies and in line with the report of the Committee on Information on its thirty-fifth session,12 to webcast, as soon
as feasible, the public meetings of the treaty bodies, and requests the Department of Public Information of the
Secretariat to report on the feasibility of providing, in all of the official languages used in the respective committees,
live webcasts and video archives that are available, accessible, searchable and secure, including from cyberattacks,
of relevant meetings of the treaty bodies;
23. Requests the Office of the High Commissioner, with the assistance of United Nations country teams
through their existing videoconferencing facilities, as appropriate, to provide, at the request of a State party, the
opportunity for members of its official delegation not present at the meeting to participate in the consideration of the
report of that State party by means of videoconference in order to facilitate wider participation in the dialogue;
24. Underlines the need for summary records of the dialogue of human rights treaty bodies with States
parties, and in this regard decides to issue summary records in one of the working languages of the United Nations
and not to translate the pending backlog of summary records, taking into account that these measures will not
constitute a precedent, given the special nature of the treaty bodies, and bearing in mind the aim of providing,
through alternative methods, verbatim records of the meetings of the treaty bodies in all of the official languages of
the United Nations;
25. Decides that a summary record of a meeting of a State party with a treaty body, at the request of any
State party, shall be translated into the official language of the United Nations used by that State party;
26. Also decides that the allocation of meeting time to the treaty bodies will be identified in the following
manner, and requests the Secretary-General to provide the corresponding financial and human resources:
(a) An allocation of the number of weeks that each treaty body requires to review the reports of States
parties it can expect annually, using the average number of reports received per committee during the period
_______________
12

8

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 21 (A/68/21).

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

from 2009 to 2012,13 on the basis of an assumed attainable rate of review of at least 2.5 reports per week and
where relevant at least 5 reports under the Optional Protocols to the human rights treaties per week;
(b) A further allocation of two weeks of meeting time per committee to allow for mandated activities, plus
an allocation of additional meeting time to those committees dealing with individual communications, on the basis
of each such communication requiring 1.3 hours of meeting time for review and the average number of such
communications received per year by those committees;
(c) An additional margin to prevent the recurrence of backlogs is established as a target 5 per cent increase
in reporting compliance allocated among the committees to address their expected workload, at the beginning of
each biennium, with a temporary target increase of 15 per cent for the period from 2015 to 2017;
(d) An adequate allocation of financial and human resources to those treaty bodies whose main mandated
role is to carry out field visits;
27. Further decides that the amount of meeting time allocated will be reviewed biennially on the basis of
actual reporting during the previous four years and will be amended on this basis at the request of the SecretaryGeneral in line with established budgetary procedures, and decides that the number of weeks allocated to a
committee on a permanent basis prior to the adoption of the present resolution will not be reduced;
28. Requests the Secretary-General accordingly to take into account the meeting time needed in relation to
the increased capacity of States parties to submit reports under the respective human rights instruments and the
situation in terms of ratifications and the number of individual communications considered, based on paragraphs 26
and 27 above, in his future biennial programme budget for the human rights treaty body system, including the
specific requirements for field visits by treaty bodies mandated to conduct such visits;
29. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure the progressive implementation of relevant accessibility
standards with regard to the human rights treaty body system, as appropriate, particularly in connection with the
strategic heritage plan being developed for the United Nations Office at Geneva, and to provide reasonable
accommodation for treaty body experts with disabilities to ensure their full and effective participation;
30. Decides to allocate a maximum of three official working languages for the work of the human rights
treaty bodies, with the inclusion, on an exceptional basis, of a fourth official language, when necessary to
facilitate communication among the members, as determined by the committee concerned, taking into account
that these measures will not constitute a precedent, given the special nature of the treaty bodies, and without
prejudice to the right of each State party to interact with the treaty bodies in any of the six official languages of
the United Nations;
31. Requests the Secretary-General to improve the efficiency of the current arrangement with regard to the
travel of treaty body experts in line with section VI of resolution 67/254 A of 12 April 2013;14
32. Invites States parties, as applicable and as an exceptional measure, with a view to achieving greater
compliance with reporting obligations by States parties and eliminating the backlog of reports and in agreement
with the relevant treaty body, to submit one combined report to satisfy its reporting obligations to the treaty body for
the entire period for which reports to that treaty body are outstanding at the time of the adoption of the present
resolution;
33. Invites the human rights treaty bodies, as an exceptional measure, and with a view to eliminating the
current backlog of reports, without prejudice to the existing practices of the human rights treaty bodies or to the right
of a State party to provide, or a treaty body to request, a short addendum for the purpose of reflecting significant and
relevant recent national developments, to consider all State party reports which at the date of the present resolution
have been submitted and are awaiting consideration to satisfy the reporting obligation of the State party concerned
to the relevant treaty body until the completion of a reporting cycle starting from the time of the consideration of the
report of the State party concerned;
_______________
13

Thereafter on the basis of the four preceding years for which data are available and, for treaties for which the data on the incoming
reports from the previous four years are not yet available owing to the more recent entry into force, the average will be calculated on the
basis of the years for which the data are available.
14
See also ST/SGB/107/Rev.6 and A/67/995.

9

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

34. Invites the human rights treaty bodies and the Office of the High Commissioner, within their respective
mandates, to continue to work to increase coordination and predictability in the reporting process, including through
cooperation with States parties, with the aim of achieving a clear and regularized schedule for reporting by States
parties;
35. Reaffirms the importance of the independence and impartiality of members of the human rights treaty
bodies, and underlines the importance of all stakeholders of the treaty body system, as well as the Secretariat,15
respecting fully the independence of treaty body members and the importance of avoiding any act that would
interfere with the exercise of their functions;
36. Notes the adoption, at the twenty-fourth annual meeting of the Chairs of the human rights treaty bodies,
held in Addis Ababa from 25 to 29 June 2012, of the guidelines on the independence and impartiality of members of
the human rights treaty bodies (the Addis Ababa guidelines),16 which are aimed at ensuring objectivity, impartiality
and accountability within the treaty body system, in full respect for the independence of the treaty bodies, and in this
regard encourages the treaty bodies to implement the guidelines in accordance with their mandates;
37. Encourages the human rights treaty bodies to continue to consider and review the Addis Ababa
guidelines, inter alia, by seeking the views of States parties and other stakeholders on their development, and in this
regard invites the Chairs of the treaty bodies to keep States parties updated on their implementation;
38. Also encourages the human rights treaty bodies, with a view to accelerating the harmonization of the
treaty body system, to continue to enhance the role of their Chairs in relation to procedural matters, including with
respect to formulating conclusions on issues related to working methods and procedural matters, promptly
generalizing good practices and methodologies among all treaty bodies, ensuring coherence across the treaty bodies
and standardizing working methods;
39. Further encourages the human rights treaty bodies to strengthen the possibilities for interaction during
the annual meetings of the Chairs of the treaty bodies with States parties to all human rights treaties, held in Geneva
and New York, with a view to ensuring a forum for an open and formal interactive dialogue in which all issues,
including those related to the independence and impartiality of treaty body members, may be raised by States parties
in a constructive manner;
40. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly, on a biennial basis, a comprehensive
report on the status of the human rights treaty body system and the progress achieved by the human rights treaty
bodies in realizing greater efficiency and effectiveness in their work, including the number of reports submitted and
reviewed by the committees, the visits undertaken and the individual communications received and reviewed, where
applicable, the state of the backlog, capacity-building efforts and the results achieved, as well as the situation in
terms of ratifications, increased reporting and the allocation of meeting time and proposals on measures, including
on the basis of information and observations from Member States, to enhance the engagement of all States parties in
the dialogue with the treaty bodies;
41. Decides to consider the state of the human rights treaty body system no later than six years from the date
of adoption of the present resolution, to review the effectiveness of the measures taken in order to ensure their
sustainability, and, if appropriate, to decide on further action to strengthen and enhance the effective functioning of
the human rights treaty body system.
RESOLUTION 68/269
A/RES/68/269

Adopted at the 82nd plenary meeting, on 10 April 2014, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/68/L.40 and Add.1,
sponsored by: Algeria, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Bulgaria, China, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Egypt, Finland,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Mozambique,
Nicaragua, Norway, Oman, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Samoa,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen

_______________
15
16

10

See ST/SGB/2009/6.
A/67/222 and Corr.1, annex I.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

68/269. Improving global road safety
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 57/309 of 22 May 2003, 58/9 of 5 November 2003, 58/289 of 14 April 2004, 60/5 of
26 October 2005, 62/244 of 31 March 2008, 64/255 of 2 March 2010 and 66/260 of 19 April 2012 on improving
global road safety,
Recalling also the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil,
from 20 to 22 June 2012, and its outcome document, entitled “The future we want”,17 in which Member States took
into account road safety as part of their efforts to achieve sustainable development,
Recalling further the special event to follow up efforts made towards achieving the Millennium Development
Goals, convened by the President of the General Assembly on 25 September 2013, and its outcome document,18
Having considered the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report on improving global road safety19
and the recommendations contained therein,
Noting that road traffic injuries are a major public health and development problem that has a broad range of
social and economic consequences which, if unaddressed, may affect the sustainable development of countries and
hinder progress towards the Millennium Development Goals,
Expressing its concern that the number of road traffic deaths still remains unacceptably high, with an
estimated 1.24 million lives lost in 2010, and that only 7 per cent of the world’s population is covered by adequate
laws that address all behavioural risk factors, including the non-use of helmets, safety belts and child restraints,
driving under the influence of alcohol and drugs, inappropriate and excessive speed and the inappropriate use of
cellular telephones, including texting, while driving,
Expressing its concern also that half of all road traffic deaths worldwide involve pedestrians, motorcyclists
and cyclists and that some developing countries have inadequate infrastructure and insufficient policies in place to
protect these vulnerable road users,
Recognizing the role of the first Global Ministerial Conference on Road Safety, held in Moscow on 19 and
20 November 2009, which culminated in a declaration inviting the General Assembly to declare a decade of action
for road safety,20
Noting with satisfaction that targeted steps to reduce road traffic injuries undertaken by the United Nations,
including in the framework of the Decade of Action for Road Safety, have yielded positive results, and recognizing
in this regard that more than 100 Member States, United Nations organizations, non-governmental organizations
and civil society representatives organized pedestrian safety activities during the second United Nations Global
Road Safety Week, held from 6 to 12 May 2013,
Commending the Governments of Brazil, Mozambique, Romania and Thailand and the World Health
Organization for the successful launch, in May 2013, in the context of the sixty-sixth World Health Assembly, of the
Global Alliance for Care of the Injured,
Acknowledging the role of Oman in drawing the attention of the international community to global road safety
and in preparing the first United Nations Global Road Safety Week, held from 23 to 29 April 2007, during the sixth
meeting of the United Nations Road Safety Collaboration, held in Muscat on 27 and 28 February 2007,
Commending the World Health Organization for its role in implementing the mandate conferred upon it by
the General Assembly to coordinate road safety issues within the United Nations system, in close cooperation
with the United Nations regional commissions, in providing support for the implementation of the Decade of
Action and in preparing the Global Status Report on Road Safety 2013 and publishing a pedestrian safety
_______________
17

Resolution 66/288, annex.
Resolution 68/6.
19
A/68/368.
20
A/64/540, annex.
18

11

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

manual, which provides information for use in developing and implementing comprehensive measures to
improve pedestrian safety, and commending also the progress of the United Nations Road Safety Collaboration,21
Recognizing the work of the United Nations regional commissions in increasing road safety activities and
advocating increased political commitment to road safety, in elaborating global road safety-related legal instruments,
including international conventions and agreements, technical standards, resolutions and recommendations, and in
working towards setting regional and national road traffic casualty reduction targets,
Commending the Economic Commission for Europe for its plan to implement the Decade of Action, which
includes actions, initiatives and measures for the Working Parties of the Commission in the areas of road
infrastructure, traffic rules, dangerous goods and vehicle regulations, noting with satisfaction the establishment by
the Commission of the two new groups of experts, namely on road signs and signals and on improving safety at
level crossings, recognizing the continuous work of the World Forum for Harmonization of Vehicle Regulations to
modify vehicle regulations to increase safety performance, and further commending the Commission for organizing
special events in May 2013 in the framework of the second United Nations Global Road Safety Week, as well as for
servicing 57 legal instruments that provide a commonly accepted legal and technical framework for the
development of international road, rail, inland water and combined transport,
Acknowledging the important interregional efforts of the Economic Commission for Europe and the
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific in organizing the Europe-Asia Road Safety Forum to
promote the implementation of United Nations road safety conventions and to facilitate the exchange of experiences
in this field among European and Asian countries,
Commending the road safety initiatives of the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific,
including the organization of the regional Expert Group Meeting on Progress in Road Safety Improvement in Asia
and the Pacific, which was held in Seoul from 8 to 10 May 2013, during the second United Nations Global Road
Safety Week, and which adopted a joint statement on improving road safety in Asia and the Pacific, and the
technical assistance provided to member countries to develop and refine national road safety goals, targets and
indicators in support of the Decade of Action,
Commending also the efforts of the Economic Commission for Africa in strengthening the road safety
initiative in Africa, including the adoption of the African Action Plan for the Decade of Action for Road Safety as a
guiding document that addressed the continent’s specificities and targeted a reduction in road traffic crashes by
50 per cent by 2020,
Commending further the efforts of the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean to
advocate and improve road safety in the Latin American and Caribbean region through studies and the
dissemination of best practices among national Governments, the private sector, academia and multilateral regional
institutions and to include road safety in comprehensive and regionally coordinated transport policies, including the
efforts to establish the Mesoamerican Road Safety Plan, and strengthening the capacity of the road safety agency of
Chile by enhancing its road safety data collection system as a tool for designing and monitoring effective policies,
Commending the efforts of the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia on enhancing road safety
in the Arab region, including the organization of regional training workshops to accelerate the implementation of the
Decade of Action and related recommendations included in the conclusions of the yearly intergovernmental
meetings on transport, such as the fourteenth session of the intergovernmental Committee on Transport,
Acknowledging a number of other important international efforts on road safety, including the development by
the International Road Transport Union of harmonized and internationally recognized standards for the vocational
training of road transport professionals,
Taking note of the report of the Commission for Global Road Safety on safe roads for all as part of a post2015 agenda for health and development,
Acknowledging the continued efforts of the Road Safety Initiative of the multilateral development banks,
coordinated by the Global Road Safety Facility of the World Bank, and their collective actions to scale up road
_______________
21
A consultative mechanism to coordinate the road safety activities implemented by its members and to provide Governments and civil
society with good-practice guidelines to support action to tackle the major road safety risk factors and support their implementation.

12

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

safety management capacity and infrastructure safety, improve safety performance measures and scale up resources
through the development of systematic country projects in low- and middle-income countries,
Commending Member States that have acceded to the United Nations international legal instruments on road
safety and that have adopted comprehensive legislation on major risk factors, including disregard for road signs and
signals, the non-use of helmets, safety belts and child restraints, driving under the influence of alcohol and drugs,
inappropriate and excessive speed and the inappropriate use of cellular telephones, including texting, while driving,
Recognizing Member States and civil society for their continued commitment to road safety by observing the
World Day of Remembrance for Road Traffic Victims on the third Sunday of November every year,
Recognizing also the efforts made by some countries to implement best practices, to set ambitious targets and
to monitor road traffic fatalities and serious injuries,
Taking into account the importance of strengthening capacity and continuing international cooperation to
further support efforts to improve road safety, particularly in developing countries, including least developed
countries and middle-income countries, and providing, as appropriate, financial and technical support and
knowledge to meet the goals of the Decade of Action,
Recognizing that a solution to the global road safety crisis can be achieved only through multisectoral
collaboration, private and public funding mechanisms and partnerships involving the public and private sectors, as
well as civil society, including national Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, academia, professional associations,
non-governmental organizations, victims’ organizations, youth organizations and the media,
1. Recognizes the importance of the efficient movement of people and goods and access to
environmentally sound, safe and affordable transportation as a means to improve social equity, health, the resilience
of cities, urban-rural linkages and the productivity of rural areas, and in this regard takes into account road safety as
part of the effort to achieve sustainable development;
2. Commends Member States that have developed national plans that are in line with the Global Plan for
the Decade of Action for Road Safety 2011–2020, and encourages Member States that have not yet developed such
plans to do so, paying special attention to the needs of all road users, in particular pedestrians, cyclists and other
vulnerable road users, as well as issues related to sustainable mobility;
3. Invites Member States that have not yet done so to nominate, as appropriate, national focal points for the
Decade of Action for Road Safety to coordinate and facilitate national activities for the Decade;
4. Also invites Member States that have not yet done so to address road safety holistically, starting with the
implementation or continuation of a road safety management system, including, as appropriate, interdepartmental
cooperation, the development of national road safety plans in line with the Global Plan for the Decade of Action,
improvement of the quality of road safety statistics and data disaggregated by sex and age, collected through the
standardization of definitions and reporting practices, and investments in multisectoral road traffic crash surveillance
and analysis;
5. Encourages Member States that have not yet done so to consider enacting comprehensive legislation on
key risk factors for road traffic injuries, including disregard for road signs and signals, the non-use of helmets, safety
belts and child restraints, driving under the influence of alcohol and drugs, inappropriate and excessive speed and
the inappropriate use of cellular telephones, including texting, while driving, in order to increase the proportion of
countries with comprehensive legislation to 50 per cent by the end of the Decade of Action, and encourages
Member States to strengthen their enforcement of existing road safety legislation on the risk factors;
6. Encourages the implementation of new car assessment programmes in all regions of the world in order
to improve the availability of consumer information about the safety performance of motor vehicles;
7. Invites Member States to continue to improve, where appropriate, their road management systems and to
introduce both road safety audits for new construction projects and road safety assessment programmes for the
existing networks;
8. Also invites Member States to develop and implement comprehensive policies on post-crash care and to
consider enacting legislation to legally protect bystanders who in good faith provide care to those injured in a crash;
9. Further invites Member States to raise awareness of serious road traffic injuries, in particular brain and
spinal cord injuries, and to encourage investment in scientific research aimed at effectively treating such injuries;
13

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

10. Encourages Member States to continue to improve and strengthen pre-hospital, trauma and
rehabilitation care through the adoption of a national emergency medical system telephone number, capacitybuilding and the provision of adequate and appropriate equipment;
11. Reaffirms the importance of addressing global road safety issues through international cooperation and
by strengthening collaboration between Member States and civil society to build capacity and raise awareness in the
field of road safety and to continue to raise awareness through the World Day of Remembrance for Road Traffic
Victims on the third Sunday of November every year;
12. Also reaffirms the role and importance of the United Nations legal instruments on road safety, such as
the 1949 Convention on Road Traffic,22 the 1968 Convention on Road Traffic,23 the 1968 Convention on Road
Signs and Signals24 and the 1958 and 1998 agreements of the World Forum for Harmonization of Vehicle
Regulations, in facilitating road safety at the global, regional and national levels, and encourages Member States that
have not yet done so to consider becoming contracting parties and, beyond accession, applying, implementing and
promoting their provisions or safety regulations, as well as adhering to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities;25
13. Requests the World Health Organization and the United Nations regional commissions, in cooperation
with other partners in the United Nations Road Safety Collaboration and other stakeholders, to continue the
activities aimed at supporting the implementation of the objectives of the Decade of Action;
14. Also requests the World Health Organization and the United Nations regional commissions to facilitate
the organization of activities during 2015 for the third United Nations Global Road Safety Week, with a focus on
improving the safety of children in traffic;
15. Invites the World Health Organization to continue to monitor, through its global status reports, progress
towards the attainment of the goal of the Decade of Action to stabilize and reduce road traffic deaths by 2020, and in
this regard notes the importance of targets and indicators against which progress can be systematically measured;
16. Invites the Secretary-General to continue to promote effective international cooperation on road safety
issues, including in the broader context of sustainable transport, and in this regard encourages further efforts, as
appropriate, to strengthen the coordination of the work of the United Nations system on sustainable transport, while
taking into account the need to adequately address road safety issues;
17. Reiterates its invitation to Governments to take a leading role in implementing the activities of the
Decade of Action, while fostering multisectoral collaboration that includes the efforts of academia, the private
sector, professional associations, non-governmental organizations, civil society, including national Red Cross and
Red Crescent Societies, victims’ organizations, youth organizations and the media;
18. Invites Member States, international organizations, development banks and funding agencies,
foundations, professional associations and private sector companies to consider providing adequate and additional
funding to activities relating to the Decade of Action, including through contributions to the Road Safety Fund
established by the World Health Organization and the FIA Foundation for the Automobile and Society;
19. Invites all interested relevant stakeholders to explore new and innovative funding modalities to support
and collaborate in national efforts to implement the Global Plan for the Decade of Action, particularly in developing
countries, including least developed countries and middle-income countries;
20. Encourages Member States and the international community to take road safety into due consideration
in the elaboration of the post-2015 development agenda, while recognizing the importance of a holistic and
integrated approach to sustainable transport;
21. Welcomes the offer by the Government of Brazil to host the second high-level global conference on road
safety, to be held in 2015, to bring together delegations of ministers and representatives dealing with transport,
_______________
22

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 125, No. 1671.
Ibid., vol. 1042, No. 15705.
24
Ibid., vol. 1091, No. 16743.
25
Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.
23

14

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

health, education, safety and related traffic law enforcement issues, to review progress in implementing the Global
Plan for the Decade of Action and in meeting the goal of the Decade of Action and to provide an opportunity for
Member States to exchange information and best practices;
22. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventieth session an item entitled “Improving global
road safety”, and requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at that session on the progress
made in the attainment of the objectives of the Decade of Action.
RESOLUTION 68/270
A/RES/68/270

Adopted at the 84th plenary meeting, on 23 April 2014, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/68/L.38/Rev.1 and
Add.1, sponsored by: Armenia, Bolivia (Plurinational State of) (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that
are members of the Group of 77 and China), Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan

68/270. Second United Nations Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Almaty Declaration26 and the Almaty Programme of Action: Addressing the Special Needs of
Landlocked Developing Countries within a New Global Framework for Transit Transport Cooperation for
Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries,27
Recalling also the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, held in
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012, entitled “The future we want”,28
Recalling further its resolutions 66/214 of 22 December 2011, 67/222 of 21 December 2012 and 68/225 of
20 December 2013,
1. Welcomes and accepts with appreciation the generous offer of the Government of Austria to host the
second United Nations Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries in Vienna;
2.

Decides to convene the Conference from 3 to 5 November 2014;

3. Also decides that two sessions of the intergovernmental Preparatory Committee shall be held in
New York on 12 and 13 June and on 2 and 3 October 2014;
4. Further decides that the Preparatory Committee shall have a Bureau consisting of two members of each
regional group, that the Bureau shall elect its own co-Chairs and that Austria and the Chair of the Group of
Landlocked Developing Countries shall serve as ex officio members of the Bureau;
5. Decides that the Bureau shall be co-chaired by two Member States, comprising one developed State and
one developing State;
6. Invites regional groups to nominate their candidates for the 10-member Bureau of the Preparatory
Committee no later than 5 May 2014, so that they can be involved in the preparations for the first meeting of the
Committee;
7. Invites the Bureau to convene further meetings on an informal basis in New York, as required and in the
most efficient and effective manner to discuss the draft outcome document of the Conference;
8. Decides that the Conference and the meetings of its Preparatory Committee shall provide for the full and
effective participation of all States Members of the United Nations and members of specialized agencies, that the
rules of procedure of the functional commissions of the Economic and Social Council, as well as the supplementary
arrangements established for the Commission on Sustainable Development by the Council in its decisions 1993/215
of 12 February 1993 and 1995/201 of 8 February 1995, shall apply to the meetings of the Committee, as applicable,
_______________
26
Report of the International Ministerial Conference of Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries and Donor Countries and
International Financial and Development Institutions on Transit Transport Cooperation, Almaty, Kazakhstan, 28 and 29 August 2003
(A/CONF.202/3), annex II.
27
Ibid., annex I.
28
Resolution 66/288, annex.

15

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

and that the Committee shall consider and adopt the provisional rules of procedure of the Conference, taking into
consideration the established practice of the General Assembly, except as otherwise provided in the present resolution;
9. Encourages the active participation of all States Members of the United Nations, in particular
landlocked and transit developing countries and donor countries, as well as of the United Nations system and
international and regional organizations, in the Conference at the highest level possible;
10. Stresses, while recognizing the intergovernmental nature of the Conference, the importance of the
effective participation of all relevant stakeholders, including civil society and the private sector, in the Conference
and its preparatory processes as well as in the interactive thematic round tables and side events during the Conference;
11. Decides that the major groups and the non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the
Economic and Social Council, as well as those that were accredited to the International Ministerial Conference of
Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries and Donor Countries and International Financial and Development
Institutions on Transit Transport Cooperation and to the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the midterm
review of the Almaty Programme of Action, must register in order to participate;
12. Also decides that non-governmental organizations not in consultative status with the Economic and
Social Council wishing to attend and contribute to the Conference, and whose work is relevant to the subject of the
Conference, may participate as observers in the Conference as well as in the preparatory meetings, in accordance
with the provisions contained in part VII of Council resolution 1996/31 of 25 July 1996, and subject to the approval of
the Preparatory Committee in plenary meeting, and that, while respecting fully the provisions contained in rule 57 of
the rules of procedure of the functional commissions of the Council, such a decision should be made by consensus;
13. Further decides that, in accordance with Economic and Social Council resolution 1996/31, the
secretariat of the Conference shall be responsible for the receipt and preliminary evaluation of requests for
accreditation to the Conference and its preparatory process and that, in the discharge of its functions, the secretariat
of the Conference shall work in close cooperation and coordination with the Non-Governmental Organizations
Branch of the Secretariat and shall review the relevance of the work of the applicants on the basis of their
background and involvement in all issues relevant to the Conference;
14. Decides that the Secretariat shall publish the list of applications received and disseminate the list in
advance to members of the Preparatory Committee, at least one month before the first meeting of the second session
of the Committee, at which time a decision on such applications will be taken;
15. Requests the Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked
Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States, as the United Nations system-wide focal point for the
preparations for the 10-year Review Conference, pursuant to its resolution 66/214, and invites the SecretaryGeneral, to take the measures necessary, within existing resources, to ensure effective, efficient and timely
preparations for the Conference and to further mobilize and coordinate the active involvement of the organizations
of the United Nations system;
16. Reiterates its invitation to Member States, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations,
major groups and other donors to contribute to the trust fund established by the Secretary-General to support the
activities related to the follow-up to the implementation of the outcome of the Almaty International Ministerial
Conference and the participation of representatives of the landlocked developing countries in both the preparatory
process and the Conference itself;
17. Decides that the Conference shall be organized in accordance with the organization of work set forth in
the annex to the present resolution.
Annex
Proposed organization of work of the second United Nations Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries
Vienna, 3 to 5 November 2014
1. The arrangements set out below have been formulated pursuant to General Assembly resolutions 66/214 of
22 December 2011, 67/222 of 21 December 2012 and 68/225 of 20 December 2013.
2. The second United Nations Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries will be held in Vienna from
3 to 5 November 2014.
16

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Plenary meetings
3.

The Conference will consist of an opening meeting, a closing meeting and four plenary meetings.

Committee of the Whole
4. A Committee of the Whole, established in accordance with the rules of procedure of the Conference, will meet
if necessary in parallel with plenary meetings, except during the opening and closing meetings. The Committee of
the Whole will be responsible for finalizing any outstanding matters.
RESOLUTION 68/271
A/RES/68/271

Adopted at the 85th plenary meeting, on 13 May 2014, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/68/L.45, submitted
by the President of the General Assembly

68/271. Scope and modalities of the comprehensive review and assessment of the progress achieved in the
prevention and control of non-communicable diseases
The General Assembly,
Recalling the political declaration of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the prevention and
control of non-communicable diseases,29 and in particular paragraph 65, by which it decided to hold a
comprehensive review and assessment in 2014 of the progress achieved in the prevention and control of
non-communicable diseases,
Recognizing the continued negative impact of non-communicable diseases, including the socioeconomic and
development challenges faced by all countries, in particular low- and middle-income countries, and the need for
continued concerted action and a coordinated response, including monitoring of the progress at the national,
regional and global levels,
Mindful of the need to maintain strong national, regional and international political commitment towards the
prevention and control of non-communicable diseases,
Taking note of the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Director General of the World
Health Organization on the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases,30
1. Decides to convene a high-level meeting to undertake the comprehensive review and assessment
on 10 and 11 July 2014, consisting of an opening plenary meeting on 10 July from 10 a.m. to 11 a.m., followed by
plenary meetings from 11 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 p.m. to 6 p.m., and two consecutive round tables on 11 July
from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 p.m. to 5 p.m., followed by a closing plenary meeting from 5 p.m. to 6 p.m.;
2. Also decides that the comprehensive review and assessment shall take stock of the progress made in
implementing the commitments in the political declaration of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on
the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases,29 identify and address gaps and reaffirm the political
commitment in response to the challenge of non-communicable diseases;
3. Further decides that the speakers at the opening plenary meeting will be the President of the General
Assembly, the Secretary-General, the Director General of the World Health Organization, the Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme and a representative of civil society who will be chosen by the President
of the Assembly from among non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social
Council and in consultation with Member States;
4. Decides that the overall theme of the review will be “Taking stock of progress in implementing the
political declaration of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the prevention and control of noncommunicable diseases and scaling up multi-stakeholder and national multisectoral responses to the prevention and
control of non-communicable diseases, including in the context of the post-2015 development agenda”;
_______________
29
30

Resolution 66/2, annex.
A/68/650.

17

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

5.

Also decides that the organizational arrangements for the round tables will be as follows:

(a)

The specific themes of the round tables will be:

(i) Round table 1: “Strengthening national and regional capacities, including health systems, and effective
multisectoral and whole-of-government responses for the prevention and control, including monitoring, of
non-communicable diseases”;
(ii) Round table 2: “Fostering and strengthening national, regional and international partnerships and
cooperation in support of efforts to address non-communicable diseases”;
(b) Each round table will be co-chaired at the ministerial or high official level, with the co-chairs to be
appointed by the President of the General Assembly;
(c) Participation in each round table will include Member States, observers and representatives of entities of
the United Nations system, civil society and non-governmental organizations, academic institutions and the private
sector;
(d) In order to promote interactive and substantive discussions, there will be no pre-established list of
speakers for the round tables;
6. Requests the President of the General Assembly to draw up a list of non-governmental organizations in
consultative status with the Economic and Social Council that may participate in the high-level meeting, including
the round tables;
7. Also requests the President of the General Assembly to draw up a list of representatives of other relevant
non-governmental organizations, civil society organizations, academic institutions and the private sector who may
participate in the round tables, taking into account the principle of transparency and the principle of equitable
geographic representation, and to submit the proposed list to Member States for their consideration on a nonobjection basis and bring the list to the attention of the Assembly;31
8. Decides that the closing plenary meeting will comprise the presentation of summaries of the round
tables and the adoption of a concise, focused, action-oriented outcome document, requests the President of the
General Assembly to produce a draft text and to convene informal consultations as appropriate in order to enable
sufficient consideration and agreement by Member States, and also requests the President of the Assembly to
appoint, as soon as possible, two co-facilitators for the consultation process;
9. Notes the ongoing regional multi-stakeholder consultations of the World Health Organization, regional
commissions and other relevant agencies and their contributions to the preparations for the high-level meeting as
well as to the meeting itself;
10. Requests the President of the General Assembly to organize, no later than June 2014, in consultation
with representatives of non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social
Council, civil society organizations, the private sector and academia, an informal interactive hearing with nongovernmental organizations, civil society organizations, the private sector and academia to provide input to the
comprehensive review and assessment;
11. Also requests the President of the General Assembly, in consultation with Member States, to finalize the
organizational arrangements for the review, including the list of speakers for the plenary meetings to be held on
10 July 2014, the identification of the civil society representative to speak at the opening plenary meeting, and the
assignment of participants to the round tables, taking into account the level of representation as well as equitable
geographical representation.
RESOLUTION 68/272
A/RES/68/272

Adopted at the 86th plenary meeting, on 19 May 2014, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/68/L.44 and Add.1,
sponsored by: Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belgium, Benin,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Canada, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Egypt,
El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iraq,

_______________
31

18

The list will include proposed as well as final names.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Mexico, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Namibia, Netherlands, New Zealand, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Viet Nam, Zimbabwe,

68/272. Interaction between the United Nations, national parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General,32 which attests to the broad and substantive
cooperation between the United Nations and the Inter-Parliamentary Union over the past two years,
Taking note of the resolutions adopted by the Inter-Parliamentary Union and circulated in the General
Assembly and the many activities undertaken by the organization in support of the United Nations,
Noting the outcomes of the World Conferences of Speakers of Parliament held in 2000, 2005 and 2010, which
affirm the commitment of national parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union to support the work of the United
Nations and continue efforts to bridge the democracy gap in international relations,
Taking into consideration the Cooperation Agreement between the United Nations and the Inter-Parliamentary
Union of 1996,33 which laid the foundation for cooperation between the two organizations,
Recalling the United Nations Millennium Declaration,34 as well as the 2005 World Summit Outcome,35 in
which Heads of State and Government resolved to strengthen further cooperation between the United Nations and
national parliaments through their world organization, the Inter-Parliamentary Union, in all fields of the work of the
United Nations,
Recalling also its resolution 57/32 of 19 November 2002, in which the Inter-Parliamentary Union was invited
to participate in the work of the General Assembly in the capacity of observer, as well as resolutions 57/47 of
21 November 2002, 59/19 of 8 November 2004, 61/6 of 20 October 2006 and 63/24 of 18 November 2008,
Recalling and further endorsing its resolutions 65/123 of 13 December 2010 and 66/261 of 29 May 2012, in
which the General Assembly, inter alia, decided to pursue a more systematic engagement with the InterParliamentary Union in organizing and integrating a parliamentary component of and contribution to major United
Nations deliberative processes and the review of international commitments,
Welcoming the annual parliamentary hearings at the United Nations, as well as other specialized parliamentary
meetings organized by the Inter-Parliamentary Union in cooperation with the United Nations in the context of major
United Nations conferences and events,
Welcoming in particular the work of the Inter-Parliamentary Union in mobilizing parliamentary action
towards the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals by the target date of 2015, as well as in bringing a
parliamentary contribution to the design of the next generation of global development goals,
Recognizing the growing role of the Inter-Parliamentary Union Standing Committee on United Nations
Affairs in providing a platform for regular interaction between parliamentarians and United Nations officials,
reviewing implementation of international commitments, facilitating closer ties between United Nations country
teams and national parliaments and helping shape a parliamentary input to major United Nations processes,
Recognizing also the work of the Inter-Parliamentary Union in the areas of gender equality, the empowerment
of women and combating violence against women, and the close cooperation between the Inter-Parliamentary
Union and the relevant United Nations bodies, including the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), the Commission on the Status of Women and the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women,
_______________
32

A/68/827.
A/51/402, annex.
34
Resolution 55/2.
35
Resolution 60/1.
33

19

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Acknowledging the role and responsibility of national parliaments in regard to national plans and strategies, as
well as in ensuring greater transparency and accountability at both national and global levels,
1. Welcomes the actions taken by the Inter-Parliamentary Union to pursue a more systematic engagement
with the United Nations;
2. Encourages the United Nations and the Inter-Parliamentary Union to continue to work closely in various
fields, in particular peace and security, economic and social development, climate change, international law, human
rights and gender issues, democracy and good governance, bearing in mind the significant benefits of cooperation
between the two organizations, to which the report of the Secretary-General attests;32
3. Encourages the continued active involvement of the Inter-Parliamentary Union in mobilizing
parliamentary action to achieve the Millennium Development Goals and to provide input to the design of the
post-2015 development agenda, and emphasizes the importance of the United Nations and the Inter-Parliamentary
Union continuing to work closely together with a view to promoting the enhanced contribution of parliaments at the
national level and the Inter-Parliamentary Union at the global level in the implementation of the post-2015
development agenda;
4. Encourages the United Nations and the Inter-Parliamentary Union to strengthen cooperation on issues
related to the dialogue between civilizations, culture, education and information and communication technologies;
5. Welcomes the preparations currently under way for the organization of the Fourth World Conference of
Speakers of Parliament, in 2015, and encourages the conduct of these preparations in close cooperation with the
United Nations, with a view to holding the Conference at United Nations Headquarters in New York as part of the
series of high-level meetings in 2015, and maximizing political support for the outcome of the summit on the
post-2015 development agenda;36
6. Also welcomes the practice of including legislators as members of national delegations to major United
Nations meetings and events, as appropriate, including new forums, such as the United Nations high-level political
forum on sustainable development and the youth forum of the Economic and Social Council, and invites Member
States to continue this practice in a more regular and systematic manner;
7. Invites Member States to further consider ways to work regularly with the Inter-Parliamentary Union in
facilitating a parliamentary component to major United Nations conferences and in more closely linking the annual
parliamentary hearing at the United Nations to the main United Nations processes, so as to help to inform such
deliberations from a parliamentary perspective;
8. Encourages Member States to consider applying the practice of the joint United Nations-InterParliamentary Union parliamentary hearing to other parliamentary meetings convened in conjunction with major
United Nations conferences and processes, such as the parliamentary meeting organized on the occasion of the
annual session of the Commission on the Status of Women, with a view to including the outcome of these
parliamentary meetings as a formal contribution to the respective United Nations processes;
9. Welcomes the contribution of the Inter-Parliamentary Union to the work of the Human Rights Council,
notably by providing a more robust parliamentary contribution to the universal periodic review and to the United
Nations human rights treaty bodies along the lines of the cooperation developed in recent years between the InterParliamentary Union, the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women and national parliaments
whose countries are under review;
10. Invites UN-Women to work closely with the Inter-Parliamentary Union in such areas as the
empowerment of women, institutional gender mainstreaming, support to parliaments in promoting gender-sensitive
legislation, increasing the representation of women in parliaments, combating violence against women and the
implementation of relevant United Nations resolutions;
11. Encourages the Inter-Parliamentary Union to further assist in developing closer cooperation between the
United Nations and parliaments at the national level, including in terms of strengthening parliamentary capacities,
reinforcing the rule of law and helping to align national legislation with international commitments;
_______________
36

20

Resolution 68/6, para. 26.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

12. Calls upon United Nations country teams to develop a more structured and integrated manner of
working with national parliaments, inter alia, by involving parliaments in consultations on national development
strategies and on development aid effectiveness;
13. Encourages the organizations and bodies of the United Nations system to avail themselves more
systematically of the unique expertise of the Inter-Parliamentary Union and its member parliaments in strengthening
parliamentary institutions, particularly in countries emerging from conflict and/or in transition to democracy;
14. Calls for a regular annual exchange between the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for
Coordination and the senior leadership of the Inter-Parliamentary Union, with a view to building greater coherence
in the work of the two organizations, maximizing parliamentary support for the United Nations and helping to forge
a strategic partnership between the two organizations;
15. Recommends that a new cooperation agreement between the United Nations and the Inter-Parliamentary
Union be drawn up, so as to reflect progress and developments over past years and to place the institutional
relationship between the two organizations on a strong footing;
16. Decides, in recognition of the unique role of national parliaments in support of the work of the United
Nations, to include in the provisional agenda of its seventieth session the item entitled “Interaction between the
United Nations, national parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union”, and requests the Secretary-General to
submit a report under this item.
RESOLUTION 68/273
A/RES/68/273

Adopted at the 87th plenary meeting, on 20 May 2014, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/68/L.46 and Add.1,
sponsored by: Argentina, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Botswana, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Montenegro,
Netherlands, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, San Marino, Serbia,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Sweden, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Uruguay, Viet Nam,

68/273. High-level meeting of the General Assembly on the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of
the Convention on the Rights of the Child
The General Assembly,
Emphasizing that the Convention on the Rights of the Child37 constitutes the standard in the promotion and
protection of the rights of the child, and, bearing in mind the importance of the Optional Protocols to the
Convention,38 calling for their universal ratification and effective implementation, as well as that of other human
rights instruments,
Welcoming the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the
human rights treaty with the most ratifications in history, and acknowledging that the Convention on the Rights of
the Child and the Optional Protocols thereto contain a comprehensive set of international legal standards for the
protection and well-being of children,
Recognizing that, while progress has been made, the situation of children is critical in many parts of the world
and many challenges remain to ensure the full realization of their rights, and that in this regard the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the Convention is an occasion for States to reflect on implementation gaps and to undertake
additional measures to ensure children’s rights,
1. Decides to convene a high-level meeting on 20 November 2014 on the occasion of the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the adoption of the Convention on the Rights of the Child,37 and that the high-level meeting will
comprise an opening plenary meeting and an interactive panel discussion with the meaningful participation of
children;
_______________
37
38

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
Ibid., vols. 2171 and 2173, No. 27531; and resolution 66/138, annex.

21

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

2. Also decides that, in addition to the participation of the President of the General Assembly and the
Secretary-General, the Executive Director of the United Nations Children’s Fund, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence against Children, the Chair of the
Committee on the Rights of the Child, the Special Rapporteur on the sale of children, child prostitution and child
pornography, and Member States speaking on behalf of regional groups, will address the high-level meeting at its
opening meeting;
3. Further decides that the interactive panel discussion will be chaired by two Member States, at the
invitation of the President of the General Assembly, after consultations with regional groups;
4. Requests the President of the General Assembly, in a transparent manner and in consultation with
Member States, with support from the United Nations Children’s Fund, to finalize the organizational arrangements
for the high-level meeting, including identification of the theme and panellists for the interactive panel discussion,
with due regard given to gender balance and equitable geographical distribution, as well as the meaningful
participation of children;
5. Encourages all Member and observer States and observers to be represented at the high-level meeting at
the highest possible level and to include children and young persons in their delegations;
6. Invites all relevant United Nations entities and other relevant intergovernmental, regional and
subregional organizations to participate in the high-level meeting at the highest possible level;
7. Requests the President of the General Assembly to draw up a list of interested representatives of nongovernmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council who may participate in the
high-level meeting;
8. Also requests the President of the General Assembly, in a timely manner, to draw up a list of
representatives of non-governmental organizations accredited to or in a collaborative relationship or partnership
with the United Nations Children’s Fund, as well as of other relevant non-governmental organizations, civil society
organizations, academic institutions and the private sector, who may participate in the high-level meeting, taking
into account the principles of transparency and equitable geographical representation, for submission to Member
States for their consideration on a non-objection basis, and to bring the list to the attention of the General
Assembly;39
9. Further requests the President of the General Assembly, with support from the United Nations
Children’s Fund, to prepare a summary of the high-level meeting and to bring the summary to the attention of
Member States, relevant United Nations entities and other stakeholders.
RESOLUTION 68/274
A/RES/68/274

Adopted at the 90th plenary meeting, on 5 June 2014, by a recorded vote of 69 to 13, with 79 abstentions,* on the basis of
draft resolution A/68/L.47, sponsored by Georgia
* In favour: Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Belgium, Belize, Bulgaria,
Burundi, Canada, Central African Republic, Costa Rica, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominica, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kiribati, Latvia, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain, Sweden, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Vanuatu
Against: Armenia, Belarus, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Myanmar,
Nauru, Nicaragua, Russian Federation, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Viet Nam
Abstaining: Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Benin, Bhutan, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Cyprus, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar,

_______________
39

22

The list will include proposed as well as final names.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee
Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Mongolia, Morocco, Namibia, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, South Africa, Suriname, Switzerland, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, United Arab Emirates, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Zambia

68/274. Status of internally displaced persons and refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia, and the Tskhinvali
region/South Ossetia, Georgia
The General Assembly,
Recalling all its relevant resolutions on the protection of and assistance to internally displaced persons,
including its resolutions 62/153 of 18 December 2007, 62/249 of 15 May 2008, 63/307 of 9 September 2009,
64/162 of 18 December 2009, 64/296 of 7 September 2010, 65/287 of 29 June 2011, 66/165 of 19 December 2011,
66/283 of 3 July 2012, 67/268 of 13 June 2013 and 68/180 of 18 December 2013,
Recalling also all relevant Security Council resolutions on Georgia relating to the need for all parties to work
towards a comprehensive peace and the return of internally displaced persons and refugees to their places of origin,
and stressing the importance of their full and timely implementation,
Recognizing the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement40 as the key international framework for the
protection of internally displaced persons,
Concerned by forced demographic changes resulting from the conflicts in Georgia,
Concerned also by the humanitarian situation caused by armed conflict in August 2008, which resulted in the
further forced displacement of civilians,
Mindful of the urgent need to find a solution to the problems related to forced displacement in Georgia,
Underlining the importance of the discussions that commenced in Geneva on 15 October 2008 and of
continuing to address the issue of the voluntary, safe, dignified and unhindered return of internally displaced persons
and refugees on the basis of internationally recognized principles and conflict-settlement practices,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General concerning the implementation of resolution 67/268,41
1. Recognizes the right of return of all internally displaced persons and refugees and their descendants,
regardless of ethnicity, to their homes throughout Georgia, including in Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali region/South
Ossetia;
2. Stresses the need to respect the property rights of all internally displaced persons and refugees affected
by the conflicts in Georgia and to refrain from obtaining property in violation of those rights;
3.

Reaffirms the unacceptability of forced demographic changes;

4. Underlines the urgent need for unimpeded access for humanitarian activities to all internally displaced
persons, refugees and other persons residing in all conflict-affected areas throughout Georgia;
5. Calls upon all participants in the Geneva discussions to intensify their efforts to establish a durable
peace, to commit to enhanced confidence-building measures and to take immediate steps to ensure respect for
human rights and create favourable security conditions conducive to the voluntary, safe, dignified and unhindered
return of all internally displaced persons and refugees to their places of origin;
6. Underlines the need for the development of a timetable to ensure the voluntary, safe, dignified and
unhindered return of all internally displaced persons and refugees affected by the conflicts in Georgia to their homes;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session a
comprehensive report on the implementation of the present resolution;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled “Protracted
conflicts in the GUAM area and their implications for international peace, security and development”.
_______________
40
41

E/CN.4/1998/53/Add.2, annex.
A/68/868.

23

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 68/275
A/RES/68/275

Adopted at the 91st plenary meeting, on 6 June 2014, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/68/L.48, submitted by
the President of the General Assembly

68/275. United Nations Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela Prize
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 64/13 of 10 November 2009, by which it designated 18 July as Nelson Mandela
International Day, which has been observed by the United Nations every year since 2010,
Commending the President of the sixty-eighth session of the General Assembly for his initiative in establishing
the United Nations Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela Prize,
Bearing in mind Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela’s leading role in and support for Africa’s struggle for liberation
and Africa’s unity, his outstanding contribution to the creation of a non-racial, non-sexist, democratic South Africa
and his contribution to the struggle for democracy internationally and the promotion of a culture of peace
throughout the world,
Bearing in mind also Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela’s values and his dedication to the service of humanity, as a
humanitarian, in the fields of conflict resolution, race relations, promotion and protection of human rights,
reconciliation, gender equality and the rights of children and other vulnerable groups, as well as the uplifting of poor
and underdeveloped communities,
Wishing to further honour and pay homage to the extraordinary life and legacy of Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela,
1. Decides to establish the United Nations Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela Prize, which will be honorary in
nature, as a tribute to the outstanding achievements and contributions of individuals to the purposes and principles
of the United Nations;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the President of the General Assembly, to establish
within six months of the adoption of the present resolution the criteria and procedures for bestowing the Prize, to be
adopted by the Assembly not later than 30 November 2014.
RESOLUTION 68/276
A/RES/68/276

Adopted at the 97th plenary meeting, on 13 June 2014, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/68/L.50, as orally
amended, submitted by the President of the General Assembly

68/276. The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy Review
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, contained in General Assembly
resolution 60/288 of 8 September 2006, and recalling Assembly resolution 66/282 of 29 June 2012, which called
for, inter alia, an examination in two years of progress made in the implementation of the Strategy and for
consideration to be given to updating it to respond to changes, as provided for in those resolutions,
Recalling the pivotal role of the General Assembly in following up the implementation and the updating of the
Strategy,
Recalling also General Assembly resolution 66/10 of 18 November 2011, and noting with appreciation that
the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre has initiated its activities and will contribute to strengthening the
United Nations counter-terrorism efforts,
Recognizing the important work carried out by the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre established
within the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force Office in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 66/10 and the role of the Centre in building the capacity of Member States to counter and respond to
terrorism, and encouraging Member States to provide resources and voluntary contributions to the Centre in this regard,
24

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Renewing its unwavering commitment to strengthening international cooperation to prevent and combat
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
Reaffirming that terrorism cannot and should not be associated with any religion, nationality, civilization or
ethnic group,
Noting with appreciation the continued contribution of United Nations entities and the subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council to the work of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force,
Recognizing that international cooperation and any measures taken by Member States to prevent and combat
terrorism must fully comply with their obligations under international law, including the Charter of the United
Nations, in particular the purposes and principles thereof, and relevant international conventions and protocols, in
particular human rights law, refugee law and international humanitarian law,
Recognizing also the need for Member States to prevent the abuse of non-governmental, non-profit and
charitable organizations by and for terrorists, and calling upon non-governmental, non-profit and charitable
organizations to prevent and oppose, as appropriate, attempts by terrorists to abuse the status of those organizations,
while reaffirming the need to fully respect the rights to freedom of expression and association of individuals in civil
society and to freedom of religion or belief of all persons,
Convinced that the General Assembly is the competent organ, with universal membership, to address the issue
of international terrorism,
Mindful of the need to enhance the role of the United Nations and the specialized agencies, within their
mandates, in the implementation of the Strategy,
Underlining the fact that the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force should continue to carry out its
activities within the framework of its mandate, with policy guidance offered by Member States through interaction
with the General Assembly on a regular basis,
Reaffirming that the acts, methods and practices of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations are activities
aimed at the destruction of human rights, fundamental freedoms and democracy, at threatening territorial integrity
and the security of States and at destabilizing legitimately constituted Governments, and that the international
community should take the necessary steps to enhance cooperation to prevent and combat terrorism in a unified
manner,
Reiterating the obligation of Member States to prevent and suppress the financing of terrorist acts and to
criminalize the wilful provision or collection, by any means, directly or indirectly, of funds by their nationals or in
their territories, with the intention that the funds be used, or with the knowledge that they are to be used, in order to
carry out terrorist acts,
Recognizing the role of the partnerships of regional and subregional organizations with the United Nations in
combating terrorism, and encouraging the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, in accordance with its
mandate, to closely cooperate and coordinate with regional and subregional organizations in their efforts to combat
terrorism,
Alarmed by the acts of intolerance, violent extremism, violence, including sectarian violence, and terrorism in
various parts of the world, which claim innocent lives, cause destruction and displace people, and rejecting the use
of violence, regardless of motivation,
Expressing deep concern about the connections, in some cases, between some forms of transnational
organized crime and terrorism, and emphasizing the need to enhance cooperation at the national, subregional,
regional and international levels in order to strengthen responses to this evolving challenge,
Recognizing the commitment of all religions to peace, and determined to condemn acts of violent extremism
and incitement to commit terrorist acts that spread hate and threaten lives,
Recognizing also the role that victims of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations can play, including in
countering the appeal of terrorism, and emphasizing the need to promote international solidarity in support of
victims of terrorism and to ensure that victims of terrorism are treated with dignity and respect,
25

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Noting the important contribution of women to the implementation of the Strategy, and encouraging Member
States, United Nations entities and international, regional and subregional organizations to consider the participation
of women in efforts to prevent and counter terrorism,
Reaffirming the commitment of Member States to take measures aimed at addressing the conditions
conducive to the spread of terrorism, including but not limited to prolonged unresolved conflicts, dehumanization of
victims of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, lack of the rule of law and violations of human rights, ethnic,
national and religious discrimination, political exclusion, socioeconomic marginalization and lack of good
governance, while recognizing that none of these conditions can excuse or justify acts of terrorism,
1. Reiterates its strong and unequivocal condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
committed by whomever, wherever and for whatever purposes;
2. Reaffirms the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and its four pillars, which constitute an
ongoing effort, and calls upon Member States, the United Nations and other appropriate international, regional and
subregional organizations to step up their efforts to implement the Strategy in an integrated and balanced manner
and in all its aspects;
3. Stresses the importance of keeping the Strategy relevant and contemporary in the light of emerging new
threats and evolving trends of international terrorism;
4. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General entitled “Activities of the United Nations system in
implementing the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy”,42 welcomes the new summary matrix of
counter-terrorism projects implemented by United Nations entities around the world and the efforts deployed by the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force Office in this regard, and underlines the importance of providing the
necessary resources for the implementation of these projects;
5. Also takes note of the measures that Member States and relevant international, regional and subregional
organizations have adopted within the framework of the Strategy, as set out in the report of the Secretary-General,
which are to be considered at the fourth biennial review of the Strategy, on 12 and 13 June 2014, all of which
strengthen cooperation to fight terrorism, including through the exchange of best practices;
6. Reaffirms the principal responsibility of Member States to implement the Strategy, while further
recognizing the need to enhance the important role that the United Nations, including the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force, plays, in coordination with other international, regional and subregional organizations,
as appropriate, in facilitating and promoting coordination and coherence in the implementation of the Strategy at the
national, regional and global levels and in providing assistance, upon request by Member States, especially in the
area of capacity-building;
7. Affirms the importance of the integrated and balanced implementation of all pillars of the Strategy,
recognizing the importance of redoubling efforts for even attention paid to and even implementation of all the pillars
of the Strategy;
8. Stresses the significance of a sustained and comprehensive approach, including through stronger efforts,
where necessary, to address conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism, bearing in mind that terrorism will not
be defeated by military force, law enforcement measures and intelligence operations alone;
9. Recognizes the principal responsibility of Member States to implement the Strategy, while encouraging
the further elaboration and development of national, subregional and regional plans, as appropriate, to support the
implementation of the Strategy;
10. Encourages civil society, including non-governmental organizations, to engage, as appropriate, in efforts
to enhance the implementation of the Strategy, including through interaction with Member States and the United
Nations system, and encourages Member States and the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force and its
entities to enhance engagement with civil society in accordance with their mandates, as appropriate, and to support
its role in the implementation of the Strategy;
_______________
42

26

A/68/841.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

11. Calls upon Member States and the United Nations entities involved in supporting counter-terrorism
efforts to continue to facilitate the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms, as well as
due process and the rule of law, while countering terrorism;
12. Urges all States to respect and protect the right to privacy, as set out in article 12 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights43 and article 17 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,44
including in the context of digital communication, also while countering terrorism, in accordance with international
law, in particular international human rights law, and to take measures to ensure that interferences with or
restrictions on that right are not arbitrary, are adequately regulated by law, and are subject to effective oversight and
to appropriate redress, including through judicial review or other legal means;
13. Urges Member States to ensure that any measures taken or means employed to counter terrorism,
including the use of remotely piloted aircraft, comply with their obligations under international law, including the
Charter of the United Nations, human rights law and international humanitarian law, in particular the principles of
distinction and proportionality;
14. Recognizes the work done and efforts made by the relevant United Nations bodies and entities and other
international, regional and subregional organizations aimed at supporting, recognizing and protecting the rights of
victims of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, and urges them to step up their efforts to provide, upon
request, technical assistance for building the capacity of Member States in the development and implementation of
programmes of assistance and support for victims of terrorism;
15. Deeply deplores the suffering caused by terrorism to the victims of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations and to their families, expresses its profound solidarity with them, encourages Member States to
provide them with proper support and assistance while taking into account, inter alia, when appropriate,
considerations regarding remembrance, dignity, respect, justice and truth, in accordance with international law;
16. Welcomes the efforts of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force to increase its transparency,
accountability and effectiveness, and calls upon the Task Force and the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre to
improve the strategic nature and impact of their programmes and policies;
17. Calls upon States that have not done so to consider becoming parties in a timely manner to the
existing international conventions and protocols against terrorism, and upon all States to make every effort to
conclude a comprehensive convention on international terrorism, and recalls the commitments of Member States
with regard to the implementation of General Assembly and Security Council resolutions relating to international
terrorism;
18. Underlines, in that regard, the importance of greater coordination among United Nations entities and of
the work of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force to ensure overall coordination and coherence in the
counter-terrorism efforts of the United Nations system, as well as the need to continue promoting transparency and
to avoid duplication in their work;
19. Recognizes the continued need to enhance the visibility and effectiveness of United Nations counterterrorism activities and ensure greater cooperation, coordination and coherence among United Nations entities, with
a view to maximizing synergies, promoting transparency and greater efficiencies and avoiding duplication of
their work;
20. Reaffirms the need for enhanced dialogue among the counter-terrorism officials of Member States to
promote international, regional and subregional cooperation and wider dissemination of knowledge of the Strategy
in order to counter terrorism, and in that regard recalls the role of the United Nations system, in particular the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, in promoting international cooperation and capacity-building as
elements of the Strategy;
_______________
43
44

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

27

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

21. Recognizes the role of the regional organizations, structures and strategies in combating terrorism, and
encourages them to consider using best practices developed by other regions in their fight against terrorism, as
appropriate, taking into account their specific regional and national circumstances;
22. Recalls that all States must cooperate fully in the fight against terrorism, in accordance with their
obligations under international law, in order to find, deny safe haven and bring to justice, on the basis of the
principle of extradite or prosecute, any person who supports, facilitates, participates or attempts to participate in the
financing, planning, preparation or commission of terrorist acts or provides safe havens;
23. Emphasizes that tolerance and dialogue among civilizations and the enhancement of interfaith and
intercultural understanding and respect among peoples, including at the national, regional and global levels, while
avoiding the escalation of hatred, are among the most important elements in promoting cooperation, in combating
terrorism and in countering violent extremism, and welcomes the various initiatives to this end;
24. Urges all Member States to unite against violent extremism in all its forms and manifestations as well as
sectarian violence, encourages the efforts of leaders to discuss within their communities the causes of violent
extremism and discrimination and to evolve strategies to address these causes, and underlines that States, regional
organizations, non-governmental organizations, religious bodies and the media have an important role to play in
promoting tolerance and respect for religious and cultural diversity;
25. Expresses concern over terrorist acts committed by lone terrorists in various parts of the world, and
recognizes the need to address this issue;
26. Underlines the importance of multilateral efforts in combating terrorism and refraining from any
practices and measures inconsistent with international law and the principles of the Charter;
27. Expresses its concern at the increasing use, in a globalized society, by terrorists and their supporters, of
information and communications technologies, in particular the Internet and other media, and the use of such
technologies to commit, incite, recruit for, fund or plan terrorist acts, notes the importance of cooperation among
stakeholders in the implementation of the Strategy, including among Member States, international, regional and
subregional organizations, the private sector and civil society, to address this issue, while respecting human rights
and fundamental freedoms and complying with international law and the purposes and principles of the Charter, and
reiterates that such technologies can be powerful tools in countering the spread of terrorism, including by promoting
tolerance and dialogue among peoples and peace;
28. Expresses concern at the increase, in some regions, in incidents of kidnapping and hostage-taking
committed by terrorist groups, for any purpose, including with the aim of raising funds or gaining political
concessions, notes that ransoms paid to terrorists are used as one of the sources of funding for their activities,
including further kidnappings, calls upon all Member States to prevent terrorists from benefiting from ransom
payments and political concessions and to secure the safe release of hostages, in accordance with applicable legal
obligations, and encourages Member States to cooperate, as appropriate, during incidents of kidnapping and
hostage-taking committed by terrorist groups;
29. Encourages all Member States to collaborate with the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre and to
contribute to the implementation of its activities within the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force;
30. Notes with appreciation the activities undertaken in the area of capacity-building by United Nations
entities, including the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force entities, inter alia, the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, in coordination with other relevant international, regional and subregional organizations to
assist Member States, upon their request, in implementing the Strategy, and encourages the Task Force to ensure
focused delivery of capacity-building assistance, including in the framework of the Integrated Assistance for
Countering Terrorism Initiative;
31. Expresses its concern at the increasing flow of international recruits to terrorist organizations, including
foreign terrorist fighters, and at the threat it poses for all Member States, including countries of origin, transit and
destination, encourages all Member States to address this threat by enhancing their cooperation and developing
relevant measures to prevent and tackle this phenomenon, including information-sharing, border management to
detect travel, and appropriate criminal justice response, and to consider the use of United Nations instruments, such
as sanctions regimes, as well as cooperation;
28

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

32. Recognizes the need to continue to take measures to prevent and suppress the financing of terrorism, and
in this regard encourages United Nations entities to cooperate with Member States and to continue to provide
assistance, upon their request, in particular, to help them to fully implement their respective international obligations
to combat the financing of terrorism;
33. Calls upon all States to adopt such measures as may be necessary and appropriate, and in accordance
with their obligations under international law, to prohibit by law incitement to commit a terrorist act or acts, prevent
such conduct and deny safe haven to any persons with respect to whom there is credible and relevant information
giving serious reasons for considering that they have been guilty of such conduct;
34. Calls for the enhanced engagement of Member States with the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force;
35. Requests the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force to continue its positive efforts in interacting
with Member States, and further requests the Task Force to continue to provide quarterly briefings and to provide a
periodic workplan for the Task Force, including the activities of the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre;
36. Encourages the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force to work closely with Member States and
relevant international, regional and subregional organizations to identify and share best practices to prevent terrorist
attacks on potentially vulnerable targets, and recognizes the importance of developing public-private partnerships in
this area;
37. Recalls all resolutions of the General Assembly on measures to eliminate international terrorism and
relevant resolutions of the Assembly on the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering
terrorism and all resolutions of the Security Council relating to international terrorism, and calls upon Member
States to cooperate fully with the relevant bodies of the United Nations in the fulfilment of their tasks, recognizing
that many States continue to require assistance in implementing these resolutions;
38. Encourages all relevant international, regional and subregional organizations and forums involved in the
fight against terrorism to cooperate with the United Nations system and Member States in supporting the Strategy,
noting recent initiatives in this regard;
39. Underscores the role, within the United Nations, of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, including in assessing issues and trends relating to the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 1373 (2001) of 28 September 2001 and 1624 (2005) of 14 September 2005, in accordance with its
mandate and Council resolution 2129 (2013) of 17 December 2013, and in sharing information, as appropriate, with
relevant United Nations counter-terrorism bodies and relevant international, regional and subregional organizations;
40. Recognizes that Al-Qaida and its affiliates continue to pose a widespread challenge in the fight against
terrorism, encourages Member States to integrate the Al-Qaida sanctions regime, pursuant to Security Council
resolutions 1267 (1999) of 15 October 1999 and 1989 (2011) of 17 June 2011, into their national and regional
counter-terrorism strategies, including by proposing for inclusion on the Al-Qaida sanctions list the names of
individuals and entities, takes note of the significant contribution of the Office of the Ombudsperson, since its
establishment, in providing fairness and transparency to the Al-Qaida sanctions regime, and stresses the need to
continue efforts to ensure that procedures are fair and clear;
41. Underlines the importance of enhancing counter-terrorism efforts undertaken by all relevant United
Nations agencies and bodies in accordance with their existing mandates, and encourages the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force to continue its collaboration with those agencies and bodies;
42. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventieth session, no later than
April 2016, a report on progress made in the implementation of the Strategy since its adoption in September 2006,
which could contain suggestions for its future implementation by the United Nations system, as well as on progress
made in the implementation of the present resolution;
43. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventieth session the item entitled “The United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy” in order to undertake, by June 2016, an examination of the report of the
Secretary-General requested in paragraph 42 above, as well as of the implementation of the Strategy by Member
States, and to consider updating the Strategy to respond to changes.
29

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 68/278
A/RES/68/278

Adopted at the 98th plenary meeting, on 16 June 2014, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/68/L.43/Rev.1 and
Add.1, sponsored by: Austria, Belgium, Bolivia (Plurinational State of) (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations
that are members of the Group of 77 and China), Croatia, Estonia, Finland, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Montenegro, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Turkey,

68/278. Implementation of the recommendations contained in the report of the Secretary-General on the
causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling the report of the Open-ended Ad Hoc Working Group on the Causes of Conflict and the Promotion
of Durable Peace and Sustainable Development in Africa,45 its resolution 53/92 of 7 December 1998 and
subsequent annual resolutions, including resolutions 60/223 of 23 December 2005, 61/230 of 22 December 2006,
62/275 of 11 September 2008, 63/304 of 23 July 2009, 64/252 of 8 February 2010, 65/278 of 13 June 2011, 66/287
of 23 July 2012 and 67/293 of 24 July 2013, as well as its resolutions 62/179 of 19 December 2007, 63/267 of
31 March 2009, 64/258 of 16 March 2010, 65/284 of 22 June 2011, 66/286 of 23 July 2012 and 67/294 of
15 August 2013 on the New Partnership for Africa’s Development, and 59/213 of 20 December 2004, 63/310 of
14 September 2009, 65/274 of 18 April 2011 and 67/302 of 16 September 2013 on cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union,
Recalling also, in this context, Security Council resolutions 1809 (2008) of 16 April 2008 on peace and
security in Africa, 1325 (2000) of 31 October 2000, 1820 (2008) of 19 June 2008, 1888 (2009) of 30 September
2009, 1889 (2009) of 5 October 2009, 1960 (2010) of 16 December 2010, 2106 (2013) of 24 June 2013 and
2122 (2013) of 18 October 2013 on women and peace and security, 1366 (2001) of 30 August 2001 on the role of
the Council in the prevention of armed conflicts, 1612 (2005) of 26 July 2005, 1882 (2009) of 4 August 2009,
1998 (2011) of 12 July 2011 and 2068 (2012) of 19 September 2012 on children and armed conflict, 1625 (2005) of
14 September 2005 on strengthening the effectiveness of the role of the Council in conflict prevention, particularly
in Africa, and 1631 (2005) of 17 October 2005 and 2033 (2012) of 12 January 2012 on cooperation between the
United Nations and regional and subregional organizations in maintaining international peace and security,
Recalling further the 2005 World Summit Outcome,46 through which world leaders reaffirmed their
commitment to addressing the special needs of Africa, and its resolution 60/265 of 30 June 2006,
Reaffirming the political declaration on Africa’s development needs adopted at the high-level meeting on
22 September 2008,47
Recalling the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals and
its outcome document,48 and recognizing that development, peace, security and human rights are closely interlinked
and mutually reinforcing,
Recalling also the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil,
from 20 to 22 June 2012, and its outcome document entitled “The future we want”,49
Recalling further its resolution 66/293 of 17 September 2012 establishing a monitoring mechanism to review
commitments made towards Africa’s development, and looking forward to the first biennial report to be submitted
by the Secretary-General at the sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly,
Reaffirming the political declaration on the peaceful resolution of conflicts in Africa, adopted at the high-level
meeting of the General Assembly held on 25 April 2013,50
_______________
45

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 45 (A/56/45).
Resolution 60/1.
47
Resolution 63/1.
48
Resolution 65/1.
49
Resolution 66/288, annex.
50
Resolution 67/259.
46

30

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recalling the special event to follow up efforts made towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals,
convened by the President of the General Assembly on 25 September 2013, and its outcome document,51
Stressing that the responsibility for peace and security in Africa, including the capacity to address the root
causes of conflict and to resolve conflicts in a peaceful manner, lies primarily with African countries, while
recognizing the need for the provision of support by the international community and the United Nations, taking
into account the responsibilities of the Organization in this regard according to the Charter of the United Nations,
Recognizing, in particular, the importance of strengthening the capacity of the African Union and subregional
organizations to address the causes of conflict in Africa,
Noting that, despite the positive trends and advances in obtaining durable peace in Africa, the conditions
required for sustainable development have yet to be consolidated throughout the continent and that there is therefore
an urgent need to continue developing African human and institutional capacities, particularly in countries emerging
from conflict,
Expressing concern, in this context, about the resurgence of coups d’état in a few African countries and their
negative impact on the consolidation of peace and development,
Welcoming the continuing efforts of the African Union and subregional organizations to settle conflicts and
promote human rights, democracy, the rule of law and constitutional order in Africa,
Reaffirming the commitment to ensure that there shall be no tolerance for impunity for genocide, war crimes
and crimes against humanity or for violations of international humanitarian law and gross violations of human rights
law, and that such violations shall be properly investigated and appropriately sanctioned, including by bringing the
perpetrators of any crimes to justice, through national mechanisms or, where appropriate, regional or international
mechanisms, in accordance with international law, and for that purpose encouraging States to strengthen national
judicial systems and institutions,
Reaffirming also the need to strengthen the synergy between Africa’s economic and social development
programmes and its peace and security agenda,
Underlining the importance of enhancing national and regional initiatives, with international support, to
address the negative implications of the illegal exploitation of natural resources in all its aspects for peace, security
and development in Africa, and condemning the illicit trade in and proliferation of arms, especially small arms and
light weapons,
Acknowledging that the achievement of durable peace and sustainable development in countries in conflict
and post-conflict situations requires that national Governments and international partners continue to develop
coordinated approaches tailored to the peacebuilding needs and challenges faced by those countries,
Reaffirming, in this regard, the importance of the Peacebuilding Commission as a dedicated mechanism to
address, within its existing mandate and in an integrated manner, the special needs of countries emerging from
conflict towards recovery, reintegration and reconstruction and to assist them in laying the foundation for peace and
sustainable development, taking into consideration national priorities and the principle of national ownership,
Encouraging the United Nations system, the African Union and subregional organizations to enhance their
interaction with civil society, academia and research institutions on issues relevant to the promotion of peace,
security and sustainable development in Africa, and welcoming the ongoing efforts in this regard, including by the
Office of the Special Adviser on Africa,
Welcoming the efforts of the United Nations Office to the African Union to enhance the partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union, particularly in the areas of peace, security and political and humanitarian
affairs, and reaffirming the need to ensure coordination and increase cost-effectiveness among relevant entities of
the United Nations system involved in the implementation of the 10-year capacity-building programme, in
particular the Economic Commission for Africa and the United Nations Office to the African Union,
_______________
51

Resolution 68/6.

31

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the recommendations
contained in his report on the causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable development
in Africa;52
2. Welcomes the progress made by African countries, the African Union and subregional organizations in
conflict prevention, peacemaking, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and development, calls for intensified efforts and a
coordinated approach among national Governments, the African Union, subregional organizations, the United
Nations system and relevant partners in addressing those challenges, with a view to achieving further progress
towards the goal of a conflict-free Africa, and in this regard recognizes the important role played by civil society
organizations, including women’s organizations;
3. Also welcomes the commitment of the African leaders to Africa’s political, social and economic
integration agenda and to the ideal of pan-Africanism and African renaissance, as reaffirmed in the solemn
declaration adopted on 26 May 2013 on the occasion of the fiftieth anniversary of the Organization of African
Unity/African Union;
4. Further welcomes the ongoing efforts of the African Union and subregional organizations to strengthen
their peacekeeping capacity and to take the lead in peacekeeping operations on the continent, in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations and in close coordination with the United Nations, through the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union, as well as the ongoing efforts to develop a continental early
warning system, operationalize the African Standby Force, establish the African capacity for immediate response to
crises and enhance mediation capacity and preventive diplomacy, including through the Panel of the Wise;
5. Calls upon the United Nations system and Member States to support the peace consolidation
mechanisms and processes, including the Panel of the Wise, the African Union Post-Conflict Reconstruction and
Development Framework and the continental early warning system, including its subregional components, as well
as the operationalization of the African Standby Force;
6. Calls upon Member States to assist post-conflict countries, at their request, in achieving a smooth
transition from relief to development and to support relevant United Nations bodies, including the Peacebuilding
Commission;
7. Calls upon the United Nations system, the international community and all partners to support the
efforts of African countries to promote political, social and economic inclusion;
8. Stresses the importance of creating an environment conducive to national reconciliation and social and
economic recovery in countries emerging from conflict;
9. Invites the United Nations and the donor community to increase efforts to support ongoing regional
efforts to build African mediation and negotiation capacity;
10. Calls upon the United Nations system and Member States to support the African Union in its effort to
effectively integrate training in international humanitarian law and international human rights law, with particular
emphasis on the rights of women and children, into the training of civilian and military personnel of national
standby contingents at both the operational and tactical levels, as set out in article 13 of the Protocol Relating to the
Establishment of the Peace and Security Council of the African Union;
11. Recognizes that international and regional efforts to prevent conflict and consolidate peace in Africa
should be channelled towards the sustainable development of Africa and the human and institutional capacitybuilding of African countries and organizations, particularly in priority areas identified at the continental level;
12. Welcomes, in this regard, the joint visit of the Secretary-General and the President of the World Bank to
the countries of the Great Lakes region of Africa from 22 to 24 May 2013 and the financial pledge announced by
the World Bank during the visit in support of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region, as well as the joint visit of the Secretary-General, the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission, the President of the World Bank, the President of the African Development Bank and
_______________
52

32

A/68/220-S/2013/475.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

the European Union Commissioner for Development to the Sahel region from 4 to 7 November 2013, during which
financial pledges were made to support the implementation of the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel,
and calls for the fulfilment of all the pledges made;
13. Recalls the signing of the declaration on enhancing cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union in Addis Ababa on 16 November 200653 and the ongoing efforts in this regard, notes with
appreciation the report of the Secretary-General on the review of the 10-year capacity-building programme for the
African Union,54 underlines the importance of accelerating the implementation of the programme, urges all
stakeholders to support the full implementation of the 10-year capacity-building programme in all its aspects, in
particular the operationalization of the African Standby Force, and requests the Secretary-General to report on the
progress made in this regard;
14. Stresses the critical importance of a regional approach to conflict prevention, in particular with
respect to cross-border issues such as transnational organized crime, disarmament, demobilization, repatriation,
resettlement and reintegration programmes, the prevention of illegal exploitation of natural resources and
trafficking in high-value commodities and the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects, and
emphasizes in this regard the central role of the African Union and subregional organizations in addressing such
issues;
15. Notes with concern that violence against women and children, including sexual violence, continues and
may increase even as armed conflicts draw to an end, urges further progress in the implementation of policies and
guidelines relating to the protection of and assistance to women and children in conflict and post-conflict situations
in Africa, including more systematic monitoring and reporting, notes the adoption by the General Assembly and the
Security Council of relevant resolutions, and encourages the entities that compose United Nations Action against
Sexual Violence in Conflict, as well as other relevant parts of the United Nations system, to assist the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict in the implementation of her mandate,
including in Africa;
16. Also notes with concern the tragic plight of children in conflict situations in Africa, in particular the
phenomenon of child soldiers, as well as other violations against children, stresses the need for the protection of
children in armed conflicts and for ensuring that the protection and rights of children in armed conflicts are
integrated into all peace processes, also stresses the need for post-conflict counselling, rehabilitation and education,
with due regard for the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council, and encourages the
relevant parts of the United Nations system to assist in the implementation of the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, including in Africa;
17. Stresses the importance of addressing the socioeconomic dimension of youth unemployment as well as
facilitating the enhanced participation of youth in decision-making processes, with a view to addressing social,
political and economic challenges;
18. Calls for the enhancement of the role of women in conflict prevention, conflict resolution, peacekeeping
and post-conflict peacebuilding, consistent with relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) on women and peace and security, and calls upon Member States in this
context to support the work of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women), established by the General Assembly in its resolution 64/289 of 2 July 2010;
19. Welcomes the ongoing efforts of the African Union to ensure the protection of the rights of women in
conflict and post-conflict situations, recalls in this regard the adoption and entry into force of the Protocol to the
African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa and the Solemn Declaration on
Gender Equality in Africa, the African Union Gender Policy and the Southern African Development Community
Protocol on Gender and Development, as well as the Framework for Cooperation on Preventing and Responding to
Sexual Violence in Conflict and Post-Conflict Situations in Africa signed by the African Union Commission and the
_______________
53
54

A/61/630, annex.
A/65/716-S/2011/54.

33

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

United Nations, stresses the significance of those instruments for all countries in Africa for strengthening the role of
women in peace and conflict prevention on the continent, and strongly urges the United Nations and all relevant
parties to redouble their efforts and support in this regard;
20. Takes note of the African Union Convention for the Protection and Assistance of Internally Displaced
Persons in Africa, which entered into force on 6 December 2012, and the Kampala Declaration on Refugees,
Returnees and Internally Displaced Persons in Africa, adopted on 23 October 2009;
21. Calls for the safeguarding of the principle of refugee protection in Africa and the resolution of the plight
of refugees, including through support for efforts aimed at addressing the causes of refugee movement and bringing
about the voluntary, dignified, safe and sustainable return and reintegration of those populations, and calls upon the
international community, including Member States, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and other relevant United Nations organizations, within their respective mandates, to take concrete action
to meet the protection and assistance needs of refugees, returnees and displaced persons and to contribute
generously to projects and programmes aimed at alleviating their plight, facilitating durable solutions for refugees
and displaced persons and supporting vulnerable local host communities;
22. Recognizes the important contribution of the African Peer Review Mechanism since its inception in
improving governance and supporting socioeconomic development in African countries, and recalls in this regard
the high-level panel discussion held on 21 October 2013 on Africa’s innovation in governance through 10 years of
the African Peer Review Mechanism, organized during the sixty-eighth session of the General Assembly to
commemorate the tenth anniversary of the Mechanism;
23. Welcomes African-led initiatives to strengthen political, economic and corporate governance, such as the
African Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance and the African Peer Review Mechanism, encourages
more African countries to participate in this process, and calls upon the United Nations system and Member States
to assist African countries and regional and subregional organizations, upon their request, in their ongoing efforts to
promote democracy, constitutional order and the rule of law, to enhance good governance and to continue to fight
against impunity, as well as in the holding of free, fair, inclusive and transparent elections;
24. Recognizes the role of the Peacebuilding Commission in ensuring that national ownership of the
peacebuilding process in countries emerging from conflict is observed and that nationally identified priorities are at
the core of international and regional efforts in post-conflict peacebuilding in the countries under consideration,
notes the important steps taken by the Commission in engaging with Burundi, the Central African Republic,
Guinea-Bissau and Sierra Leone, through integrated peacebuilding strategies, and with Guinea and Liberia, through
statements of mutual commitments for peacebuilding, and calls for sustained regional and international commitment
to the implementation of those strategies and mutual commitments;
25. Stresses the importance of effectively addressing the challenges that continue to hamper the achievement
of peace, stability and sustainable development on the continent, and encourages the United Nations system and
Member States to assist African countries in effectively addressing these challenges;
26. Calls upon the United Nations system, and invites Member States, to assist African countries emerging
from conflict, upon their request as appropriate, in their efforts to build national capacities, including through
national security sector reform strategies, the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants, the
provision for the safe return of internally displaced persons and refugees, the launch of income-generation activities,
particularly for youth and women, and the delivery of basic public services;
27. Takes note of the African Union policy framework on security sector reform adopted by the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of the African Union at its summit in January 2013, welcomes the support rendered
by the United Nations and development partners in the formulation of the policy framework, and calls upon the
international community, including the United Nations system, to continue to support the efforts towards its
implementation;
28. Urges continued support for measures to address the challenges of poverty eradication and hunger, job
creation and sustainable development in Africa, including, as appropriate, debt relief, improved market access,
support for the private sector and entrepreneurship, fulfilment of commitments on official development assistance
and increased flows of foreign direct investment and transfer of technology on mutually agreed terms;
34

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

29. Recognizes the need for African countries to make continued efforts to create enabling environments for
inclusive growth in support of sustainable development and for the international community to make continued
efforts to increase the flow of new and additional resources for financing for development from all sources, public
and private, domestic and foreign, to support those development efforts by African countries, and welcomes the
various important initiatives established between African countries and their development partners in this regard;
30. Calls upon the United Nations system and Member States, bilateral and multilateral partners and new
partners, to deliver expeditiously on commitments and to ensure the full and speedy implementation of the
provisions of the political declaration on Africa’s development needs,47 as well as the implementation of the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development;55
31. Stresses the need to promote socioeconomic development on the continent, and in this context takes note
of the Declaration on Employment and Poverty Alleviation in Africa, adopted by the African Union in 2004, as well
as the recommendations of the Millennium Development Goals Africa Steering Group, which were endorsed by the
African Union in July 2008 and which cover such critical areas as agriculture and food security, education, health,
infrastructure and trade facilitation and the national statistical system;
32. Encourages African Governments to strengthen structures and policies in order to create an environment
conducive to the promotion of inclusive economic growth and to attracting foreign direct investment by, inter alia,
achieving a transparent, stable and predictable investment climate, with proper contract enforcement and respect for
property rights, and to promote socioeconomic development and social justice, calls upon African Member States
and regional and subregional organizations to assist the African countries concerned, at their request, by enhancing
their capacity to devise and improve their national natural resources and public revenue management structures, and
in this regard invites the international community to assist in that process by providing adequate financial and
technical assistance and by renewing its commitment to efforts aimed at combating the illegal exploitation of the
natural resources of those countries, in conformity with international law;
33. Recalls relevant resolutions on the strengthening of cooperation and communication between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations or arrangements, and encourages coordination and cooperation
between the United Nations system and regional and subregional organizations and regional economic communities
in advocacy and in the mobilization of the support of the international community for African countries and towards
the priorities of their continental and regional institutions;
34. Notes the completion of the review of the implementation of the recommendations contained in the
1998 report of the Secretary-General,56 and requests the Secretary-General to develop, in consultation with relevant
partners, policy proposals on issues identified in his report, including enhancing cooperation among the United
Nations, the African Union and subregional organizations, particularly in conflict prevention and resolution,
peacekeeping, post-conflict peacebuilding and recovery, and promoting socioeconomic development, good
governance, the rule of law and human rights;
35. Takes note of the recommendations presented by the Secretary-General to the General Assembly at its
sixty-seventh session on possible ways to strengthen the interdepartmental task force on African affairs,57 including
through enhancing joint advocacy for international support to Africa, assisting in the mobilization of support for the
implementation of relevant programmes and initiatives in Africa and championing approaches and solutions that
take into account the enabling environment that peace and security provide for development, and reaffirms the need
to ensure further coherence and an integrated approach for United Nations support to Africa, including in following
up on the implementation of all global summit and conference outcomes related to Africa;
36. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to monitor and report to the General Assembly on an annual
basis on persistent and emerging challenges to the promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in
Africa, as well as on the approach and support of the United Nations system.
_______________
55

A/57/304, annex.
A/52/871-S/1998/318.
57
See A/67/205/Add.1-S/2012/715/Add.1.
56

35

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 68/279
A/RES/68/279

Adopted at the 99th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2014, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/68/L.49, submitted
by the President of the General Assembly

68/279. Modalities for the third International Conference on Financing for Development
The General Assembly,
Recalling the International Conference on Financing for Development, held in Monterrey, Mexico, from
18 to 22 March 2002, and the Follow-up International Conference on Financing for Development to Review the
Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus, held in Doha from 29 November to 2 December 2008,
Recalling also its resolution 68/204 of 20 December 2013 on the follow-up to the International Conference on
Financing for Development and all its previous resolutions on the subject, as well as Economic and Social Council
resolution 2013/44 of 26 July 2013 on the follow-up to the Conference and all the previous resolutions of the
Council on the subject,
Recalling further the United Nations Millennium Declaration58 and the 2005 World Summit Outcome,59
Recalling the Conference on the World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on Development and its
outcome document,60
Recalling also the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium Development
Goals, held from 20 to 22 September 2010, and its outcome document,61 and the special event to follow up efforts
made towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals, convened by the President of the Assembly on
25 September 2013, and its outcome document,62
Recalling further the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil,
from 20 to 22 June 2012, and its outcome document, entitled “The future we want”,63
Taking note of the summary by the President of the General Assembly of the sixth High-level Dialogue on
Financing for Development, held in New York on 7 and 8 October 2013,64
Noting the steps taken by the President of the General Assembly at its sixty-eighth session to convene
inclusive and transparent intergovernmental consultations, with the participation of the major institutional
stakeholders involved in the financing for development process, as appropriate, on all issues related to the
conference, including the date, format, organization and scope, taking into account the elements contained in its
resolution 68/204,
1.

Decides that the third International Conference on Financing for Development:

(a)

Shall be held in Addis Ababa from 13 to 16 July 2015;

(b) Shall be held at the highest possible political level, including Heads of State or Government, relevant
ministers, including ministers for finance, foreign affairs and development cooperation and special representatives
and other representatives, as appropriate;
(c)

Shall result in an intergovernmentally negotiated and agreed outcome;

(d) Shall also result in summaries of the plenary meetings and other deliberations of the Conference, to be
included in the report of the Conference;
_______________
58

Resolution 55/2.
Resolution 60/1.
60
Resolution 63/303, annex.
61
Resolution 65/1.
62
Resolution 68/6.
63
Resolution 66/288, annex.
64
A/68/627.
59

36

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

2. Welcomes the offer of the Government of Ethiopia to host the third International Conference on
Financing for Development;
3. Reiterates the scope of the third International Conference on Financing for Development, as in
resolution 68/204;
4. Reaffirms the relevance of the holistic financing for development agenda, as contained in the Monterrey
Consensus of the International Conference on Financing for Development65 and the Doha Declaration on Financing
for Development: outcome document of the Follow-up International Conference on Financing for Development to
Review the Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus,66 for the integrated and coordinated implementation of
and follow-up to the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and summits in the economic, social,
environmental and related fields, and in this regard emphasizes that the Monterrey Consensus and the Doha
Declaration provide the conceptual framework, including in the context of the post-2015 development agenda, for
the mobilization of resources from a variety of sources and the effective use of financing required for the
achievement of sustainable development;
5. Stresses, in this regard, the need to reinforce coherence and coordination and to avoid duplication of
efforts with regard to the financing for development process, with a view to ensuring a single, comprehensive,
holistic, forward-looking approach addressing the three dimensions of sustainable development;
6. Emphasizes the need for effective coordination between the preparatory process for the third
International Conference on Financing for Development and the preparations for the summit to be held in
September 2015 for the adoption of the post-2015 development agenda, in order to promote coherence and to
minimize duplication of effort;
7. Reaffirms that the third International Conference on Financing for Development will assess the progress
made in the implementation of the Monterrey Consensus and the Doha Declaration, reinvigorate and strengthen the
financing for development follow-up process, identify obstacles and constraints encountered in the achievement of
the goals and objectives agreed therein, as well as actions and initiatives to overcome these constraints, and address
new and emerging issues, including in the context of the recent multilateral efforts to promote international
development cooperation, taking into account the current evolving development cooperation landscape, the
interrelationship of all sources of development finance, the synergies among financing objectives across the three
dimensions of sustainable development, as well as the need to support the United Nations development agenda
beyond 2015;
8. Invites the Economic and Social Council to contribute to the preparations for the third International
Conference on Financing for Development, as appropriate, including through its special high-level meeting with the
World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, the World Trade Organization and the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, to be held in 2015;
9. Looks forward to the reports of the Intergovernmental Committee of Experts on Sustainable
Development Financing and of the Open Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals, as mandated in the
outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development,63 as well as the synthesis report
of the Secretary-General, as mandated in its resolution 68/6 of 9 October 2013, which are to serve as important
inputs to the preparations for the third International Conference on Financing for Development, the outcome of
which should constitute an important contribution to and support the implementation of the post-2015 development
agenda;
10. Requests the President of the General Assembly to appoint two co-facilitators, one from a developed
country and one from a developing country, to continue direct intergovernmental consultations on all issues related
to the third International Conference on Financing for Development and its preparatory process, and decides that
those consultations must be scheduled in advance in order to facilitate participation from capitals in the informal
consultations and drafting sessions and must be open, inclusive and transparent;
_______________
65
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
66
Resolution 63/239, annex.

37

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

11. Also requests the President of the General Assembly, in consultation with Member States, to provide a
programme of work, from within existing resources, including substantive informal sessions, with balanced
geographical participation of experts and institutions, on relevant thematic areas, of a maximum duration of eight
working days plus two working days for informal interactive hearings with representatives of civil society and the
business sector during the period from September 2014 to March 2015, and to prepare summaries which may serve
as inputs to the preparations for the third International Conference on Financing for Development;
12. Requests that the first draft of the outcome document be prepared by the co-facilitators on the basis of
informal consultations, taking into account inputs from Member States, and presented by February 2015, and that
informal consultations and drafting sessions on the outcome document be held as follows: in January 2015 for three
days, in April 2015 for five days, and in June 2015 for five days;
13. Stresses the need for flexibility in the informal consultation process, including the possibility of
convening additional consultations and drafting sessions, as required, although not after the conclusion of the third
informal consultation;
14. Decides that all the negotiations of the outcome document shall be held at United Nations Headquarters
in New York;
15. Also decides that the third International Conference on Financing for Development and its preparatory
process shall be open to participation by all States Members of the United Nations or States members of specialized
agencies and observers in the General Assembly, in accordance with arrangements utilized for previous international
conferences on financing for development;
16. Stresses the importance of the full involvement of all relevant stakeholders in the implementation of the
Monterrey Consensus and the Doha Declaration at all levels, and also stresses the importance of their full
participation in the third International Conference on Financing for Development and its preparatory process, in
accordance with the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, in particular the accreditation procedures and
modalities of participation utilized at the International Conference on Financing for Development, held in
Monterrey, and the Follow-up International Conference on Financing for Development to Review the
Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus, held in Doha, and in their preparatory processes;
17. Invites and encourages non-governmental organizations and business sector entities, including small
and medium enterprises from developing countries, to participate in the third International Conference on Financing
for Development and its preparatory process, in accordance with the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, in
particular the accreditation procedures and modalities of participation utilized at the Monterrey and Doha
Conferences and their preparatory processes, and decides that:
(a) Registration shall be open to all non-governmental organizations that are in consultative status with the
Economic and Social Council and to all non-governmental organizations and business sector entities accredited to
the Monterrey and Doha Conferences or to their follow-up processes;
(b) Interested non-governmental organizations and business sector entities that are not in consultative status
with the Economic and Social Council or were not accredited to the Monterrey or Doha Conferences shall apply to
the General Assembly for accreditation, following the accreditation procedures established during the Conferences;
(c) The above arrangements concerning participation of non-governmental organizations and business
sector entities in the Conference and its preparatory process shall in no way create a precedent for meetings of the
General Assembly;
18. Reaffirms the special role that the international financial and trade institutions, in particular the major
institutional stakeholders involved in the financing for development follow-up process, should play in all aspects of
the third International Conference on Financing for Development, including their active involvement in its
preparatory work, following the experience of the Monterrey and Doha Conferences;
19. Calls upon the regional commissions, with the support of regional development banks and other relevant
entities, to hold regional consultations, as appropriate, the outcome of which could serve as input to the preparations
for the third International Conference on Financing for Development;
20. Invites all Member States and other potential donors to consider contributing generously to the Trust
Fund for the Follow-up to the International Conference on Financing for Development, in order to support the
activities involved in the preparations for the third International Conference on Financing for Development and the
travel and participation of representatives from developing countries, in particular the least developed countries;
38

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

21. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a note on the organization of work of the third International
Conference on Financing for Development;
22. Also requests the Secretary-General to provide all appropriate support to the work of the preparatory
process for the third International Conference on Financing for Development and to the Conference itself and to
ensure inter-agency cooperation and effective participation and coherence within the United Nations system, as well
as the efficient use of resources, so that the objectives of the Conference can be addressed.
RESOLUTION 68/300
A/RES/68/300

Adopted at the 100th plenary meeting, on 10 July 2014, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/68/L.53, as orally
revised, submitted by the President of the General Assembly

68/300. Outcome document of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the comprehensive
review and assessment of the progress achieved in the prevention and control of
non-communicable diseases
The General Assembly
Adopts the following outcome document:
Outcome document of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the comprehensive review and
assessment of the progress achieved in the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases
We, Ministers and representatives of States and Governments and heads of delegations, assembled at the
United Nations on 10 and 11 July 2014 to take stock of the progress made in implementing the commitments set out
in the political declaration of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the prevention and control of noncommunicable diseases, adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 66/2 of 19 September 2011,
Intensifying our efforts towards a world free of the avoidable burden of non-communicable diseases
1. Reaffirm the political declaration, which has catalysed action and retains great potential for engendering
sustainable improved health and human development outcomes;
2. Reaffirm our commitment to address the global burden and threat of non-communicable diseases, which
constitute one of the major challenges for development in the twenty-first century, undermine social and economic
development throughout the world, threaten the achievement of internationally agreed development goals and may
lead to increasing inequalities within and between countries and populations;
3. Reiterate that the most prevalent non-communicable diseases, namely, cardiovascular diseases, cancers,
chronic respiratory diseases and diabetes, are primarily linked to four common risk factors, namely, tobacco use,
harmful use of alcohol, unhealthy diet and physical inactivity;
4. Reiterate our concern regarding the rising levels of obesity in different regions, particularly among children
and youth;
5. Recognize that mental and neurological conditions are an important cause of morbidity and contribute to the
global non-communicable disease burden, in respect of which there is a need to provide equitable access to effective
programmes and health-care interventions, as described in the comprehensive mental health action plan 2013–2020
of the World Health Organization;67
6. Recall the Moscow Declaration, adopted at the first Global Ministerial Conference on Healthy Lifestyles and
Non-communicable Disease Control, held in April 2011,68 as well as all the regional initiatives undertaken on the
prevention and control of non-communicable diseases, including the declaration of the Heads of State and
Government of the Caribbean Community entitled “Uniting to stop the epidemic of chronic non-communicable
diseases”, adopted in September 2007, the Libreville Declaration on Health and Environment in Africa, adopted in
_______________
67
68

World Health Organization, document WHA66/2013/REC/1.
A/65/859, annex.

39

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

August 2008, the statement of the Commonwealth Heads of Government on action to combat non-communicable
diseases, adopted in November 2009, the declaration of commitment of the Fifth Summit of the Americas, adopted
in June 2009, the Parma Declaration on Environment and Health, adopted by the member States in the European
region of the World Health Organization in March 2010, the Dubai Declaration on Diabetes and Chronic Noncommunicable Diseases in the Middle East and Northern Africa Region, adopted in December 2010, the European
Charter on Counteracting Obesity, adopted in November 2006, the Aruba Call for Action on Obesity of June 2011,
and the Honiara Communiqué on addressing non-communicable disease challenges in the Pacific region, adopted in
July 2011;
Taking stock: progress achieved since 2011
7. Welcome the development by the World Health Organization, in accordance with paragraph 61 of the political
declaration, of the comprehensive global monitoring framework, including the set of 9 voluntary global targets for
achievement by 2025 and a set of 25 indicators to be applied across regional and country settings in order to monitor
trends and assess progress made in the implementation of national strategies and plans on non-communicable
diseases, and the adoption of the framework by the World Health Assembly;
8. Also welcome the endorsement by the World Health Assembly of the Global Action Plan for the Prevention
and Control of Non-communicable Diseases 2013–202067 and its adoption of the nine indicators to inform reporting
on progress made in implementing the Global Action Plan;
9. Welcome the establishment of the United Nations Inter-Agency Task Force on the Prevention and Control of
Non-communicable Diseases and the endorsement of its terms of reference by the Economic and Social Council
on 13 June 2014;
10. Welcome the request that the Director General of the World Health Organization prepare, for consideration
during the sixty-eighth World Health Assembly, in consultation with Member States, United Nations organizations
and other relevant stakeholders, as appropriate, and within existing resources, a framework for country action, for
adaptation to different contexts, taking into account the Helsinki Statement on Health in All Policies, adopted at the
Eighth Global Conference on Health Promotion, aimed at supporting national efforts to improve health, ensure
health protection, health equity and health system functioning, including through action across sectors on
determinants of health and risk factors of non-communicable diseases, based on best available knowledge and
evidence;
11. Also welcome the endorsement by the World Health Assembly of the terms of reference for the
comprehensive global coordination mechanism for the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases;
12. Recognize the remarkable progress achieved at the national level, since September 2011, including an increase
in the number of countries which have an operational national non-communicable disease policy with a budget for
implementation, from 32 per cent of countries in 2010 to 50 per cent of countries in 2013;
13. Recognize that progress in the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases has been insufficient and
highly uneven, due in part to their complexity and challenging nature, and that continued and increased efforts are
essential for achieving a world free of the avoidable burden of non-communicable diseases;
14. Acknowledge that, despite some improvements, commitments to promote, establish or support and
strengthen, by 2013, multisectoral national policies and plans for the prevention and control of non-communicable
diseases, and to increase and prioritize budgetary allocations for addressing non-communicable diseases, were often
not translated into action, owing to a number of factors, including the lack of national capacity;
15. Acknowledge that many countries, in particular developing countries, are struggling to move from
commitment to action and, in this regard, reiterate our call upon Member States to consider implementing, as
appropriate, within national contexts, policies and evidence-based, affordable, cost-effective, population-wide and
multisectoral interventions, including a reduction of modifiable risk factors of non-communicable diseases
as described in appendix 3 to the Global Action Plan for the Prevention and Control of Non-communicable
Diseases 2013–2020;
16. Recognize that affordable interventions to reduce environmental and occupational health risks are available
and that prioritization and implementation of such interventions in accordance with national conditions can
contribute to reducing the burden of non-communicable diseases;
40

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

17. Reiterate our call upon Member States to consider implementing, as appropriate, according to national
circumstances, policy options and cost-effective, affordable, multisectoral interventions for the prevention and
control of non-communicable diseases69 in order to achieve the nine voluntary global targets for non-communicable
diseases by 2025;
Reaffirming our leadership: commitments and actions
18. Reaffirm our commitment to advance the implementation of multisectoral, cost-effective, population-wide
interventions in order to reduce the impact of the four common behavioural risk factors for non-communicable
diseases, through the implementation of relevant international agreements, strategies, national policies, legislation
and development priorities, including educational, regulatory and fiscal measures, without prejudice to the right of
sovereign nations to determine and establish their taxation policies and other policies, where appropriate, by
involving all relevant sectors, civil society and communities, as appropriate;
19. Recognize that the implementation of the Global Action Plan for the Prevention and Control of Noncommunicable Diseases 2013–2020, the Global Strategy on Diet, Physical Activity and Health,70 the Global
Strategy to Reduce the Harmful Use of Alcohol,71 the Global Strategy for Infant and Young Child Feeding of the
World Health Organization and the United Nations Children’s Fund, and the World Health Organization Set of
Recommendations on the Marketing of Foods and Non-alcoholic Beverages to Children,72 as appropriate, will
accelerate efforts to reduce non-communicable diseases, and reiterate our call upon Member States to mobilize
political will and financial resources for that purpose;
20. Reiterate our commitment to accelerate the implementation of the World Health Organization Framework
Convention on Tobacco Control73 by States parties, and encourage countries to consider becoming parties to the
Convention;
21. Call upon Member States to take steps, including, where appropriate, effective legislation, cross-sectoral
structures, processes, methods and resources that enable societal policies which take into account and address the
impacts on health determinants, health protection, health equity and health system functioning, and which measure
and track economic, social and environmental determinants and disparities in health;
22. Call upon Member States to develop, as appropriate, institutional capacity with adequate knowledge and skills
for assessing the impact on health of policy initiatives in all sectors, identifying solutions and negotiating policies
across sectors to achieve improved outcomes from the perspective of health, health equity and health system
functioning;
23. Recognize the importance of universal health coverage in national health systems, and call upon Member
States to strengthen health systems, including health-care infrastructure, human resources for health, and health and
social protection systems, particularly in developing countries, in order to respond effectively and equitably to the
health-care needs of people with non-communicable diseases throughout the life cycle;
24. Continue to scale up, where appropriate, a package of proven, cost-effective interventions, including those
identified in appendix 3 to the Global Action Plan;
25. Reiterate the importance of increased access to cost-effective cancer screening programmes as determined by
national situations, as well as the importance of promoting increased access to cost-effective vaccinations to prevent
infections associated with cancer, as part of national immunization schedules;
26. Acknowledge that limited progress has been made in implementing paragraph 44 of the annex to General
Assembly resolution 66/2, and although an increased number of private sector entities have started to produce and
promote food products consistent with a healthy diet, such products are not always broadly affordable, accessible
and available in all communities within countries;
_______________
69

Such as those included in appendix 3 to the annex to resolution WHA66.10.
World Health Organization, document WHA57/2004/REC/1, resolution 57.17, annex.
71
World Health Organization, document WHA63/2010/REC/1, annex 3.
72
World Health Organization, document WHA63/2010/REC/1, annex 4.
73
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2302, No. 41032.
70

41

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

27. Continue to encourage policies that support the production and manufacture of and facilitate access to foods
that contribute to a healthy diet and provide greater opportunities for the utilization of healthy local agricultural
products and foods, thereby contributing to efforts to cope with the challenges and take advantage of opportunities
presented by globalization and to achieve food security and adequate nutrition;
28. Reaffirm the primary role and responsibility of Governments in responding to the challenge of noncommunicable diseases, including through engaging non-governmental organizations, the private sector and other
sectors of society to generate effective responses for the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases at the
global, national and local levels;
29. Recall that effective non-communicable disease prevention and control requires leadership and multisectoral
approaches to health at the governmental level, including, as appropriate, health-in-all-policies and whole-ofgovernment approaches across sectors beyond health, while protecting public health policies for the prevention and
control of non-communicable diseases from undue influence by any form of real, perceived or potential conflict of
interest;
Moving forward: national commitments
30. Commit to addressing non-communicable diseases as a matter of priority in national development plans, as
appropriate within national contexts and the international development agenda, and to take the following measures
with the engagement of all relevant sectors, including civil society and communities, as appropriate:
(a)

Enhance governance:

(i) By 2015, consider setting national targets for 2025 and process indicators based on national situations,
taking into account the nine voluntary global targets for non-communicable diseases, building on guidance
provided by the World Health Organization, to focus on efforts to address the impacts of non-communicable
diseases and to assess the progress made in the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases and
their risk factors and determinants;
(ii) By 2015, consider developing or strengthening national multisectoral policies and plans to achieve the
national targets by 2025, taking into account the Global Action Plan for the Prevention and Control of Noncommunicable Diseases 2013–2020;
(iii) Continue to develop, strengthen and implement, as appropriate, multisectoral public policies and action
plans to promote health education and health literacy, with a particular focus on populations with low health
awareness and/or literacy;
(iv) Raise awareness about the national public health burden caused by non-communicable diseases and the
relationship between non-communicable diseases, poverty and social and economic development;
(v) Integrate measures to address non-communicable diseases into health planning and national
development plans and policies, including the design process and implementation of the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework;
(vi) Consider establishing, as appropriate to the respective national context, a national multisectoral
mechanism, such as a high-level commission, agency or task force for engagement, policy coherence and
mutual accountability of different spheres of policymaking that have a bearing on non-communicable
diseases, in order to implement health-in-all-policies and whole-of-government and whole-of-society
approaches, and to monitor and act on the determinants of non-communicable diseases, including social and
environmental determinants;
(vii) Enhance the capacity, mechanisms and mandates, as appropriate, of relevant authorities in facilitating
and ensuring action across governmental sectors;
(viii) Strengthen the capacity of ministries of health to exercise a strategic leadership and coordination role in
policy development that engages all stakeholders across government, non-governmental organizations, civil
society and the private sector, ensuring that issues relating to non-communicable diseases receive an
appropriate, coordinated, comprehensive and integrated response;
(ix) Align international cooperation on non-communicable diseases with national plans concerning noncommunicable diseases in order to strengthen aid effectiveness and the development impact of external
resources in support of non-communicable diseases;
42

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

(x) Develop and implement national policies and plans, as relevant, with financial and human resources
allocated particularly to addressing non-communicable diseases, in which social determinants are included;
(b) By 2016, as appropriate, reduce risk factors for non-communicable diseases and underlying social
determinants through the implementation of interventions and policy options to create health-promoting
environments, building on guidance set out in appendix 3 to the Global Action Plan;
(c) By 2016, as appropriate, strengthen and orient health systems to address the prevention and control of
non-communicable diseases and the underlying social determinants through people-centred primary health care and
universal health coverage throughout the life cycle, building on guidance set out in appendix 3 to the Global
Action Plan;
(d) Consider the possible linkages between non-communicable diseases and some communicable diseases,
such as HIV/AIDS, call for the integration, as appropriate, of responses to HIV/AIDS and non-communicable
diseases, and in this regard call for attention to be given to people living with HIV/AIDS, especially in countries
with a high prevalence of HIV/AIDS, in accordance with national priorities;
(e) Continue to promote the inclusion of prevention and control of non-communicable diseases within
programmes for sexual and reproductive health and maternal and child health, especially at the primary health-care
level, as well as communicable disease programmes, such as those addressing tuberculosis, as appropriate;
(f) Consider the synergies between major non-communicable diseases and other conditions as described in
appendix 1 to the Global Action Plan in order to develop a comprehensive response for the prevention and control
of non-communicable diseases that also recognizes the conditions in which people live and work;
(g) Monitor the trends and determinants of non-communicable diseases and evaluate progress in their
prevention and control:
(i) Assess progress towards attaining the voluntary global targets and report on the results using the
indicators established in the comprehensive global monitoring framework, according to the agreed timelines,
and use results from monitoring of the 25 indicators and 9 voluntary targets and other sources of data to
inform and guide policy and programming, aiming to maximize the impact of interventions and investments
on non-communicable disease outcomes;
(ii) Contribute information on trends in non-communicable diseases to the World Health Organization,
according to the agreed timelines on progress made in the implementation of national action plans and on the
effectiveness of national policies and strategies, coordinating country reporting with global analyses;
(iii) Develop or strengthen, as appropriate, surveillance systems to track social disparities in noncommunicable diseases and their risk factors as a first step to addressing inequalities, and pursue and promote
gender-based approaches for the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases on the basis of data
disaggregated by sex, age and disability, in an effort to address the critical differences in the risks of morbidity
and mortality from non-communicable diseases for women and men;
(h) Continue to strengthen international cooperation in support of national, regional and global plans for the
prevention and control of non-communicable diseases, inter alia, through the exchange of best practices in the areas
of health promotion, legislation, regulation, strengthening of health systems, training of health-care personnel and
the development of appropriate health-care infrastructure and diagnostics and by promoting the development and
dissemination of appropriate, affordable and sustainable transfer of technology on mutually agreed terms for the
production of affordable, safe, effective and quality medicines and vaccines, while recognizing the leading role of
the World Health Organization as the primary specialized agency for health in that regard;
31. Continue to strengthen international cooperation through North-South, South-South and triangular
cooperation in the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases to promote at the national, regional and
international levels an enabling environment to facilitate healthy lifestyles and choices, bearing in mind that SouthSouth cooperation is not a substitute for, but rather a complement to, North-South cooperation;
32. Continue to explore the provision of adequate, predictable and sustained resources, through domestic,
bilateral, regional and multilateral channels, including traditional and voluntary innovative financing mechanisms;
43

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Moving forward: international commitments
33. Invite the Development Assistance Committee of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development to consider developing a purpose code for non-communicable diseases in order to improve the
tracking of official development assistance in support of national efforts for the prevention and control of noncommunicable diseases;
34. Reiterate our commitment to actively promote national and international investments and strengthen national
capacity for quality research and development, in all aspects relating to the prevention and control of
non-communicable diseases, in a sustainable and cost-effective manner, while noting the importance of continuing
to incentivize innovation in public health, inter alia, as appropriate, through a sound and balanced intellectual
property rights system, which is important, inter alia, for the development of new medicines, as recognized in the
Doha Declaration on the World Trade Organization Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property
Rights (TRIPS Agreement) and Public Health;
35. Reaffirm the right to use, to the fullest extent, the provisions contained in the World Trade Organization
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS Agreement), the Doha Declaration on
the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health, the decision of the General Council of the World Trade Organization of
30 August 2003 on the implementation of paragraph 6 of the Doha Declaration, and, when formal acceptance
procedures are completed, the amendment to article 31 of the TRIPS Agreement, which provide flexibilities for the
protection of public health, and in particular to promote access to medicines for all and encourage the provision of
assistance to developing countries in this regard;
36. Give due consideration to addressing non-communicable diseases in the elaboration of the post-2015
development agenda, taking into account, in particular, their serious socioeconomic consequences and determinants
and their links to poverty;
37. Call upon the World Health Organization, in consultation with Member States, in the context of the
comprehensive global coordination mechanism for the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases, while
ensuring appropriate protection from vested interests, to develop, before the end of 2015, an approach that can be
used to register and publish contributions of the private sector, philanthropic entities and civil society to the
achievement of the nine voluntary targets for non-communicable diseases;
Towards the world we want: follow-up
38. Request the Secretary-General, in collaboration with Member States, the World Health Organization and
relevant funds, programmes and specialized agencies of the United Nations system, to submit to the General
Assembly, by the end of 2017, for consideration by Member States, a report on the progress achieved in the
implementation of the present outcome document and of the political declaration of the high-level meeting of the
Assembly on the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases, in preparation for a comprehensive review,
in 2018, of the progress achieved in the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases.
RESOLUTION 68/301
A/RES/68/301

Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 17 July 2014, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/68/L.41/Rev.1 and
Add.1, as orally revised, sponsored by: Austria, Bolivia (Plurinational State of) (on behalf of the States Members of the United
Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China), Estonia, Finland, France, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy,
Luxembourg, Montenegro, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Slovenia, Sweden, Turkey

68/301. New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress in implementation and international support
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 57/2 of 16 September 2002 on the United Nations Declaration on the New Partnership
for Africa’s Development,
Recalling also its resolution 57/7 of 4 November 2002 on the final review and appraisal of the United Nations
New Agenda for the Development of Africa in the 1990s and support for the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development and resolutions 58/233 of 23 December 2003, 59/254 of 23 December 2004, 60/222 of
44

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

23 December 2005, 61/229 of 22 December 2006, 62/179 of 19 December 2007, 63/267 of 31 March 2009, 64/258
of 16 March 2010, 65/284 of 22 June 2011, 66/286 of 23 July 2012 and 67/294 of 15 August 2013, entitled
“New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress in implementation and international support”,
Recalling further the 2005 World Summit Outcome,74 including the recognition of the need to meet the
special needs of Africa, and recalling also its resolution 60/265 of 30 June 2006,
Recalling the political declaration on Africa’s development needs, adopted at the high-level meeting on
Africa’s development needs on 22 September 2008,75
Recalling also the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium Development
Goals and its outcome document,76 including the recognition that more attention should be given to Africa,
especially to those countries most off track to achieve the Millennium Development Goals by 2015,
Recalling further that significant challenges remain in achieving sustainable development in Africa, as
emphasized in the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, entitled
“The future we want”,77 including the importance of fulfilling all commitments to advance action in areas critical to
Africa’s sustainable development,
Recalling its resolution 66/293 of 17 September 2012, by which it established a United Nations monitoring
mechanism to review commitments made towards Africa’s development, and looking forward to the first biennial
report, to be submitted to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session,
Recalling also the holding of the high-level thematic debate of the General Assembly on the promotion of
investment in Africa and its catalytic role in achieving Africa’s development objectives, including those of the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development, on 17 July 2014,
Taking note of other initiatives, such as the first high-level meeting of the Global Partnership for Effective
Development Cooperation on the theme “Building towards an inclusive post-2015 development agenda”, held in
Mexico City on 15 and 16 April 2014,
Stressing that addressing Africa’s special development needs should be given due attention in the post-2015
development agenda,
Bearing in mind that African countries have primary responsibility for their own economic and social
development and that the role of national policies and development strategies cannot be overemphasized, and
bearing in mind also the need for their development efforts to be supported by an enabling international economic
environment, and in this regard recalling the support given by the International Conference on Financing for
Development to the New Partnership,78
Noting with appreciation the recent progress made by the 34 African countries and the 4 regional economic
communities that voluntarily adopted the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme and
committed to ensuring an annual rate of growth in agriculture of 6 per cent and to allocating at least 10 per cent of
public expenditure to the agricultural sector, as appropriate, and noting with appreciation also that, today, nine
countries have reached or surpassed the 10 per cent budget allocation target, while another nine countries are
currently spending between 5 and 10 per cent,
Welcoming the decision, taken by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the African Union at its
nineteenth ordinary session, held on 15 and 16 July 2012, to proclaim 2014 the Year of Agriculture and Food
Security in Africa,
_______________
74

Resolution 60/1.
Resolution 63/1.
76
Resolution 65/1.
77
Resolution 66/288, annex.
78
See Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
75

45

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Reiterating the need for the international community to implement all commitments regarding the economic
and social development of Africa,
1.

Welcomes the eleventh consolidated report of the Secretary-General;79

2.

Reaffirms its full support for the implementation of the New Partnership for Africa’s Development;80

3. Reaffirms its commitment to the full implementation of the political declaration on Africa’s development
needs,75 as reaffirmed in the Doha Declaration on Financing for Development, adopted as the outcome document of
the Follow-up International Conference on Financing for Development to Review the Implementation of the
Monterrey Consensus, held in Doha from 29 November to 2 December 2008;81
4. Recognizes the progress made in the implementation of the New Partnership as well as regional and
international support for the New Partnership, while acknowledging that much needs to be done in its
implementation;
5. Takes note of the declaration of the special summit of the African Union on HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and
malaria, held in Abuja from 12 to 16 July 2013, on the progress made in implementing the Abuja actions towards
the elimination of HIV and AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria in Africa by 2030, also takes note of the Political
Declaration on HIV and AIDS: Intensifying Our Efforts to Eliminate HIV and AIDS, adopted at the high-level
meeting on HIV/AIDS on 10 June 2011,82 further takes note of the declaration of the extraordinary summit meeting
of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity on HIV/AIDS,
tuberculosis and other related infectious diseases, held in Abuja from 24 to 27 April 2001, and reaffirms the resolve
to provide assistance for prevention, treatment and care, with the aim of ensuring an HIV/AIDS-, malaria- and
tuberculosis-free Africa by addressing the needs of all, in particular the needs of women, children and young people,
and the urgent need to scale up significantly efforts towards achieving the goal of universal access to comprehensive
HIV/AIDS prevention programmes, treatment, care and support in African countries, to accelerate and intensify
efforts to expand access to affordable and quality medicines in Africa, including antiretroviral drugs, by encouraging
pharmaceutical companies to make drugs available, and to ensure strengthened global partnership and increased
bilateral and multilateral assistance, where possible on a grant basis, to combat HIV/AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis and
other infectious diseases in Africa through the strengthening of health systems;
6. Also takes note of the road map on shared responsibility and global solidarity for AIDS, tuberculosis and
malaria response in Africa, from 2012 to 2015, adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
African Union at its nineteenth ordinary session, notes the revitalization of AIDS Watch Africa as an African highlevel platform to advocate action, accountability and resource mobilization for response to HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis
and malaria in Africa, and requests, as appropriate, and in line with other international obligations, development
partners and the United Nations system to support efforts of African countries and organizations to reach the main
objectives put forward in the African Union road map, including achieving diversified sustainable financing,
strengthening regulatory harmonization and local pharmaceutical manufacturing capacity and enhancing leadership
and governance of the responses;
7. Recognizes that HIV/AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis and other infectious diseases pose severe risks for the
entire world, in particular the African continent, and serious challenges to the achievement of the internationally
agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals;
8. Invites development partners to continue to assist African countries in their efforts to strengthen national
health systems, including by providing skilled health personnel, reliable health information and data, research
infrastructure and laboratory capacity, and to expand surveillance systems in the health sector, including support for
the efforts to prevent, protect against and combat outbreaks of diseases, including of neglected tropical diseases, and
in this context reiterates its support for the Kampala Declaration and Agenda for Global Action and follow-up
conferences to respond to the serious health workforce crisis in Africa;
_______________
79

A/68/222.
A/57/304, annex.
81
Resolution 63/239, annex.
82
Resolution 65/277, annex.
80

46

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

9. Stresses the importance of improving maternal and child health, and in this regard welcomes the
declaration of the African Union summit on maternal, infant and child health and development, held in Kampala
from 19 to 27 July 2010, and acknowledges the Campaign on Accelerated Reduction of Maternal Mortality
in Africa;
10. Takes note of the declaration of the high-level meeting of African and international leaders, entitled
“Toward African renaissance: renewed partnership for a unified approach to end hunger in Africa by 2025 under the
framework of the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme”;
11. Expresses deep concern about the ongoing adverse impacts, particularly on development, of the world
financial and economic crisis, recognizes evidence of an uneven and fragile recovery, is cognizant that the global
economy, notwithstanding significant efforts that helped to contain tail risks, improve financial market conditions
and sustain recovery, still remains in a challenging phase, with downside risks, including high volatility in global
markets, high unemployment, particularly among young people, indebtedness in some countries and widespread
fiscal strains, which pose challenges for global economic recovery and reflect the need for additional progress
towards sustaining and rebalancing global demand, and stresses the need for continuing efforts to address systemic
fragilities and imbalances and to reform and strengthen the international financial system while implementing the
reforms agreed upon to date;
12. Expresses concern about the negative consequences of the uneven global recovery, the increasing
challenges posed by climate change, drought, land degradation, desertification, the loss of biodiversity and floods,
and the serious challenges these impacts pose to the fight against poverty and hunger, which could pose serious
additional challenges to the achievement of the internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium
Development Goals, particularly in Africa;
13. Recognizes that, while global growth is returning, there is a need to further strengthen the recovery,
which is still uneven, stresses the urgent need for full recovery and sustained and accelerated growth, which
translates into new employment opportunities, secure incomes and improved livelihoods, and reaffirms the need to
continue to support the special needs of Africa and to take action to mitigate the multidimensional impacts of the
crisis on the continent;
14. Notes that the rapid economic growth of some developing countries has had a positive impact on the
efforts of the African continent to sustain and expand growth, despite the fact that those developing countries
continue to face development challenges;
15. Expresses concern at Africa’s disproportionately low share in the volume of international trade, which
stands at approximately 3 per cent, also expresses concern that official development assistance to Africa fell in 2013,
and further expresses concern at the increased debt burden of some African countries;
16. Notes that foreign direct investment is a major source of financing for development, that it has a critical
role in achieving development objectives and inclusive economic growth, including through the promotion of job
creation and poverty eradication, and that it contributes to the active participation of the African economies in the
global economy and facilitates regional economic cooperation and integration, and in this regard calls upon
developed countries to continue to devise source-country measures to encourage and facilitate the flow of foreign
direct investment, inter alia, through the provision of export credits and other lending instruments, risk guarantees
and business development services;
17. Also notes the importance of promoting the formalization of informal sector activities in Africa;
18. Calls upon developing countries and countries with economies in transition to continue their efforts to
create a domestic environment conducive to attracting investments by, inter alia, achieving a transparent, stable and
predictable investment climate with proper contract enforcement and respect for property rights;
19. Emphasizes that economic development, including inclusive industrial development, and policies which
seek to enhance productive capacities in Africa can generate employment and income for the poor and, therefore, be
an engine for poverty eradication and for achieving internationally agreed development goals, including the
Millennium Development Goals;
20. Reaffirms the need to enhance the voice and participation of developing countries, including African
countries, in international economic decision-making and norm-setting, notes the steps taken in this regard, and
emphasizes in this context the need to avoid further marginalization of the African continent;
47

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

I
Actions by African countries and organizations
21. Welcomes the progress made by African countries in fulfilling their commitments in the implementation
of the New Partnership to deepen democracy, human rights, good governance and sound economic management,
and encourages African countries, with the participation of stakeholders, including civil society and the private
sector, to continue their efforts towards achieving development goals, developing and strengthening institutions for
governance, creating an environment conducive to involving the private sector, including small and medium-sized
enterprises, in the New Partnership implementation process, developing public-private partnerships for financing
infrastructure projects and attracting foreign direct investment for development;
22. Also welcomes the collaboration between the African Private Sector Forum and the United Nations
Global Compact, and encourages the strengthening of this partnership in conjunction with the African Union
Commission in support of the development of the African private sector and the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals, in line with the relevant executive decisions of the African Union;
23. Notes with appreciation the efforts exerted by the African Union and the regional economic
communities in the area of economic integration, as well as ongoing efforts by the African Union in the
operationalization of the provision contained in General Assembly resolutions 59/213 of 20 December 2004, 61/296
of 17 September 2007 and 63/310 of 14 September 2009, and stresses the key role of the United Nations system in
supporting the African Union in the social, economic and political fields and in the area of peace and security;
24. Recognizes the important role that African regional economic communities can play in the
implementation of the New Partnership, and in this regard encourages African countries and the international
community to give regional economic communities the support necessary to strengthen their capacity;
25. Welcomes the decision by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the African Union, at its
eighteenth ordinary session, on 29 and 30 January 2012, to strengthen intra-African trade, which plays an important
role in promoting economic growth and development, and calls upon the United Nations system and development
partners to continue to support the efforts of African countries, the African Union and regional economic
communities to enhance intra-African trade;
26. Also welcomes the commitment of the African leaders to Africa’s political, social and economic
integration agenda and to the ideal of pan-Africanism and African renaissance, as reaffirmed in the solemn
declaration adopted on 26 May 2013 on the occasion of the fiftieth anniversary of the Organization of African
Unity/African Union;
27. Takes note of the progress in the development of the African Union Agenda 2063 as a strategic vision
and action plan for ensuring a positive socioeconomic transformation in Africa within the next 50 years, particularly
through regional integration, industrialization, diversification of the economy and job creation;
28. Welcomes the commendable progress that has been achieved in implementing the African Peer Review
Mechanism, in particular the completion of the peer review process in 17 countries, and welcomes the progress in
implementing the national programmes of action resulting from those reviews, and in this regard urges African
States that have not yet done so to consider joining the Mechanism process and to strengthen the Mechanism
process for its efficient performance;
29. Welcomes and appreciates the continuing and increasing efforts of African countries in mainstreaming a
gender perspective and the empowerment of women in the implementation of the New Partnership;
30. Encourages African countries to accelerate the achievement of the objective of food security in Africa,
welcomes the commitment made by African leaders to raise the share of agriculture and rural development in their
budget expenditures and ensure better governance to effectively manage the resources allocated, and in this regard
reaffirms its support for, inter alia, the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme, under the
strong leadership of African countries, in accordance with the targets set by the New Partnership;
31. Also encourages African countries to strengthen and expand local and regional infrastructure and to
continue sharing best practices with a view to strengthening regional and continental integration, and in this regard
notes with appreciation the work of the high-level subcommittee of the African Union on the Presidential
Infrastructure Champion Initiative, which seeks to further strengthen the development of infrastructure on the
African continent in collaboration with relevant development partners;
48

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

32. Further encourages African countries to maintain the trend of increasing investment in infrastructure
development and improving the efficiency of existing infrastructure investment, in the context of the Programme for
Infrastructure Development in Africa which calls for the creation of an enabling environment for adequate
investments and the adoption of the sector reforms needed to produce the expected results;
33. Encourages African countries to continue their efforts in investing in education, science, technology and
innovation to enhance value addition and industrial development;
II
Response of the international community
34. Welcomes the efforts by development partners to strengthen cooperation with the New Partnership;
35. Also welcomes the various important initiatives established between African countries and their
development partners, as well as other initiatives, emphasizes the importance of coordination in such initiatives on
Africa and the need for their effective implementation, and in this regard recognizes the important role that NorthSouth, South-South and triangular cooperation can play in supporting Africa’s development efforts, including in the
implementation of the New Partnership, while bearing in mind that South-South cooperation is not a substitute for
but rather a complement to North-South cooperation;
36. Urges continued support of measures to address the challenges of poverty eradication and hunger, job
creation and sustainable development in Africa, including, as appropriate, debt relief, improved market access,
support for the private sector and entrepreneurship, fulfilment of commitments on official development assistance
and increased flows of foreign direct investment, and transfer of technology on mutually agreed terms;
37. Expresses deep concern about the continuing negative effects of desertification, land degradation and
drought on the African continent and, in particular, the critical situation in the Sahel and the Horn of Africa region,
which have experienced one of the worst droughts in history, and underlines the need for short-, medium- and
long-term measures, and in this regard calls for the continued effective implementation of the United Nations
Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification,
Particularly in Africa,83 including its 10-year strategic plan and framework to enhance the implementation of the
Convention (2008–2018),84 to address the situation;
38. Recognizes that Africa, which contributes the least to climate change, is one of the regions most
vulnerable and most exposed to its adverse impacts, and in this regard calls upon the international community, in
particular developed countries, to continue to support Africa in its adaptation and sustainable development efforts
through, inter alia, the transfer and deployment of technology, on mutually agreed terms, capacity-building and the
provision of adequate and predictable new resources, in line with existing commitments;
39. Notes the progress made at the Ninth Ministerial Conference of the World Trade Organization, held in
Bali, Indonesia, from 3 to 7 December 2013, and looks forward to the timely implementation of the “Bali package”,
including the trade facilitation agreement, and calls for a balanced, ambitious, comprehensive and developmentoriented outcome of the Doha Development Agenda multilateral trade negotiations;
40. Reiterates the important role of trade as an engine of sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth
and sustainable development, in particular its contribution to boosting job creation, given high youth unemployment
in Africa, and to the attainment of the Millennium Development Goals, and emphasizes the need to resist
protectionist tendencies and to rectify any trade-distorting measures already taken that are inconsistent with World
Trade Organization rules, while recognizing the right of countries, in particular developing countries, to fully utilize
their flexibilities consistent with their commitments and obligations as members of the World Trade Organization;
41. Also reiterates the need for all countries and relevant multilateral institutions to continue efforts to
enhance coherence in their trade policies towards African countries, and acknowledges the importance of efforts to
fully integrate African countries into the international trading system and to build their capacity to compete through
such initiatives as aid for trade and, given the world economic and financial crisis, the provision of assistance to
address the adjustment challenges of trade liberalization;
_______________
83
84

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1954, No. 33480.
A/C.2/62/7, annex.

49

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

42. Calls for a comprehensive and sustainable solution to the external debt problems of African countries,
and recognizes the important role, on a case-by-case basis, of debt relief, including debt cancellation, as appropriate,
the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative and debt restructuring, as debt crisis prevention and management
tools for mitigating the impact of the world financial and economic crisis in developing countries;
43. Welcomes the efforts of some developed countries which are on target to meet the commitments made in
terms of increased official development assistance;
44. Expresses deep concern at the fact that the commitment to double aid to Africa by 2010, as articulated at
the Summit of the Group of Eight held at Gleneagles from 6 to 8 July 2005, was not entirely reached, and in this
regard stresses the need to make rapid progress in order to fulfil the Gleneagles and other donors’ substantial
commitments to increase aid through a variety of means;
45. Underlines the fact that the fulfilment of all official development assistance commitments is crucial,
including the commitments by many developed countries to achieve the target of 0.7 per cent of gross national
product for official development assistance to developing countries by 2015, as well as the target of 0.15
to 0.20 per cent of gross national product for official development assistance to least developed countries, and urges
developed countries that have not yet done so to fulfil their commitments for official development assistance to
developing countries;
46. Considers that innovative mechanisms of financing can make a positive contribution towards assisting
developing countries in mobilizing additional resources for financing for development on a voluntary basis and that
such financing should supplement and not be a substitute for traditional sources of financing, and, while
highlighting the considerable progress on innovative sources of financing for development achieved to date, stresses
the importance of scaling up present initiatives and developing new mechanisms, as appropriate;
47. Welcomes the increasing efforts to improve the quality of official development assistance and increase its
development impact, recognizes the Development Cooperation Forum of the Economic and Social Council, notes
other initiatives, such as the high-level forums on aid effectiveness, which produced, inter alia, the Paris Declaration
on Aid Effectiveness, the Accra Agenda for Action85 and the Busan Partnership for Effective Development
Cooperation, which make important contributions to the efforts of the countries that have made commitments to
them, including through the adoption of the fundamental principles of national ownership, alignment, harmonization
and managing for results, and bears in mind that there is no one-size-fits-all formula that will guarantee effective
assistance and that the specific situation of each country needs to be fully considered;
48. Recognizes the need for Africa’s development partners that are supporting agriculture and food security
in Africa to align their efforts more specifically towards supporting the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture
Development Programme, using the Programme’s investment plans for alignment of external funding, and in this
regard takes note of the Declaration of the World Summit on Food Security;86
49. Also recognizes the need for Africa’s development partners to align their efforts in infrastructure
investment towards supporting the Programme for Infrastructure Development in Africa;
50. Invites all of Africa’s development partners, in particular developed countries, to support African
countries in promoting and maintaining macroeconomic stability, to help African countries to attract investments
and promote policies conducive to attracting domestic and foreign investment, for example by encouraging private
financial flows, to promote investment by their private sectors in Africa, to encourage and facilitate the transfer of
technology to African countries, on mutually agreed terms, and to assist in strengthening human and institutional
capacities for the implementation of the New Partnership, consistent with its priorities and objectives and with a
view to furthering Africa’s development at all levels;
51. Stresses that the prevention, management and resolution of conflict and post-conflict consolidation are
essential for the achievement of the objectives of the New Partnership, and welcomes in this regard the cooperation
and support granted by the United Nations and development partners to the African regional and subregional
organizations in the implementation of the New Partnership;
_______________
85
86

50

A/63/539, annex.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document WSFS 2009/2.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

52. Welcomes the continued efforts of the United Nations Peacebuilding Commission in assisting postconflict countries in Africa, particularly the six African countries for which the Commission has established countryspecific configurations;
53. Urges the international community to give due attention to Africa’s priorities, including the New
Partnership, in the formulation of the post-2015 development agenda;
54. Requests the United Nations system to continue to provide assistance to the Planning and Coordinating
Agency of the New Partnership and to African countries in developing projects and programmes within the scope of
the priorities of the New Partnership and to place greater emphasis on monitoring, evaluation and dissemination of
the effectiveness of its activities in support of the New Partnership;
55. Emphasizes African ownership of the African Peer Review Mechanism process, and invites the
international community to support the efforts of African countries, at their request, in implementing their respective
national programmes of action arising from the process;
56. Invites the Secretary-General, as a follow-up to the 2005 World Summit, to urge the United Nations
development system to assist African countries in implementing quick-impact initiatives through, inter alia, the
Millennium Villages Project, and requests the Secretary-General to include in his report an assessment of those
quick-impact initiatives;
57. Requests the Secretary-General to promote greater coherence in the work of the United Nations system
in support of the New Partnership, on the basis of the agreed clusters of the Regional Coordination Mechanism for
Africa,87 and in this regard calls upon the United Nations system to continue to mainstream the special needs of
Africa in all its normative and operational activities;
58. Welcomes the establishment of a United Nations monitoring mechanism to review commitments made
related to Africa’s development, and invites Member States and all relevant entities of the United Nations system,
including funds, programmes, specialized agencies and regional commissions, in particular the Economic
Commission for Africa, and all relevant international and regional organizations to contribute to the effectiveness
and reliability of the review process by cooperating in the collection of data and the evaluation performance;
59. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive report on the implementation of the present
resolution to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session on the basis of inputs from Governments, organizations
of the United Nations system and other stakeholders in the New Partnership.
RESOLUTION 68/302
A/RES/68/302

Adopted at the 105th plenary meeting, on 31 July 2014, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/68/L.54, submitted
by the President of the General Assembly

68/302. Modalities for the overall review by the General Assembly of the implementation of the outcomes of
the World Summit on the Information Society
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration of Principles and the Plan of Action adopted by the World Summit on the
Information Society at its first phase, held in Geneva from 10 to 12 December 2003,88 and endorsed by the General
Assembly,89 and the Tunis Commitment and the Tunis Agenda for the Information Society adopted by the Summit
at its second phase, held in Tunis from 16 to 18 November 2005,90 and endorsed by the Assembly,91
_______________
87
The nine clusters include: infrastructure development; environment, population and urbanization; social and human development;
science and technology; advocacy and communications; governance; peace and security; agriculture, food security and rural development;
and industry, trade and market access.
88
See A/C.2/59/3, annex.
89
See resolution 59/220.
90
See A/60/687.
91
See resolution 60/252.

51

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recalling also paragraph 111 of the Tunis Agenda, in which the General Assembly was requested to undertake
the overall review of the implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society in 2015,
and in this regard reaffirming the centrality of the General Assembly to this process,
Recognizing that the overall review will be undertaken on the basis of and with full respect for the
Tunis Agenda,
Recalling its resolution 68/198 of 20 December 2013 and, in particular, paragraph 22 thereof in which it
decided to finalize the modalities for the overall review by the General Assembly of the implementation of the
outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society, to be held in 2015 in accordance with paragraph 111 of
the Tunis Agenda,
Recognizing the role of the Commission on Science and Technology for Development in assisting the
Economic and Social Council as the focal point in the system-wide follow-up, in particular the review and
assessment of the progress made in implementing the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society,
while at the same time maintaining its original mandate concerning science and technology for development, and
the work carried out by the Commission to that effect,
Reaffirming that science, innovation and technology, including information and communications technologies,
are essential enablers and drivers for the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals and the promotion of
the economic, social and environmental components of sustainable development and should be given due
consideration in the elaboration of the post-2015 development agenda,
Noting that the Commission on Science and Technology for Development should submit after its eighteenth
session, by June 2015, its report on the 10-year review of progress made in the implementation of the outcomes of
the World Summit on the Information Society, through the Economic and Social Council, to the General Assembly,
1. Decides that the overall review will be concluded by a two-day high-level meeting of the General
Assembly, to be preceded by an intergovernmental preparatory process that also takes into account inputs from all
relevant stakeholders of the World Summit on the Information Society;
2. Also decides to convene the high-level meeting of the General Assembly, at the highest possible level, in
December 2015, in accordance with the rules of procedure of the General Assembly;
3. Further decides that the President of the General Assembly, in consultation with Member States, will
invite, in addition to all Member and observer States and observers, representatives of all relevant stakeholders of
the World Summit on the Information Society to speak during the high-level meeting, and in this regard also
encourages the participation of those stakeholders in the meeting;
4. Decides that the overall review by the General Assembly shall take stock of the progress made in the
implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society and address potential information
and communications technology gaps and areas for continued focus, as well as addressing challenges, including
bridging the digital divide, and harnessing information and communications technologies for development;
5. Requests the President of the General Assembly, in June 2015, to appoint two co-facilitators to lead, on
the basis of, among other relevant inputs, submissions from Member and observer States and observers and the final
report of the Commission on Science and Technology for Development, an intergovernmental negotiation process,
which will include preparatory meetings, resulting in an intergovernmentally agreed outcome document, for
adoption at the high-level meeting of the General Assembly;
6. Decides that during the preparatory process for the high-level meeting, the President of the General
Assembly will organize informal interactive consultations with all relevant stakeholders of the World Summit on the
Information Society, in order to collect their inputs for the intergovernmental negotiation process.
RESOLUTION 68/303
A/RES/68/303

Adopted at the 105th plenary meeting, on 31 July 2014, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/68/L.55 and Add.1,
sponsored by: Afghanistan, Albania, Angola, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Guinea, Guyana,
Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kiribati, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,

52

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Malta, Mexico, Mongolia, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan,
Palau, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Serbia, Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay

68/303. Strengthening the role of mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention
and resolution
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 65/283 of 22 June 2011 and 66/291 of 13 September 2012 on strengthening the role
of mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and resolution, and all other relevant General
Assembly resolutions and Security Council resolutions and presidential statements related to mediation and to
regional and subregional organizations,
Guided by the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming its commitment to respect the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of
all States,
Recalling Chapter VI, including Article 33, of the Charter, and other Articles relevant to mediation, as well as
Chapter VIII of the Charter and other Articles relevant to, inter alia, the role of regional and subregional
organizations in mediation,
Bearing in mind its responsibilities, functions and powers under the Charter, and thus recalling all its relevant
resolutions in matters related to the peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and resolution, including
through mediation,
Reaffirming the respective role and authority of the General Assembly and the Security Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security in accordance with the Charter,
Acknowledging the efforts of the Security Council to promote cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in the peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and resolution,
including through mediation, and encouraging the continued cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations, as appropriate, in accordance with the Charter,
Reaffirming its commitment to uphold the sovereign equality of all States, respect for their territorial integrity
and political independence and the duty of Member States to refrain in their international relations from the threat or
use of force in any manner inconsistent with the purposes and principles of the United Nations, and to uphold the
resolution of disputes by peaceful means and in conformity with the principles of justice and international law, the
right to self-determination of peoples which remain under colonial domination or foreign occupation, noninterference in the internal affairs of States, respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, respect for the
equal rights of all without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion, international cooperation in solving
international problems of an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian character and the fulfilment in good faith of
the obligations assumed in accordance with the Charter,
Bearing in mind that armed and other types of conflicts and terrorism, in all its forms and manifestations, and
hostage-taking still persist in many parts of the world,
Recalling that the peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and resolution, in accordance with the
Charter and international law, including through mediation, remain a primary responsibility of Member States
without prejudice to Article 36 of the Charter,
Recognizing that responsible and credible mediation requires, inter alia, national ownership, the consent of
parties to a particular dispute or conflict, the impartiality of the mediators, their compliance with agreed mandates,
respect for national sovereignty, compliance with obligations of States and other relevant actors under international
law, including applicable treaties, the operational preparedness, including process and substantive expertise, of the
mediators, and coherence, coordination and complementarity of mediation efforts,
Emphasizing that justice and truth is a fundamental building block of sustainable peace,
53

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Appreciating the efforts of the Secretary-General, the Member States, regional and subregional organizations
and other relevant actors to promote the use of mediation, and in this regard taking note of the United Nations
Guidance for Effective Mediation,92
Stressing the need for Member States as well as the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations
to continue to improve, as appropriate, their capacities in the pacific settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and
conflict resolution, including mediation, for sustainable peace,
Recalling the good offices of the Secretary-General, and appreciating his efforts to continue to strengthen
United Nations mediation support capacities, in accordance with agreed mandates,
Appreciating the partnerships and cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in the field of mediation and the efforts of the Secretary-General to work together with regional and
subregional organizations to strengthen their mediation support capacities, upon request and in accordance with
agreed mandates,
Encouraging the Secretary-General to support regional efforts and initiatives by Member States, as well as
regional and subregional organizations, to promote mediation and to prevent and resolve conflicts, upon request and
in accordance with agreed mandates,
Reaffirming the role of regional and subregional organizations in the maintenance of international peace and
security, in line with provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter, and taking note of their important role as mediators,
within agreed mandates, in many regions, acting with the consent of parties to a particular dispute or conflict,
Acknowledging that regional and subregional organizations can benefit mediation efforts with their specific
approaches stemming from their geographic, cultural and historical proximity to, as well as information about,
specific local conflict situations within their mandates, and contribute to the prevention and resolution of such
conflicts,
Recognizing the importance of the equal and effective participation and the full involvement of women at all
levels, at all stages and in all aspects of the peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and resolution, as
well as the provision of adequate gender expertise for all mediators and their teams, noting that further efforts are
necessary to appoint more women as chief or lead peace mediators, and in this context reaffirming the full and
effective implementation of all relevant United Nations resolutions, including those on women, peace and security,
and the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action,93 and furthermore welcoming the role of the United Nations
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) in this respect,
Recognizing also national and civil society actors active in mediation, and encouraging their contributions and
continued coordination to improve complementarity in mediation activities, when appropriate, in this regard,
Welcoming the increasing contribution by the African Union in efforts to settle conflicts of its members, and
expressing its support for the peace initiatives conducted by the African regional and subregional organizations,
1. Reiterates that all Member States should strictly adhere to their obligations as laid down in the Charter of
the United Nations, including in the peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and resolution;
2. Welcomes the contributions of Member States, as well as of the United Nations and of regional and
subregional organizations, to mediation efforts, as appropriate;
3. Invites Member States, as well as the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations, as
appropriate, to continue to optimize the use of mediation and other tools mentioned in Chapter VI of the Charter for
the peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and resolution;
4. Encourages Member States, as well as the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations,
to continue to develop, where appropriate, their mediation capacities in the pacific settlement of disputes, conflict
prevention and conflict resolution;
_______________
92

A/66/811, annex I.
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13),
chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
93

54

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

5. Also encourages Member States, as well as the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations, to increase the awareness on the importance of mediation, as appropriate, through, inter alia, the
organization of conferences, seminars and workshops, and in this regard welcomes regional initiatives to strengthen
mediation in their regions, such as the “Mediation in the Mediterranean Initiative”;
6. Encourages the use, as appropriate, of the United Nations Guidance for Effective Mediation92 in
mediation efforts, in accordance with the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter;
7. Encourages Member States and regional and subregional organizations to promote equal, full and
effective participation of women in all forums and at all levels of the peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict
prevention and resolution, particularly the decision-making level;
8. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to appoint women as chief or lead mediators and as
members of mediation teams in United Nations-sponsored peace processes, as well as to ensure adequate gender
expertise for all United Nations processes, and invites similar efforts by Member States as well as by regional and
subregional organizations;
9. Encourages Member States, as appropriate, to use the mediation capacities of the United Nations as well
as those of regional and subregional organizations, where applicable, and to promote mediation in their bilateral and
multilateral relations;
10. Invites all Member States to consider providing sustained political support, expertise and timely and
adequate resources, including through the United Nations, for mediation and, as appropriate, for the implementation
of agreed outcomes of mediation processes, in order to assure their success, as well as for mediation capacitybuilding activities of the United Nations and of regional and subregional organizations;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to offer his good offices, in accordance with the Charter and
relevant United Nations resolutions, and to provide mediation support, where appropriate, to special representatives
and envoys of the United Nations as well as to Member States and regional and subregional organizations, upon
request;
12. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to work with Member States and relevant regional and
subregional organizations, upon request and in accordance with agreed mandates, in mediation capacity-building for
the peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and resolution, including through training events and staff
exchanges;
13. Encourages the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations to regularly hold dialogues
on mediation upon mutually agreed agendas, exchange views, information and lessons learned and improve
cooperation, coordination, coherence and complementarity in specific mediation contexts, in accordance with
agreed mandates and as appropriate;
14. Stresses the importance of partnerships and cooperation of international, regional and subregional
organizations with the United Nations, with each other and with civil society, and of developing mechanisms to
improve information-sharing, cooperation and coordination, in order to ensure the coherence and complementarity
of efforts of actors involved in a specific mediation context;
15. Emphasizes the importance of facilitating interaction by mediators between concerned parties and other
stakeholders, as appropriate, as well as inclusive national processes in the implementation of the agreed outcomes of
mediation processes;
16. Welcomes the efforts of regional and subregional organizations that have developed their mediation and
conflict prevention and resolution capacities, structures and policy frameworks, and encourages other interested
organizations, as mandated by their member States, to make similar efforts, as appropriate;
17. Encourages regional and subregional organizations to appoint, as appropriate, mediation focal points
and to regularly communicate their contact information to the Secretary-General, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to maintain and share this information with Member States and regional and subregional organizations, as
appropriate;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at its seventieth session on
cooperation between the United Nations and the regional and subregional organizations on mediation, as well as
possible ways to enhance such cooperation, and to hold regular briefings in order to promote closer consultation
with Member States as well as regional and subregional organizations and to increase transparency;
55

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

19. Invites the Secretary-General to continue to brief Member States on mediation activities of the United
Nations;
20. Encourages regional and subregional organizations to further enhance their informal thematic exchange
with the Member States on mediation-related issues, as appropriate and in accordance with the Charter;
21. Decides to continue its consideration of the question “Strengthening the role of mediation in the peaceful
settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and resolution” at its seventieth session.
RESOLUTION 68/304
A/RES/68/304

Adopted at the 107th plenary meeting, on 9 September 2014, by a recorded vote of 124 to 11, with 41 abstentions,* on the
basis of draft resolution A/68/L.57/Rev.1, sponsored by the Plurinational State of Bolivia (on behalf of the States Members of
the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China)
* In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic
of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Palau,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Australia, Canada, Czech Republic, Finland, Germany, Hungary, Ireland, Israel, Japan, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Denmark,
Estonia, France, Georgia, Greece, Iceland, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Papua New Guinea, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Ukraine

68/304. Towards the establishment of a multilateral legal framework for sovereign debt
restructuring processes
The General Assembly,
Recalling the United Nations Millennium Declaration, adopted on 8 September 2000,94 and the high-level
plenary meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals and its outcome document,95
Recalling also the 2005 World Summit Outcome96 and the follow-up to the development outcome of the
2005 World Summit, including the Millennium Development Goals and the other internationally agreed
development goals,97
Recalling further the International Conference on Financing for Development and its outcome document,98 in
which sustainable debt financing is recognized as an important element for mobilizing resources for public and
private investment, and the Follow-up International Conference on Financing for Development to Review the
Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus and its outcome document, the Doha Declaration on Financing for
Development,99 as well as General Assembly resolution 68/204 of 20 December 2013,
_______________
94

Resolution 55/2.
Resolution 65/1.
96
Resolution 60/1.
97
Resolution 60/265.
98
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
99
Resolution 63/239, annex.
95

56

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recalling its resolution 68/279 of 30 June 2014 on the convening of the third International Conference on
Financing for Development to assess the progress made in the implementation of the Monterrey Consensus and the
Doha Declaration, reinvigorate and strengthen the financing for development follow-up process, identify obstacles
and constraints encountered in the achievement of the goals and objectives agreed therein, as well as actions and
initiatives to overcome these constraints, and address new and emerging issues, including in the context of the recent
multilateral efforts to promote international development cooperation, taking into account the current evolving
development cooperation landscape, the interrelationship of all sources of development finance and the synergies
among financing objectives across the three dimensions of sustainable development, as well as the need to support
the United Nations development agenda beyond 2015,
Recalling also the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil,
from 20 to 22 June 2012, and its outcome document, entitled “The future we want”,100
Recalling further its resolution 63/303 of 9 July 2009, in which it endorsed the Outcome of the Conference
on the World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on Development, held in New York from 24 to
30 June 2009,
Stressing the need to reinforce coherence and coordination and to avoid duplication of efforts with regard to
the financing for development process,
Taking note of the report of the Commission of Experts on Reform of the International Monetary and
Financial System, convened by the President of the General Assembly at its sixty-third session,101
Recalling its resolutions 58/203 of 23 December 2003, 59/223 of 22 December 2004, 60/187 of 22 December
2005, 61/188 of 20 December 2006, 62/186 of 19 December 2007, 63/206 of 19 December 2008, 64/191 of
21 December 2009, 65/144 of 20 December 2010, 66/189 of 22 December 2011, 67/198 of 21 December 2012
and 68/202 of 20 December 2013,
Noting that sovereign debt crises are a recurring problem that involves very serious political, economic and
social consequences and that the restructuring processes of sovereign debt are a frequent phenomenon in the
international financial system,
Noting with concern that there remain a number of low- and middle-income developing countries that are still
facing difficulties in finding a durable solution to their external debt problems, which could adversely affect their
sustainable development,
Recognizing that addressing the sovereign debt problems of developing countries is an important part of
international cooperation,
Stressing the importance for developing countries, on a case-by-case basis, of debt relief, including debt
cancellation, as appropriate, and debt restructuring as debt crisis prevention and management tools,
Stressing also the need to work towards the establishment of responsible and preventive financial crisis
policies to enhance transparent and sustainable national financial systems,
Recognizing the sovereign right of any State to restructure its sovereign debt, which should not be frustrated or
impeded by any measure emanating from another State,
Recognizing also that the efforts of a State to restructure its sovereign debt should not be frustrated or impeded
by commercial creditors, including specialized investor funds such as hedge funds, which seek to undertake
speculative purchases of its distressed debt at deeply discounted rates on secondary markets in order to pursue full
payment via litigation,
Noting that private creditors of sovereign debt are increasingly numerous, anonymous and difficult to
coordinate and that there are a variety of debt instruments and a wide range of jurisdictions in which debt is issued,
thus complicating the restructuring of sovereign debt,
_______________
100
101

Resolution 66/288, annex.
A/63/838.

57

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Noting also the concern expressed in the declaration of the Summit of Heads of State and Government of the
Group of 77 and China on the theme “For a New World Order for Living Well”, held in Santa Cruz de la Sierra,
Plurinational State of Bolivia, on 14 and 15 June 2014,102 concerning the so-called “vulture funds” and their actions
of a highly speculative nature, which pose a risk to all future debt restructuring processes, for both developing and
developed countries,
Taking into account the initiatives studied in the framework of the International Development Association of
the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund to address the activities of the so-called “vulture funds”, with
the objective of, inter alia, preventing such funds from benefiting from litigation initiated against indebted countries,
which are forced to divert many of their resources to handle such litigation, thereby undermining the purpose of the
debt restructuring processes,
Recalling, among other things, the work carried out by the International Monetary Fund in 2003, with the
support of the International Monetary and Financial Committee, to formulate a proposal for a sovereign debt
restructuring mechanism,
Stressing the importance of the Principles on Promoting Responsible Sovereign Lending and Borrowing
issued by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development on 4 May 2011, which aim to reduce the
prevalence of sovereign debt crises, prevent unsustainable debt situations, maintain steady economic growth and
help achieve the Millennium Development Goals, encouraging to that end responsible sovereign borrowing,
Stressing also the need to continue to address systemic fragilities and imbalances and the need for continuing
efforts to reform and strengthen the international financial system,
Noting with concern that the international financial system does not have a sound legal framework for the
orderly and predictable restructuring of sovereign debt, which further increases the cost of non-compliance,
Recognizing the need to create a legal framework that facilitates the orderly restructuring of sovereign debts,
allows the re-establishment of viability and growth without creating incentives that inadvertently increase the risk of
non-compliance and acts as a deterrent to disruptive litigation that creditors could engage in during negotiations to
restructure sovereign debts,
Stressing, in this context, the importance of establishing a clear set of principles for the management and
resolution of financial crises that take into account the obligation of sovereign creditors to act in good faith and with
a cooperative spirit to reach a consensual rearrangement of the debt of sovereign States,
Recognizing that debt-restructuring processes should have as their core element a determination of real
payment capacity so that they do not adversely affect economic growth and the fulfilment of the unfinished business
of the Millennium Development Goals, the sustainable development goals and the post-2015 development agenda,
Stressing that, in the restructuring of sovereign debt, the progressive development and codification of
international law are necessary in order to make it a more effective means to implement the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and to give greater importance to its role in the relations among States,
1. Emphasizes the special importance of a timely, effective, comprehensive and durable solution to the debt
problems of developing countries in order to promote their inclusive economic growth and development;
2. Calls for the intensification of efforts to prevent debt crises by enhancing international financial
mechanisms for crisis prevention and resolution, in cooperation with the private sector, with a view to finding
solutions acceptable to all;
3. Calls upon all Member States and the United Nations system, and invites the Bretton Woods institutions
and the private sector, to take appropriate measures and actions for the implementation of the commitments,
agreements and decisions of the major United Nations conferences and summits, in particular those related to the
question of the external debt sustainability of developing countries;
4. Recognizes the roles of the United Nations and the international financial institutions in accordance with
their respective mandates, and encourages them to continue to support global efforts towards sustainable
development and a durable solution to the problem of the debt of developing countries;
_______________
102

58

A/68/948, annex.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

5. Decides to elaborate and adopt through a process of intergovernmental negotiations, as a matter of
priority during its sixty-ninth session, a multilateral legal framework for sovereign debt restructuring processes with
a view, inter alia, to increasing the efficiency, stability and predictability of the international financial system and
achieving sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth and sustainable development, in accordance with
national circumstances and priorities;
6. Also decides to define the modalities for the intergovernmental negotiations and the adoption of the text
of the multilateral legal framework at the main part of its sixty-ninth session, before the end of 2014.
RESOLUTION 68/305
A/RES/68/305

Adopted at the 107th plenary meeting, on 9 September 2014, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/68/L.59 and
Add.1, sponsored by: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Bulgaria,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Jordan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Mongolia, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia,
Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay

68/305. Report of the International Criminal Court
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 67/295 of 22 August 2013 and all its previous relevant resolutions,
Recalling also that the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court103 reaffirms the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Recognizing the International Criminal Court as an independent permanent judicial institution and, in this
regard, that the United Nations and the Court respect each other’s status and mandate,
Reiterating the historic significance of the adoption of the Rome Statute,
Emphasizing that justice, especially transitional justice in conflict and post-conflict societies, is a fundamental
building block of sustainable peace,
Convinced that ending impunity is essential for coming to terms with any past crimes committed and
preventing such crimes in the future,
Acknowledging the fact that the International Criminal Court has achieved considerable progress in its
investigations and judicial proceedings in various situations and cases which were referred to it by States parties to
the Rome Statute and by the Security Council, and which the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court has
initiated proprio motu, in accordance with the Rome Statute,
Recalling that effective and comprehensive cooperation and assistance in all aspects of its mandate by States,
the United Nations and other international and regional organizations remain essential for the International Criminal
Court to carry out its activities,
Expressing its appreciation to the Secretary-General for providing effective and efficient assistance to the
International Criminal Court in accordance with the Relationship Agreement between the United Nations and the
International Criminal Court,104
Acknowledging the Relationship Agreement as approved by the General Assembly in its resolution 58/318 of
13 September 2004, including paragraph 3 of the resolution, with respect to the payment in full of expenses
accruing to the United Nations as a result of the implementation of the Relationship Agreement,105 which provides a
_______________
103

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2187, No. 38544.
A/58/874 and Add.1.
105
Articles 10 and 13 of the Relationship Agreement.
104

59

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

framework for continued cooperation between the International Criminal Court and the United Nations, which
enables, inter alia, facilitation by the United Nations of the Court’s field activities, and encouraging the conclusion
of supplementary arrangements and agreements, as necessary,
Noting the need for funding of expenses related to investigations or prosecutions of the International Criminal
Court, including in connection with situations referred to the Court by the Security Council,
Welcoming the continuous support given by civil society to the International Criminal Court,
Expressing its appreciation to the International Criminal Court for providing assistance to the Special Court
for Sierra Leone,
Stressing the importance that the Rome Statute accords to the rights and needs of victims, in particular their
right to participate in judicial proceedings and to claim reparations, and emphasizing the importance of informing
and involving victims and affected communities in order to give effect to the mandate of the International Criminal
Court towards victims,
1.

Welcomes the report of the International Criminal Court for 2012/13;106

2. Also welcomes the States that have become parties to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court,103 and calls upon all States in all regions of the world that are not yet parties to the Rome Statute to consider
ratifying or acceding to it without delay;
3. Further welcomes the States parties as well as States not parties to the Rome Statute that are parties to
the Agreement on the Privileges and Immunities of the International Criminal Court,107 and calls upon all States that
have not yet done so to consider becoming parties to that Agreement;
4. Notes the recent ratifications of the amendments adopted at the Review Conference of the Rome Statute,
held in Kampala from 31 May to 11 June 2010;
5. Underlines, bearing in mind that in accordance with the Rome Statute the International Criminal Court
is complementary to national criminal jurisdictions, that States need to adopt appropriate measures within their
national legal systems for those crimes for which they are required under international law to exercise their
responsibility to investigate and prosecute;
6. Encourages further efforts by the United Nations, other international and regional organizations and
States, as well as civil society, to appropriately assist States, upon their request, in strengthening their domestic
capacity to investigate and prosecute crimes, and in this regard underlines the importance of national ownership;
7. Emphasizes the importance of international cooperation and judicial assistance in conducting effective
investigations and prosecutions;
8. Acknowledges the role of the International Criminal Court in a multilateral system that aims to end
impunity, promote the rule of law, promote and encourage respect for human rights, achieve sustainable peace and
further the development of nations, in accordance with international law and the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations;
9. Calls upon States parties to the Rome Statute that have not yet done so to adopt national legislation to
implement obligations emanating from the Rome Statute and to cooperate with the International Criminal Court in
the exercise of its functions, and recalls the provision of technical assistance by States parties in this respect;
10. Welcomes the cooperation and assistance provided thus far to the International Criminal Court by States
parties as well as States not parties, the United Nations and other international and regional organizations, and calls
upon those States that are under an obligation to cooperate to provide such cooperation and assistance in the future,
in particular with regard to arrest and surrender, the provision of evidence, the protection and relocation of victims
and witnesses and the enforcement of sentences;
_______________
106
107

60

A/68/314.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2271, No. 40446.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

11. Notes the efforts of the Secretary-General in promoting cooperation between the United Nations and the
International Criminal Court in accordance with the Relationship Agreement between the United Nations and the
International Criminal Court,104 and also notes in this regard that the Office of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat has a
specific role within the United Nations;
12. Recalls article 3 of the Relationship Agreement according to which, with a view to facilitating the
effective discharge of their respective responsibilities, the United Nations and the International Criminal Court shall
cooperate closely, whenever appropriate, with each other and consult each other on matters of mutual interest
pursuant to the provisions of the Relationship Agreement and in conformity with the respective provisions of the
Charter and the Rome Statute, and shall respect each other’s status and mandate,108 and requests the SecretaryGeneral to continue to include information relevant to the implementation of article 3 of the Relationship Agreement
in a report to be submitted to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session;
13. Takes note of the guidance issued by the Secretary-General on contacts with persons who are the subject
of arrest warrants or summonses issued by the International Criminal Court,109 and also takes note in this regard of
the information included in the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of article 3 of the
Relationship Agreement;110
14. Recalls the Relationship Agreement, and notes that expenses related to investigations or prosecutions
incurred by the International Criminal Court in connection with situations referred by the Security Council or
otherwise have been borne exclusively by States parties to the Rome Statute;
15. Emphasizes the importance of cooperation with States that are not parties to the Rome Statute;
16. Invites regional organizations to consider concluding cooperation agreements with the International
Criminal Court;
17. Recalls that, by virtue of article 12, paragraph 3, of the Rome Statute, if the acceptance of a State which
is not a party to the Rome Statute is required under article 12, paragraph 2, of the Rome Statute, that State may, by
declaration lodged with the Registrar of the International Criminal Court, accept the exercise of jurisdiction by the
Court with respect to the crime in question;
18. Urges all States parties to take the interests, needs for assistance and mandate of the International
Criminal Court into account when relevant matters are being discussed in the United Nations, and invites all other
States to consider doing the same, as appropriate;
19. Emphasizes the importance of the full implementation of all aspects of the Relationship Agreement,
which forms a framework for close cooperation between the two organizations and for consultation on matters of
mutual interest pursuant to the provisions of that Agreement and in conformity with the respective provisions of the
Charter and the Rome Statute, as well as the need for the Secretary-General to continue to inform the General
Assembly at its sixty-ninth session of the expenses incurred and reimbursements received by the United Nations in
connection with assistance provided to the International Criminal Court;
20. Encourages further dialogue between the United Nations and the International Criminal Court, and
welcomes in this regard the increased interaction of the Security Council with the Court under various formats,
including the holding of an open debate on peace and justice, with a special focus on the role of the Court;
21. Continues to welcome the statement by the President of the Security Council of 12 February 2013111 in
which the Council reiterated its previous call regarding the importance of State cooperation with the International
Criminal Court in accordance with the respective obligations of States, and expressed its commitment to effective
follow-up of Council decisions in this regard;
22. Expresses its appreciation for the work undertaken by the International Criminal Court liaison office to
United Nations Headquarters, and encourages the Secretary-General to continue to work closely with that office;
_______________
108

Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Relationship Agreement.
A/67/828-S/2013/210, annex.
110
A/68/364.
111
S/PRST/2013/2; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1 August 2012–31 July 2013.
109

61

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

23. Encourages States to contribute to the Trust Fund established for the benefit of victims of crimes within
the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court and the families of such victims, and acknowledges with
appreciation contributions made to that Trust Fund thus far;
24. Recalls that, at the Review Conference of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, which
was convened and opened by the Secretary-General, States parties reaffirmed their commitment to the Rome Statute
and its full implementation, as well as its universality and integrity, and that the Review Conference undertook a
stocktaking exercise of international criminal justice, considering the impact of the Rome Statute on victims and
affected communities, peace and justice, complementarity and cooperation, called for the strengthening of the
enforcement of sentences, adopted amendments to the Rome Statute to expand the jurisdiction of the Court to cover
three additional war crimes when committed in armed conflicts not of an international character, and adopted
amendments to the Rome Statute to define the crime of aggression and to establish conditions under which the
Court could exercise jurisdiction with respect to that crime;
25. Acknowledges the report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Organization;112
26. Takes note of the decision of the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court at its twelfth session, while recalling that, according to article 112, paragraph 6, of the Rome Statute,
the Assembly of States Parties shall meet at the seat of the Court or at United Nations Headquarters, to hold its
thirteenth session in New York and its fourteenth session in The Hague, looks forward to the thirteenth session,
which is to be held from 8 to 17 December 2014, and requests the Secretary-General to provide the necessary
services and facilities in accordance with the Relationship Agreement and resolution 58/318;
27. Encourages the widest possible participation of States in the Assembly of States Parties, invites States to
contribute to the Trust Fund for the participation of least developed countries, and acknowledges with appreciation
contributions made to that Trust Fund thus far;
28. Invites the International Criminal Court to submit, if it deems it appropriate, in accordance with article 6
of the Relationship Agreement, a report on its activities for 2013/14, for consideration by the General Assembly at
its sixty-ninth session.
RESOLUTION 68/306
A/RES/68/306

Adopted at the 107th plenary meeting, on 9 September 2014, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/68/L.42/Rev.1,
sponsored by Belarus, and Bolivia (Plurinational State of) (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are
members of the Group of 77 and China)

68/306. Enhancement of the administration and financial functioning of the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and its relevant provisions,
Recalling the Agreement between the United Nations and the United States of America regarding the
Headquarters of the United Nations of 26 June 1947, approved by the General Assembly in its resolution 169 (II) of
31 October 1947, and the obligations it establishes for the host country,
Taking into consideration the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations of 18 April 1961,113 and the
Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations adopted by the General Assembly on
13 February 1946,114
Recognizing the problems that have arisen as a result of the decisions made on a number of occasions by
several banking institutions in regard to the closing of the accounts of some Permanent Missions to the United
Nations and those of their staff members accredited to the United Nations and of their family members,
_______________
112

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 1 (A/68/1).
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 500, No. 7310.
114
Resolution 22 A (I).
113

62

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Noting with concern the difficulties experienced by such Permanent Missions and individuals as a result of
such account closures,
Stressing that the Governments of Member and Observer States, the Permanent Missions and their staff, as
well as the United Nations at its Headquarters and the agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations
system should have appropriate banking services for the normal functioning of their facilities in order to discharge
their duties,
Bearing in mind the need for the Permanent Missions and the United Nations as a whole to benefit from
appropriate banking services based on mutual trust and respect, especially in the light of the latest actions taken by
some banking institutions in this regard,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to review and report to the General Assembly, within 150 days
following the adoption of the present resolution, any impediments or obstacles with respect to the accounts opened
by the Permanent Missions of Member and Observer States to the United Nations or their staff in the City of
New York, and the impact that any such impediments or obstacles have on the adequate functioning of their offices,
and to this end invites Member and Observer States to provide the Secretary-General with relevant information that
will facilitate the elaboration of such a report;
2. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly on the financial relations of the
Secretariat with the banking institutions in the City of New York, in the context of the report mentioned in
paragraph 1 above;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General, within 120 days of the adoption of the present resolution, to
provide Member and Observer States with information on alternative options regarding banking services in the City
of New York so as to enable them and their Permanent Missions to adequately manage and maintain their accounts,
assessed budgetary contributions, voluntary contributions, transfers and other financial responsibilities directly
related to their membership in the United Nations;
4. Requests the host country to take, as soon as possible, additional measures to assist the Permanent
Missions accredited to the United Nations and their staff to obtain appropriate banking services;
5. Stresses the importance of ensuring the confidentiality of the personal data and information of persons
affected by the closure of accounts by the banking institutions, invites the host country to submit information
on the norms and regulations applicable to the banking system regarding the confidentiality of personal data
and information, and requests the Secretary-General to include such information in the report referred to in
paragraph 1 above;
6.

Decides to keep this matter under review during the sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly.
RESOLUTION 68/307

A/RES/68/307

Adopted at the 108th plenary meeting, on 10 September 2014, without a vote, on the basis of the report of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on the Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembly (A/68/951, para. 91)

68/307. Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 67/297 of 29 August 2013 and all other previous resolutions relating to the
revitalization of the work of the General Assembly,115
Underlining the need to further enhance the role, authority, effectiveness and efficiency of the General
Assembly,
Reiterating that the revitalization of the work of the General Assembly is a critical component of the overall
reform of the United Nations,
_______________
115
Resolutions 46/77, 47/233, 48/264, 51/241, 52/163, 55/14, 55/285, 56/509, 57/300, 57/301, 58/126, 58/316, 59/313, 60/286, 61/292,
62/276, 63/309, 64/301, 65/315 and 66/294.

63

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Reaffirming the central position of the General Assembly as the chief deliberative, policymaking and
representative organ of the United Nations, as well as the role of the Assembly in the process of standard-setting and
the codification of international law,
Reaffirming also the role and authority of the General Assembly in global matters of concern to the
international community, including in global governance, as set out in the Charter of the United Nations,
Welcoming the efforts of the President of the General Assembly to reinvigorate the revitalization of the work
of the Assembly during its sixty-eighth session,
1. Welcomes the report of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the Work of the General
Assembly and the updated inventory of General Assembly resolutions on revitalization annexed thereto;116
2. Also welcomes the establishment of a multilingual web page devoted to the revitalization of the work of
the General Assembly, accessible directly from the United Nations website, and invites the Secretariat to continue
updating that web page and its substantive content;
3. Decides to establish, at its sixty-ninth session, an ad hoc working group on the revitalization of the work
of the General Assembly, open to all Member States:
(a) To identify further ways to enhance the role, authority, effectiveness and efficiency of the Assembly,
inter alia, by building on the progress achieved in past sessions as well as on previous resolutions, including
evaluating the status of their implementation;
(b)

To submit a report thereon to the Assembly at its sixty-ninth session;

4. Also decides that the Ad Hoc Working Group shall continue its review of the inventory of General
Assembly resolutions on revitalization annexed to the report of the Ad Hoc Working Group submitted at the sixtyeighth session, and, as a result, continue to update the inventory to be attached to the report to be submitted at the
sixty-ninth session of the Assembly;
5. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General,117 and requests the Secretary-General to submit an
update on the provisions of the General Assembly resolutions on revitalization addressed to the Secretariat for
implementation that have not been implemented, with an indication of the constraints and reasons behind any lack
of implementation, for further consideration by the Ad Hoc Working Group at the sixty-ninth session;
Role and authority of the General Assembly
6. Reaffirms the role and authority of the General Assembly, including on questions relating to international
peace and security, in accordance with Articles 10 to 14 and 35 of the Charter of the United Nations, where
appropriate, using the procedures set forth in rules 7 to 10 of the rules of procedure of the Assembly, which enable
swift and urgent action by the Assembly, bearing in mind that the Security Council has the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security, in accordance with Article 24 of the Charter;
7. Recognizes that implementation of General Assembly resolutions, including those related to the
revitalization of its work, enhances the role, authority, effectiveness and efficiency of the Assembly, and underlines
the important role and responsibility of Member States in their full implementation;
8. Reaffirms that the relationship between the principal organs of the United Nations is mutually
reinforcing and complementary, in accordance with and with full respect for their respective functions, authority,
powers and competencies as enshrined in the Charter, and in this regard stresses the importance of further ensuring
increased cooperation, coordination and the exchange of information among the Presidents of the principal organs
and also with the Secretariat of the United Nations, in particular the Secretary-General;
9. Also reaffirms the importance and benefit of continuing interaction between the General Assembly and
international or regional forums and organizations dealing with global matters of concern to the international
_______________
116
117

64

A/68/951.
A/68/774.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

community, as well as with civil society, where appropriate, and encourages the exploration of appropriate actions
or measures, while fully respecting the intergovernmental nature of the Assembly, in conformity with its relevant
rules of procedure;
10. Recognizes the value of holding interactive inclusive thematic debates on current issues of critical
importance to the international community, and encourages the President of the General Assembly to continue this
practice in close consultation with the General Committee and the Member States, including with regard to the
preliminary programme of such debates, in order to enable an adequate level of participation and an appropriate
allocation of time for substantive interactive discussion to facilitate, where appropriate, results-oriented and
productive outcomes of such debates, and in this context welcomes the initiative of the President of the Assembly at
the sixty-eighth session to select “The post-2015 development agenda: setting the stage” as the theme of the general
debate;
11. Welcomes the improvement in the quality of the annual reports of the Security Council to the General
Assembly, and encourages the Council to make further improvement as necessary;
12. Invites the Secretariat, including the Department of Public Information, while carrying out its activities,
as mandated by the General Assembly, to continue its efforts to raise the visibility of the Assembly and to enhance,
in the light of the seventieth anniversary of the United Nations, world public and media awareness of the
contribution made by the Assembly to the fulfilment of the goals of the Organization, as set out in the Charter;
Working methods
13. Appreciates the briefings by the Chairs of the Main Committees of the General Assembly to the Ad Hoc
Working Group about the working methods of their respective Committees during the sixty-eighth session of the
Assembly, and in this regard encourages the Main Committees:
(a)

To ensure adequate coordination in their work while avoiding overlap and duplication;

(b) To elect the bureau of each Committee at least three months in advance of the session for better
coordination and for smoother handover of their work;
(c) To benefit from their respective intranet and other online services to facilitate the smooth organization
and timely conclusion of their work;
(d)

To share experiences, best practices and lessons learned concerning their respective working methods;

(e) To further enhance sharing of information on the work and activities of the Main Committees within
each Main Committee;
14. Requests each Main Committee to further discuss its working methods at the beginning of every session,
and in this regard invites the Chairs of the Main Committees to brief the Ad Hoc Working Group during the sixtyninth session on any best practices and lessons learned with a view to improving working methods, as appropriate;
15. Stresses the importance of enhancing the role of the General Committee to support the work of the
General Assembly;
16. Emphasizes that the General Assembly and its Main Committees, at the sixty-ninth session, in
consultation with Member States, should continue their consideration of and make proposals for the further
biennialization, triennialization, clustering and elimination of items on the agenda of the Assembly, including
through the introduction of a sunset clause, with the clear consent of the sponsoring State or States, taking into
account the relevant recommendations of the Ad Hoc Working Group;
17. Decides to conduct the elections of the non-permanent members of the Security Council and the
members of the Economic and Social Council about six months before the elected members assume their
responsibilities, beginning at the seventieth session;
18. Reiterates its invitation to the Secretary-General, the President of the General Assembly and the Chairs
of the Main Committees, in consultation with the General Committee and Member States, to enhance the
coordination of the scheduling of high-level meetings and high-level thematic debates with a view to optimizing the
number, especially during the general debate, and distribution of such events throughout the session;
65

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

19. Reaffirms resolution 57/301 of 13 March 2003, by which the General Assembly, inter alia, decided that
the general debate shall be held without interruption, and encourages the scheduling of future high-level meetings
during the first half of the year, from within existing resources, taking into account the calendar of conferences and
without prejudice to the current practice of convening one high-level meeting in September at the beginning of each
session of the Assembly;
20. Encourages Member States to make, to the extent possible, full use of the e-services provided by the
Secretariat, in order to save costs, reduce the environmental impact and improve the distribution of documents;
21. Decides to reiterate the interim arrangement adopted in General Assembly decision 68/505 of 1 October
2013 recommending the pattern for the rotation of the Chairs of the Main Committees for the forthcoming five
sessions, namely from the sixty-ninth to seventy-third sessions, as well as the guidelines on the election of the
Chairs and Rapporteurs of the Main Committees contained in the annex to the present resolution;
22. Requests, in this regard, that the Ad Hoc Working Group prepare long-term arrangements concerning the
election of the Chairs and Rapporteurs of the Main Committees of the General Assembly with the aim of
establishing a predictable, transparent and fair mechanism, in consultation with regional groups, and that it submit
them to the Assembly no later than at the seventy-second session, and in this regard invites Member States to
present proposals and begin early on to give attention to the matter of concluding a future arrangement, which
would come into effect at the seventy-fourth session of the Assembly, with the annex to the present resolution
containing an option to be considered in this context;
23. Encourages Member States to seek gender balance in the distribution of Chairs of the Main Committees
and in the position of the President of the General Assembly;
24. Underlines the need to fully implement and observe rule 55 of the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly, which provides that, during the sessions of the Assembly, the Journal of the United Nations shall be
published in the languages of the Assembly, from within existing resources;
Selection and appointment of the Secretary-General and other executive heads
25. Reaffirms its commitment to continue, in the Ad Hoc Working Group, in accordance with the provisions
of Article 97 of the Charter, its consideration of the revitalization of the role of the General Assembly in the selection
and appointment of the Secretary-General, and calls for the full implementation of all relevant resolutions, including
resolutions 11 (I) of 24 January 1946, 51/241 of 31 July 1997, 60/286 of 8 September 2006, in particular
paragraphs 17 to 22 of the annex thereto, and 64/301 of 13 September 2010, keeping in mind the applicable
procedures in the rules of procedure, including rule 141, while acknowledging existing relevant Assembly practices;
26. Reiterates that the process of selecting and appointing the Secretary-General differs from the process
used with regard to other executive heads in the organizations of the United Nations system, given the roles of the
Security Council and the General Assembly in accordance with Article 97 of the Charter, and re-emphasizes the
need for the process of selection of the Secretary-General to be transparent and inclusive of all Member States;
27. Notes that the selection and appointment of the next Secretary-General is expected to take place in 2016,
and as a result encourages, without prejudice to the role of the principal organs as enshrined in Article 97 of the
Charter, the President of the General Assembly to actively support this process in accordance with the role accorded
to him or her by relevant resolutions;118
28. Stresses the need to ensure equal and fair distribution based on gender and geographical balance, while
meeting the highest possible requirements on the appointment of executive heads of the Organization;
29. Takes note of the recommendations contained in the report of the Joint Inspection Unit on the selection
and conditions of service of executive heads in the organizations of the United Nations system,119 proposing that the
General Assembly conduct hearings or meetings with candidates running for the post of Secretary-General of the
United Nations;
_______________
118
119

66

Resolutions 51/241, 60/286 and 64/301.
A/65/71, annex.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Strengthening the institutional memory of the Office of the President of the General Assembly
30. Notes with appreciation the views expressed by the Office of the President of the General Assembly to
the Ad Hoc Working Group on the strengthening of the institutional memory of the Office of the President of the
Assembly and its relationship with the Secretariat120 and measures already undertaken in this regard, while
continuing to explore additional measures where feasible, and notes the support provided by the General Assembly
and Economic and Social Council Affairs Division of the Department for General Assembly and Conference
Management of the Secretariat to the Office of the President of the Assembly;
31. Encourages the Presidents of the General Assembly to continue with the practice of periodically briefing
Member States on their activities, including official travel;
32. Commends the initiative of convening a retreat on the strengthening of the General Assembly, which
brings together the incoming and outgoing presidencies of each session of the Assembly, and in this regard takes
note of the summary of the proceedings of the retreat held on 11 and 12 July 2013;121
33. Encourages exchanges between the President-elect of the General Assembly and the Council of
Presidents so that Presidents-elect may benefit from the experiences of former Presidents in terms of best practices
and lessons learned, as part of strengthening the institutional memory of the Office of the President of the Assembly;
34. Encourages Presidents-elect to continue to ensure respect for balanced gender and geographical
representation in the Office of the President of the General Assembly;
35. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Ad Hoc Working Group at the sixty-ninth session of the
General Assembly on sources of the funding and staffing of the Office of the President of the Assembly, including
on any technical, logistical, protocol-related or financial questions, and for more clarification on the budgetary basis
for the provision of such support by the Secretariat;
36. Emphasizes the need to ensure, from within agreed resources, that the Office of the President of the
General Assembly is allocated dedicated Secretariat staff, with responsibility for coordinating the transition between
Presidents, managing interactions between the President and the Secretary-General and the preservation of
institutional memory;
37. Notes that the activities of the President of the General Assembly have increased markedly in recent
years, recalls provisions regarding support for the Office of the President of the Assembly in previous resolutions,
and expresses continued interest in seeking ways to further support the Office, in accordance with existing
procedures, in particular rule 153 of the rules of procedure of the Assembly;
38. Requests the Secretary-General to submit, in the context of the proposed programme budget for the
biennium 2016–2017, proposals to review the budget allocation to the Office of the President of the General
Assembly in accordance with existing procedures;
39. Stresses the importance of the contributions of Member States to the Trust Fund in support of the Office
of the President of the General Assembly, and in this regard notes with appreciation contributions that have been
made to the Fund and encourages Member States to continue to contribute to the Fund;
40. Requests the President of the General Assembly, in cooperation with the Secretariat, to report to the Ad Hoc
Working Group at the sixty-ninth session of the Assembly on the role, mandate and activities of the President.
Annex
Guidelines on the election of the Chairs and Rapporteurs of the Main Committees of the General Assembly
1. The allocation of chairmanships of the Main Committees for the next session of the General Assembly, in case
there is an intention to switch or waive chairmanship, shall be determined by the regional groups involved with
facilitation and coordination by the President of the Assembly as soon as possible before the opening of that session
of the Assembly.
_______________
120
121

See A/68/951.
A/68/669, annex.

67

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

2. Member States and regional groups might wish to consider the following pattern of regional rotation of
chairmanships for the Main Committees starting at the seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly:
Session

First Committee

Second Committee

Third Committee

Seventy-fourth

Latin American and Asia-Pacific
Caribbean States
Statesa,b

African States

Western European Asia-Pacific
and other Statesb Statesa

Eastern European
States

Seventy-fifth

Western European
and other States

African Statesa,b

Asia-Pacific
Statesb

Eastern European African Statesa,b
States

Latin American
and Caribbean
Statesb

Seventy-sixth

African Statesb

Latin American
and Caribbean
States

Western European Asia-Pacific
and other States Statesa

Eastern European Asia-Pacific
States
Statesa

Seventy-seventh

Asia-Pacific States

African Statesa,b

Eastern European Latin American
States
and Caribbean
States

Western European African Statesa
and other States

Seventy-eighth

Eastern European
States

Asia-Pacific Statesb Latin American
and Caribbean
Statesa

Western European African Statesb
and other Statesb

Latin American
and Caribbean
Statesa,b

Seventy-ninth

African Statesa,b

Eastern European Asia-Pacific
States
Statesb

African Statesa

Western European
and other States

a
b

Fourth Committee

Fifth Committee

Latin American
and Caribbean
States

Sixth Committee

Regional group holding two chairmanships during the session.
Regional group holding two chairmanships in this Committee during the period from the seventy-fourth to the seventy-ninth sessions.

3. The decision on switching or waiving the chairmanship of a Main Committee shall be taken by the regional
groups involved in coordination with the President of the General Assembly. Such a decision shall not affect the
general pattern of allocation of chairmanships of the Main Committees among the regional groups in consecutive
sessions.
4. The Rapporteur of a Main Committee should be elected from the regional group that held the chairmanship of
the Committee at the previous session.
RESOLUTION 68/308
A/RES/68/308

Adopted at the 108th plenary meeting, on 10 September 2014, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/68/L.60 and
Add.1, sponsored by: Australia, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Denmark, Finland, France, India, Israel, Japan,
Luxembourg, Malawi (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of African
States), Monaco, Montenegro, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Slovenia, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America

68/308. Consolidating gains and accelerating efforts to control and eliminate malaria in developing
countries, particularly in Africa, by 2015
The General Assembly,
Recalling that the period 2001–2010 was proclaimed by the General Assembly as the Decade to Roll Back
Malaria in Developing Countries, Particularly in Africa,122 and that combating HIV/AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis
and other diseases is included in the internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium
Development Goals,
_______________
122

68

Resolution 55/284.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recalling also the malaria-related goals and commitments in the outcome document of the high-level plenary
meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals,123
Recalling further its resolution 67/299 of 16 September 2013 and all previous resolutions concerning the
struggle against malaria in developing countries, particularly in Africa,
Recalling World Health Assembly resolutions 60.18 of 23 May 2007 and 64.17 of 24 May 2011, urging a
broad range of national and international actions to scale up malaria control programmes,124 and resolution 61.18 of
24 May 2008 on monitoring the achievement of health-related Millennium Development Goals,125
Recalling also the commitment made by African leaders to end the epidemic of malaria by ensuring universal
and equitable access to quality health care and by improving health systems and health financing, contained in the
African Common Position on the post-2015 development agenda,
Bearing in mind the relevant resolutions of the Economic and Social Council relating to the struggle against
malaria and diarrhoeal diseases, in particular resolution 1998/36 of 30 July 1998,
Taking note of all declarations and decisions on health issues, in particular those related to malaria, adopted by
the Organization of African Unity and the African Union, including the Abuja Declaration on HIV/AIDS,
Tuberculosis and Other Related Infectious Diseases, containing the pledge to allocate at least 15 per cent of national
budgets to the health sector, the Abuja call for accelerated action towards universal access to HIV and AIDS,
tuberculosis and malaria services in Africa, issued by the Heads of State and Government of the African Union at
the special summit of the African Union on HIV and AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria, held in Abuja from 2 to 4 May
2006, the decision of the Assembly of the African Union at its fifteenth ordinary session, held in Kampala
from 25 to 27 July 2010, to extend the Abuja call to 2015 to coincide with the Millennium Development Goals, and
the declaration of the special summit of the African Union on HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria, held in Abuja
from 12 to 16 July 2013,
Recognizing the leadership provided by the African Leaders Malaria Alliance and the continued commitment
to help to achieve the 2015 targets, and encouraging the members of the Alliance to continue to provide political
leadership at the highest level in the fight against malaria in Africa,
Welcoming the creation of the Asia Pacific Leaders Malaria Alliance, recognizing the leadership and
commitment of the Alliance to achieve the 2015 targets, and encouraging the members of the Alliance to continue to
provide political leadership at the highest level in the fight against malaria in the Asia-Pacific region,
Taking note of the World Health Organization framework for action for an emergency response to artemisinin
resistance in the Greater Mekong subregion of South-East Asia, launched in April 2013,
Welcoming the selection by the Secretary-General of malaria as one of the top priorities of his second mandate
and his commitment to develop new partnerships and improve existing ones and to scale up high-impact
interventions aimed at significantly reducing the number of deaths from malaria,
Recognizing the linkages among efforts being made to reach the targets set at the Extraordinary Summit of
Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity, held in Abuja on 24 and 25 April 2000, as
necessary and important for the attainment of the “Roll Back Malaria” goal126 and the targets of the Millennium
Development Goals by 2010 and 2015, respectively, and welcoming in this regard the commitment of Member
States to respond to the specific needs of Africa,
Recognizing also that malaria-related ill health and deaths throughout the world can be substantially reduced
with political commitment and commensurate resources if the public is educated and sensitized about malaria and
appropriate health services are made available, particularly in countries where the disease is endemic,
_______________
123

Resolution 65/1.
See World Health Organization, documents WHASS1/2006-WHA60/2007/REC/1 and WHA64/2011/REC/1.
125
See World Health Organization, document WHA61/2008/REC/1.
126
A/55/240/Add.1, annex.
124

69

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recognizing further that malaria control interventions have a positive impact on overall child and maternal
mortality rates and could help African countries and other malaria-endemic countries to reach Millennium
Development Goals 4 and 5 of reducing child mortality and improving maternal health, respectively, by 2015,
Acknowledging the progress made in parts of Africa in reversing the high burden of malaria through political
engagement and sustainable national malaria control programmes, as well as the progress being made towards
achieving by 2015 the goals concerning malaria control set by the World Health Assembly and the Roll Back
Malaria Partnership,
Recognizing that, despite the fact that increased global and national investments in malaria control have
yielded significant results in decreasing the burden of malaria in many countries and that some countries are moving
towards the elimination of malaria, many countries continue to have unacceptably high burdens of malaria and in
order to reach internationally agreed development goals, including the health-related Millennium Development
Goals, must rapidly increase malaria prevention and control efforts, which rely heavily on medicines and
insecticides whose utility is continuously threatened by the development of resistance in humans to antimalarial
agents, as well as resistance of mosquitoes to insecticides,
Aware that recent successes in prevention and control are fragile and can be maintained only with sufficient
and sustained national and international investment to fund global malaria control efforts fully,
Recognizing the serious challenges relating to substandard, falsified and counterfeit drugs, as well as poor
malaria diagnostics,
Expressing concern about the continued morbidity, mortality and debility attributed to malaria, and recalling
that more efforts are needed if the Abuja malaria targets and the malaria and Millennium Development Goal targets
for 2015 are to be reached on time,
Emphasizing the importance of strengthening health systems to effectively sustain malaria control and
elimination,
Commending the efforts of the World Health Organization, the United Nations Children’s Fund, the Roll Back
Malaria Partnership, the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, the World Bank and other partners
to fight malaria over the years,
Taking note with appreciation of the Global Malaria Action Plan developed by the Roll Back Malaria
Partnership,
1. Welcomes the report prepared by the World Health Organization,127 and calls for support for the
implementation of the recommendations contained therein;
2. Calls for increased support for the implementation of international commitments and goals pertaining to
the fight to eliminate malaria as stipulated in the internationally agreed development goals, including the
Millennium Development Goals;
3. Encourages Member States, relevant organizations of the United Nations system, international
institutions, non-governmental organizations, the private sector and civil society to continue to observe World
Malaria Day on 25 April in order to raise public awareness of and knowledge about the prevention, control and
treatment of malaria as well as the importance of meeting the Millennium Development Goals, and stresses the
importance of engaging local communities in this regard;
4. Encourages the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Malaria to continue raising issues relating to
malaria in collaboration with other United Nations organizations already working on those issues in the context of
the international political and development agendas and to work with national and global leaders to intensify efforts
to secure the political commitment, partnerships and funds to drastically reduce malaria deaths by 2015 through
increased access to prevention, diagnosis and treatment, especially in Africa;
5. Welcomes the increased funding, while recognizing the need for additional funding, for malaria
interventions and for research and development of preventive, diagnostic and control tools from the international
_______________
127

70

A/68/854.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

community, through funding from multilateral and bilateral sources and from the private sector, as well as by
making predictable financing available through appropriate and effective aid modalities and in-country health
financing mechanisms aligned with national priorities, which are key to strengthening health systems, including
malaria surveillance, and promoting universal and equitable access to high-quality malaria prevention, diagnostic
and treatment services, and noting in this regard that a high level of external assistance per person at risk for malaria
is associated with a decrease in the incidence of the disease;
6. Urges the international community, United Nations agencies and private organizations and foundations
to support the implementation of the Global Malaria Action Plan, including through support for programmes and
activities at the country level in order to achieve internationally agreed targets on malaria;
7. Calls upon the international community to continue to support the secretariat of the Roll Back Malaria
Partnership and partner organizations, including the World Health Organization, the World Bank and the United
Nations Children’s Fund, as vital complementary sources of support for the efforts of malaria-endemic countries to
combat the disease;
8. Urges the international community to work in a spirit of cooperation towards effective, increased,
harmonized, predictable and sustained bilateral and multilateral assistance and research to combat malaria,
including support for the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, in order to assist States, in
particular malaria-endemic countries, to implement sound national plans, in particular health plans and sanitation
plans, including malaria control and elimination strategies which may include evidence-based, cost-effective and
context-appropriate environmental management solutions, and integrated management of childhood illnesses, in a
sustained and equitable way that, inter alia, contributes to strengthening health system development approaches at
the district level;
9. Appeals to the malaria partners to resolve the financial, supply chain and delivery bottlenecks that are
responsible for stock-outs of long-lasting insecticide-treated nets, rapid diagnostic tests and artemisinin-based
combination therapies at the national level, whenever they occur, including through the strengthening of malaria
programme management at the country level;
10. Welcomes the contribution to the mobilization of additional and predictable resources for development
by voluntary innovative financing initiatives taken by groups of Member States, and in this regard notes the
International Drug Purchase Facility, UNITAID, the International Finance Facility for Immunization, the advance
market commitments for vaccines, the GAVI Alliance and the Affordable Medicines Facility for Malaria pilot, and
expresses support for the work of the Leading Group on Innovative Financing for Development and its special task
force on innovative financing for health;
11. Urges malaria-endemic countries to work towards financial sustainability, to increase, to the extent
possible, national resources allocated to malaria control and to create favourable conditions for working with the
private sector in order to improve access to good-quality malaria services;
12. Urges Member States to assess and respond to the needs for integrated human resources at all levels of
the health system in order to achieve the targets of the Abuja Declaration on Roll Back Malaria in Africa126 and the
internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, to take action, as
appropriate, to effectively govern the recruitment, training and retention of skilled health personnel, and to give
particular focus to the availability of skilled personnel at all levels to meet technical and operational needs as
increased funding for malaria control programmes becomes available;
13. Urges the international community, inter alia, to support the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis
and Malaria to enable it to meet its financial needs and, through country-led initiatives with adequate international
support, to intensify access to affordable, safe and effective antimalarial treatments, including artemisinin-based
combination therapies, intermittent preventive therapies for pregnant women, children under 5 and infants, adequate
diagnostic facilities, long-lasting insecticide-treated mosquito nets, including, where appropriate, through the free
distribution of such nets and, where appropriate, to insecticides for indoor residual spraying for malaria control,
taking into account relevant international rules, including the Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic
Pollutants128 standards and guidelines;
_______________
128

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2256, No. 40214.

71

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

14. Requests relevant international organizations, in particular the World Health Organization and the United
Nations Children’s Fund, to assist the efforts of national Governments to provide universal access to malaria control
interventions to address all at-risk populations, in particular young children and pregnant women, in malariaendemic countries, particularly in Africa, as rapidly as possible, with due regard to ensuring the proper use of those
interventions, including long-lasting insecticide-treated nets, and sustainability through full community participation
and implementation through the health system;
15. Calls upon Member States, in particular malaria-endemic countries, with the support of the international
community, to establish and/or strengthen national policies, operational plans and research, with a view to scaling up
efforts to achieve internationally agreed malaria targets for 2015, in accordance with the technical recommendations
of the World Health Organization;
16. Commends those African countries that have implemented the recommendations of the Abuja Summit
in 2000 to reduce or waive taxes and tariffs for nets and other products needed for malaria control,126 and
encourages other countries to do the same;
17. Calls upon United Nations agencies and their partners to continue to provide the technical support
necessary to build and enhance the capacity of Member States to implement the Global Malaria Action Plan and
meet the internationally agreed goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, and looks forward to the
timely completion of the second edition of the Global Malaria Action Plan;
18. Expresses deep concern about emerging drug and insecticide resistance in several regions of the world,
calls upon Member States, with support from the World Health Organization and other partners, to implement the
Global Plan for Artemisinin Resistance Containment and the Global Plan for Insecticide Resistance Management
in Malaria Vectors and to strengthen and implement surveillance systems for monitoring and assessing changing
patterns of drug and insecticide resistance, calls upon the World Health Organization to support Member States in
the development of their national insecticide resistance management strategies and to coordinate support at the
international level for countries to ensure that drug efficacy and insecticide resistance testing is fully operational in
order to enhance the use of artemisinin-based combination therapies and insecticides, and stresses that the
data gathered should be utilized for further research and development of safe and effective therapies and vector
control tools;
19. Urges all Member States to prohibit the marketing and use of oral artemisinin-based monotherapies and
to replace them with oral artemisinin-based combination therapies, as recommended by the World Health
Organization, and to develop the financial, legislative and regulatory mechanisms necessary to introduce artemisinin
combination therapies at affordable prices in both public and private facilities;
20. Recognizes the importance of the development of safe and cost-effective vaccines and new medicines to
prevent and treat malaria and the need for further and accelerated research, including into safe, effective and highquality therapies, using rigorous standards, including by providing support to the Special Programme for Research
and Training in Tropical Diseases,129 through effective global partnerships, such as the various malaria vaccine
initiatives and the Medicines for Malaria Venture, where necessary stimulated by new incentives to secure their
development, and through effective and timely support for the pre-qualification of new antimalarials and their
combinations;
21. Calls upon the international community, including through existing partnerships, to increase investment
in and efforts towards research to optimize current tools, develop and validate new, safe and affordable malariarelated medicines, products and technologies, such as vaccines, rapid diagnostic tests, insecticides and their delivery
modes, to prevent and treat malaria, especially for at-risk children and pregnant women, and testing opportunities
for integration in order to enhance effectiveness and delay the onset of resistance;
22. Calls upon malaria-endemic countries to assure favourable conditions for research institutions, including
the allocation of adequate resources and the development of national policies and legal frameworks, where
appropriate, with a view to, inter alia, informing policy formulation and strategic interventions on malaria;
_______________
129

A joint programme of the United Nations Children’s Fund, the United Nations Development Programme, the World Bank and the
World Health Organization.

72

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

23. Reaffirms the right to use, to the fullest extent, the provisions contained in the World Trade Organization
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS Agreement), the Doha Declaration on
the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health, the decision of the General Council of the World Trade Organization of
30 August 2003 on the implementation of paragraph 6 of the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public
Health, and, when formal acceptance procedures are completed, the amendment to article 31 of the Agreement,
which provide flexibilities for the protection of public health, and in particular to promote access to medicines for all
and to encourage the provision of assistance to developing countries in this regard, and calls for the broad and timely
acceptance of the amendment to article 31 of the Agreement, as proposed by the General Council of the World
Trade Organization in its decision of 6 December 2005;
24. Recognizes the importance, in the struggle against malaria, of the World Health Organization Global
Strategy and Plan of Action on Public Health, Innovation and Intellectual Property, adopted by the World Health
Assembly on 24 May 2008;125
25. Calls upon malaria-endemic countries, development partners and the international community to
support the timely replacement of long-lasting insecticide-treated nets in accordance with the recommendations of
the World Health Organization on the service lives of such nets, in order to prevent the risk of malaria resurgence
and a reversal of the gains made to date;
26. Calls upon the international community to support ways to expand access to affordable, effective and
safe products and treatments, such as vector control measures, including indoor residual spraying, long-lasting
insecticide-treated nets, including through the free distribution of such nets, adequate diagnostic facilities,
intermittent preventive therapies for pregnant women, children under 5 and infants, and artemisinin-based
combination therapy for populations at risk of falciparum malaria infection in endemic countries, particularly in
Africa, including through additional funds and innovative mechanisms, inter alia, for the financing and scaling up of
artemisinin production and procurement, as appropriate, to meet the increased need;
27. Recognizes the impact of the Roll Back Malaria Partnership, and welcomes the increased level of
public-private partnerships for malaria control and prevention, including the financial and in-kind contributions of
private sector partners and companies operating in Africa, as well as the increased engagement of non-governmental
service providers;
28. Encourages the producers of long-lasting insecticide-treated nets to continue to accelerate technology
transfer to developing countries, and invites the World Bank and regional development funds to consider supporting
malaria-endemic countries in establishing factories to scale up production of long-lasting insecticide-treated nets;
29. Calls upon Member States and the international community, especially malaria-endemic countries, in
accordance with existing guidelines and recommendations of the World Health Organization and the requirements
of the Stockholm Convention related to the use of DDT, to become fully knowledgeable about the technical policies
and strategies of the World Health Organization and the provisions of the Stockholm Convention, including for
indoor residual spraying, long-lasting insecticide-treated nets and case management, intermittent preventive
therapies for pregnant women, children under 5 and infants and monitoring of in vivo resistance studies to
artemisinin-based combination therapies, as well as to increase capacity for the safe, effective and judicious use of
indoor residual spraying and other forms of vector control, including quality control measures, in accordance with
international rules, standards and guidelines;
30. Requests the World Health Organization, the United Nations Children’s Fund and donor agencies to
provide support to those countries that choose to use DDT for indoor residual spraying so as to ensure that it is
implemented in accordance with international rules, standards and guidelines, and to provide all possible support to
malaria-endemic countries to manage the intervention effectively and prevent the contamination, in particular, of
agricultural products with DDT and other insecticides used for indoor residual spraying;
31. Encourages the World Health Organization and its member States, with the support of the parties to the
Stockholm Convention, to continue to explore possible alternatives to DDT as a vector control agent;
32. Recognizes the importance of a multisectoral strategy to advance global control efforts, invites malariaendemic countries to consider adopting and implementing the Multisectoral Action Framework for Malaria
developed by the Roll Back Malaria Partnership and the United Nations Development Programme, and encourages
regional and intersectoral collaboration, both public and private, at all levels, especially in education, health,
agriculture, economic development and the environment, to advance malaria control objectives;
73

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

33. Also recognizes the need to strengthen malaria surveillance and data quality in all endemic regions to
enable Member States to direct financial resources to the populations most in need and to respond effectively to
disease outbreaks;
34. Calls upon Member States and the international community to strengthen mechanisms for countrybased coordination of technical assistance to achieve alignment of the best approaches to implement World Health
Organization technical guidance and to mobilize support for the sharing and analysis of best practices to address
urgent programmatic challenges, to improve monitoring and evaluation and to conduct regular financial planning
and gap analysis;
35. Encourages sharing, across regions, of knowledge, experience and lessons learned with regard to the
control and elimination of malaria, particularly between the Africa, Asia-Pacific and Latin America regions;
36. Calls upon the international community to support the strengthening of health systems, national
pharmaceutical policies and national drug regulatory authorities, to monitor and fight against the trade in counterfeit
and substandard antimalarial medicines and prevent their distribution and use, and to support coordinated efforts,
inter alia, by providing technical assistance to improve surveillance, monitoring and evaluation systems and their
alignment with national plans and systems so as to better track and report changes in coverage, the need for scaling
up recommended interventions and the subsequent reductions in the burden of malaria;
37. Urges Member States, the international community and all relevant actors, including the private sector,
to promote the coordinated implementation and enhance the quality of malaria-related activities, including through
the Roll Back Malaria Partnership, in accordance with national policies and operational plans that are consistent
with the technical recommendations of the World Health Organization and recent efforts and initiatives, including,
where appropriate, the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness and the Accra Agenda for Action, adopted at the Third
High-level Forum on Aid Effectiveness, held in Accra from 2 to 4 September 2008;130
38. Recognizes the need for political commitment and financial support beyond 2015 to sustain and expand
the achievements in the struggle against malaria and to meet the international malaria targets through prevention and
malaria control efforts to end the epidemic, while acknowledging the remarkable progress in combating malaria
to date;
39. Requests the Secretary-General, in close collaboration with the Director General of the World Health
Organization and in consultation with Member States, to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session on
the implementation of the present resolution, and specifically on progress towards achieving the 2015 targets of the
Abuja Declaration and those of the Global Malaria Action Plan and Millennium Development Goal 6, including
identification of best practices and successes and specific challenges limiting the achievement of the targets and,
taking these into account, to provide recommendations to ensure that the targets are reached by 2015.
RESOLUTION 68/309
A/RES/68/309

Adopted at the 108th plenary meeting, on 10 September 2014, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/68/L.61, as
orally revised, submitted by the President of the General Assembly

68/309. Report of the Open Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals established pursuant to
General Assembly resolution 66/288
The General Assembly,
Recalling the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, entitled
“The future we want”, contained in resolution 66/288 of 27 July 2012, in which Heads of State and Government,
inter alia, resolved to establish an inclusive and transparent intergovernmental process on sustainable development
goals open to all stakeholders, with a view to developing global sustainable development goals to be agreed by the
General Assembly,
_______________
130

74

A/63/539, annex.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

1. Acknowledges the conclusion of the work of the Open Working Group on Sustainable Development
Goals, and welcomes its report;131
2. Decides that the proposal of the Open Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals contained in
the report shall be the main basis for integrating sustainable development goals into the post-2015 development
agenda, while recognizing that other inputs will also be considered, in the intergovernmental negotiation process at
the sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly.
RESOLUTION 68/310
A/RES/68/310

Adopted at the 109th plenary meeting, on 15 September 2014, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/68/L.62,
submitted by the President of the General Assembly

68/310. Four one-day structured dialogues on possible arrangements for a facilitation mechanism
to promote the development, transfer and dissemination of clean and environmentally
sound technologies
The General Assembly,
Welcoming the convening of four structured dialogues on possible arrangements for a facilitation mechanism
to promote the development, transfer and dissemination of clean and environmentally sound technologies, on 29 and
30 April, 4 June and 23 July 2014, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 68/210 of 20 December 2013,
Taking note of the summary prepared by the President of the sixty-eighth session of the General Assembly of
the discussions and recommendations that emerged from the four one-day structured dialogues to consider possible
arrangements for a facilitation mechanism to promote clean and environmentally sound technologies, held during
the sixty-eighth session of the Assembly,
Noting the views expressed by and the active participation of Member States and other stakeholders, as well as
experts and panellists, during the dialogues,
1. Requests the President of the sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly to continue consultations
based on the above-mentioned recommendations prepared by the President of the sixty-eighth session, with the aim
of reaching a conclusion during the sixty-ninth session in the context of the post-2015 development agenda;
2. Invites the Secretary-General to take into account the recommendations that emerged from the structured
dialogues on possible arrangements for a facilitation mechanism to promote the development, transfer and
dissemination of clean and environmentally sound technologies, contained in the summary prepared by the
President of the sixty-eighth session of the General Assembly, when preparing his synthesis report.

_______________
131

A/68/970 and Corr.1. Reservations by Member States to the report are referred to in sect. III, para. 13, thereof.

75

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political
and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
Contents

Resolution
number

68/277.

Title

Page

Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects ...................................... 78

77

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

RESOLUTION 68/277
A/RES/68/277

Adopted at the 98th plenary meeting, on 16 June 2014, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/426/Add.1, para. 6)1

68/277. Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2006 (XIX) of 18 February 1965 and all other relevant resolutions,
Recalling in particular its resolution 67/301 of 16 September 2013,
Affirming that the efforts of the United Nations in the peaceful settlement of disputes, including through its
peacekeeping operations, are indispensable,
Convinced of the need for the United Nations to continue to improve its capabilities in the field of
peacekeeping and to enhance the effective and efficient deployment of its peacekeeping operations,
Considering the contribution that all States Members of the United Nations make to peacekeeping,
Noting the widespread interest in contributing to the work of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations expressed by Member States, in particular troop- and police-contributing countries,
Bearing in mind the continuous necessity of preserving the efficiency and strengthening the effectiveness of
the work of the Special Committee,
1.

Welcomes the report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations;2

2. Endorses the proposals, recommendations and conclusions of the Special Committee contained in
paragraphs 17 to 315 of its report;
3. Urges Member States, the Secretariat and relevant organs of the United Nations to take all steps
necessary to implement the proposals, recommendations and conclusions of the Special Committee;
4. Reiterates that those Member States that become personnel contributors to United Nations peacekeeping
operations in years to come or that participate in the future in the Special Committee for three consecutive years as
observers shall, upon request in writing to the Chair of the Special Committee, become members at the following
session of the Special Committee;
5. Decides that the Special Committee, in accordance with its mandate, shall continue its efforts for a
comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects and shall review the
implementation of its previous proposals and consider any new proposals so as to enhance the capacity of the
United Nations to fulfil its responsibilities in this field;
6.
session;

Requests the Special Committee to submit a report on its work to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth

7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled “Comprehensive
review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects”.

_______________
1
The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Argentina, Canada, Egypt, Japan, Nigeria and
Poland.
2
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 19 (A/68/19).

78

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee*
Contents
Resolution
number

Title

Page

*

68/19.

Financial reports and audited financial statements, and reports of the Board of Auditors.............................................. 81
Resolution B .......................................................................................................................................................... 81

68/247.

Special subjects relating to the programme budget for the biennium 2014–2015 ......................................................... 82
Resolution B .......................................................................................................................................................... 82

68/258.

Financing of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei ............................................................................. 91
Resolution B .......................................................................................................................................................... 91

68/259.

Financing of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali........................................ 93
Resolution B .......................................................................................................................................................... 93

68/260.

Financing of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force............................................................................... 95
Resolution B .......................................................................................................................................................... 95

68/263.

Procurement ........................................................................................................................................................... 97

68/264.

Progress towards an accountability system in the United Nations Secretariat .............................................................. 98

68/265.

Mobility framework.............................................................................................................................................. 100

68/266.

Joint Inspection Unit ............................................................................................................................................. 102

68/267.

Construction of a new facility for the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, Arusha branch ........ 104

68/280.

Estimates in respect of special political missions, good offices and other political initiatives authorized
by the General Assembly and/or the Security Council ............................................................................................. 105

68/281.

Rates of reimbursement to troop-contributing countries........................................................................................... 106

68/282.

Triennial review of the rates and standards for reimbursement to Member States for contingent-owned
equipment ............................................................................................................................................................ 107

68/283.

Support account for peacekeeping operations ......................................................................................................... 107

68/284.

Financing of the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy ............................................................................. 117

68/285.

Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire .................................................................................... 118

68/286.

Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus .............................................................................. 121

68/287.

Financing of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo .......... 124

68/288.

Financing of the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste......................................................................... 126

68/289.

Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti ................................................................................ 127

68/290.

Financing of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo ............................................................ 130

68/291.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia ................................................................................................ 132

68/292.

Financing of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon...................................................................................... 135

68/293.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan ........................................................................................ 138

_______________
*

Unless otherwise stated, the draft resolutions recommended in the reports were submitted by the Chair or another officer of the Bureau of the Committee.

79

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee
Resolution
number

Title

Page

68/294.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan ............................................................................................ 140

68/295.

Financing of the United Nations Supervision Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic ................................................... 141

68/296.

Financing of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara ...................................................... 142

68/297.

Financing of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur ............................................................ 144

68/298.

Financing of the activities arising from Security Council resolution 1863 (2009) ...................................................... 147

68/299.

Financing of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic ............................................................................................................................. 149

80

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 68/19 B
A/RES/68/19B

Adopted at the 99th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2014, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/610/Add.1, para. 7)

68/19.

Financial reports and audited financial statements, and reports of the Board of Auditors
B1

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 67/235 B of 28 June 2013 and 68/19 A of 4 December 2013,
Having considered the financial report and audited financial statements for the 12-month period from 1 July
2012 to 30 June 2013 and the report of the Board of Auditors on United Nations peacekeeping operations,2 the
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the recommendations of the Board of Auditors concerning
United Nations peacekeeping operations for the financial period ended 30 June 20133 and the related report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,4
1. Accepts the financial report and audited financial statements of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations for the period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013;2
2. Takes note of the observations and endorses the recommendations contained in the report of the Board of
Auditors;5
3. Also takes note of the observations and endorses the recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;4
4. Recalls paragraph 11 of the report of the Board of Auditors and paragraph 36 of the report of the
Advisory Committee, and decides to consider the question of the authority to move staff within the area of an
individual mission during the second part of its resumed sixty-ninth session, while maintaining existing
arrangements in the interim;
5.

Commends the Board of Auditors for the quality of its report and the streamlined format thereof;

6. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the recommendations of
the Board of Auditors concerning United Nations peacekeeping operations for the financial period ended
30 June 2013;3
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the recommendations of the Board
of Auditors and the related recommendations of the Advisory Committee in a prompt and timely manner;
8. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to improve asset management across
peacekeeping missions, including by holding mission management accountable for checking stock levels before
undertaking any acquisition activity in order to ensure compliance with established asset management policies,
taking into account the importance of the full implementation of the International Public Sector Accounting
Standards;
9. Further requests the Secretary-General to continue to indicate an expected time frame for the
implementation of the recommendations of the Board of Auditors and the priorities for their implementation,
including the office holders to be held accountable and measures taken in that regard;
_______________
1

Resolution 68/19, in section VI of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 49 and corrigenda
(A/68/49 and A/68/49 (Vol. I)/Corr.1 and 3), vol. I, becomes resolution 68/19 A.
2
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 5, vol. II (A/68/5 (Vol. II)).
3
A/68/751.
4
A/68/843.
5
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 5, vol. II (A/68/5 (Vol. II)), chap. II.

81

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

10. Requests the Secretary-General to provide, in his next report on the implementation of the
recommendations of the Board of Auditors concerning United Nations peacekeeping operations, a full explanation
for the delays in the implementation of all outstanding recommendations of the Board, the root causes of the
recurring issues and the measures to be taken.
RESOLUTION 68/247 B
A/RES/68/247B

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 9 April 2014, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/689/Add.1, para. 7)

68/247. Special subjects relating to the programme budget for the biennium 2014–2015
B6
The General Assembly,
I
Subvention to the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the request for a subvention to the Extraordinary
Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia7 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions,8
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;7

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,8 subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3. Affirms the high priority accorded to the work of the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of
Cambodia;
4. Notes with concern the adverse cash position of the Extraordinary Chambers and its difficult financial
situation;
5. Recalls article 15 of the Agreement between the United Nations and the Royal Government of
Cambodia concerning the Prosecution under Cambodian Law of Crimes Committed during the Period of
Democratic Kampuchea of 6 June 2003;9
6.

Takes note of paragraphs 33, 34 (a) and 35 of the report of the Advisory Committee;

7. Authorizes the Secretary-General, as an exceptional measure, to enter into commitments in an amount
not to exceed 15,540,000 United States dollars to supplement the voluntary financial resources of the international
component of the Extraordinary Chambers for the period from 1 January to 31 December 2014;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at the main part of its sixty-ninth
session a report on the use of the commitment authority as well as information on a comprehensive examination of
the future financing of the Extraordinary Chambers for 2015 and beyond;
9. Encourages all Member States to provide voluntary support for both the international and national
components of the Extraordinary Chambers, and requests the Secretary-General to intensify his efforts to obtain
additional voluntary contributions, including by broadening the donor base, for funding the future activities of the
Extraordinary Chambers;
_______________
6
Resolution 68/247, in section VI of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 49 and
corrigenda (A/68/49 and A/68/49 (Vol. I)/Corr.1 and 3), vol. I, becomes resolution 68/247 A.
7
A/68/532.
8
A/68/7/Add.12.
9
Resolution 57/228 B, annex.

82

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

10. Recalls paragraph 36 (e) of the report of the Advisory Committee, and in this regard requests the
Secretary-General to ensure that the Extraordinary Chambers, in consultation with the key actors, prepare a
completion strategy with a clear road map and to report to the General Assembly thereon by no later than at the
main part of its sixty-ninth session;
II
Estimates in respect of special political missions, good offices
and other political initiatives authorized by the General Assembly
and/or the Security Council: thematic cluster II – Panel of Experts
on the Central African Republic
Recalling section VI of its resolution 68/247 A and its resolution 68/248 A both of 27 December 2013,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on estimates in respect of special political missions,
good offices and other political initiatives authorized by the General Assembly and/or the Security Council,10 as
well as the related report of the Advisory Committee,11
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;10

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee,11
subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3.

Takes note of paragraph 8 of the report of the Advisory Committee;

4. Welcomes the efforts made by the Secretary-General to improve efficiency under thematic cluster II
(sanctions monitoring teams, groups and panels) of the special political missions, and requests the Secretary-General
to continue to make efforts to improve the efficiency of the Panel of Experts on the Central African Republic;
5. Approves the budget for the Panel of Experts on the Central African Republic in the amount
of 1,476,100 dollars net, as proposed by the Secretary-General in his report;
6. Also approves a charge totalling 1,476,100 dollars net against the provision appropriated for special
political missions under section 3, Political affairs, of the programme budget for the biennium 2014–2015;
III
Progress in the implementation of the organizational
resilience management system and of the recommendations
from the after-action review of storm Sandy
Recalling section II of its resolution 64/260 of 29 March 2010, section I of its resolution 66/247 of
24 December 2011 and sections II and IV of its resolution 67/254 A of 12 April 2013,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on progress in the implementation of the
organizational resilience management system12 and on progress in the implementation of the recommendations
from the after-action review of storm Sandy,13 as well as the related report of the Advisory Committee,14
1.

Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General;12,13

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee,14
subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
_______________
10

A/68/327/Add.9 and Corr.1.
A/68/7/Add.25.
12
A/68/715.
13
A/68/732.
14
A/68/780.
11

83

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

A.

Progress in the implementation of the organizational resilience management system

3. Welcomes the progress achieved so far in the implementation of the organizational resilience
management system, and looks forward to receiving information on the next phases of implementation;
4. Underlines the importance of the full implementation of the organizational resilience management
system in the offices away from Headquarters, regional commissions, field missions of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Political Affairs of the Secretariat and the participating specialized
agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations system in the next step of its implementation;
5. Emphasizes the importance of the organizational resilience management system in managing
operational risks to the United Nations under an all-hazards approach;
6. Recalls paragraphs 19 and 46 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and in this regard requests the
Secretary-General to continue to provide a detailed accounting of the cost of the organizational resilience
management system initiative in the context of future progress reports;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly, not later than at its seventieth
session, a progress report on the implementation of the organizational resilience management system, including
information on the steps taken to expand the system to include offices away from Headquarters, regional
commissions, field missions of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Political Affairs
and the participating specialized agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations system;
B.

Progress in the implementation of the recommendations from the after-action review of storm Sandy

8. Requests the Secretary-General to complete the implementation of the recommendations emanating
from the after-action review of storm Sandy, to finalize the global information technology disaster recovery plan and
assessment and to comprehensively address the weaknesses identified in the area of business continuity during the
storm and to report thereon in the context of the next progress report;
9. Welcomes the efforts of the Secretary-General with respect to the tracking, monitoring and settlement of
insurance claims for work related to the storm that was covered by insurance policies;
10. Encourages the Secretary-General to ensure that the post-storm remediation and mitigation work is
completed in a timely manner;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to provide, during the main part of the sixty-ninth session of the General
Assembly, a comprehensive briefing to Member States on the status of the remediation and mitigation work
undertaken as a result of the damage caused by the storm, including a full accounting of the related expenditures and
infrastructure recovered;
12. Also requests the Secretary-General to consider all means of risk mitigation, including through the
insurance market and/or self-insurance mechanisms, with a view to securing adequate coverage at a reasonable cost
for all United Nations installations and premises exposed to natural hazards and emergencies and to report thereon
in the next progress report;
IV
Implementation of a flexible workplace at United Nations Headquarters
Recalling section V of its resolution 67/246 of 24 December 2012 and section III of its resolution 67/254 A,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of a flexible workplace at
United Nations Headquarters,15 as well as the related report of the Advisory Committee,16
_______________
15
16

84

A/68/387.
A/68/583.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;15

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee,16
subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3. Notes that flexible workplace strategies in the United Nations should be aimed at improving the overall
productivity and efficiency of the Organization, as well as the staff workplace environment;
4. Encourages the Secretary-General to keep under review the functioning of the interdisciplinary working
group on flexible workplace strategies to ensure that all relevant stakeholders, including staff representatives, are
appropriately engaged;
5. Takes note of paragraph 5 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and in this regard requests the
Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly no later than at its sixty-ninth session a report containing a
comprehensive business case for the application of flexible workplace strategies at the United Nations;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the comprehensive business case includes linkages to
ongoing reform initiatives, such as the Umoja enterprise resource planning project;
V
Strategic capital review
Recalling section III of its resolution 65/259 of 24 December 2010,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the strategic capital review17 and the related report
of the Advisory Committee,18
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;17

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee,18
subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3. Emphasizes the technical nature of the subject matter and the need for a shared understanding and
consistent application of terms, moving towards the development of a long-term capital programme and a
prioritization strategy for the global premises of the United Nations Secretariat, and requests the Secretary-General
to set out precise definitions and to provide additional information on the scope, content and nature of the strategic
capital review;
4. Also emphasizes the importance of ensuring the compliance of all United Nations premises with the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,19 and considers that this should be given due weight in the
prioritization strategy;
5. Takes note of paragraphs 15 to 18 of the report of the Advisory Committee, decides that the review
should include all premises owned and managed by the United Nations that are managed by the Office of Central
Support Services of the Department of Management of the Secretariat, and further decides to assess the feasibility of
disseminating the best practices learned from this process to all locations owned and/or managed by the
Organization that have permanent long-term capital requirements;
6. Recalls paragraph 22 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and further recalls that any potential
proposals stemming from the strategic capital review with budgetary implications should follow the procedure set
out in the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations;20
_______________
17

A/68/733.
A/68/796.
19
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2515, No. 44910.
20
ST/SGB/2013/4.
18

85

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

VI
Revised estimates, under section 22, Economic and social development
in Western Asia, and section 33, Construction, alteration, improvement and
major maintenance, of the programme budget for the biennium 2014–2015
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on revised estimates, under section 22, Economic and
social development in Western Asia, and section 33, Construction, alteration, improvement and major maintenance,
of the programme budget for the biennium 2014–201521 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,22
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;21

2.

Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee;22

3. Decides to appropriate an additional non-recurrent amount of 5,722,400 dollars, representing a charge
against the contingency fund, comprising, under section 22, Economic and social development in Western Asia,
281,800 dollars, section 33, Construction, alteration, improvement and major maintenance, 5,440,600 dollars and
the amount of 29,000 dollars under section 36, Staff assessment, to be offset by a corresponding amount under
income section 1, Income from staff assessment, of the programme budget for the biennium 2014–2015;
VII
Capital master plan
Recalling its resolutions 54/249 of 23 December 1999, 55/238 of 23 December 2000, 56/234 and 56/236 of
24 December 2001, 56/286 of 27 June 2002, section II of its resolution 57/292 of 20 December 2002, its
resolution 59/295 of 22 June 2005, section II of its resolution 60/248 of 23 December 2005, its resolutions 60/256 of
8 May 2006, 60/282 of 30 June 2006, 61/251 of 22 December 2006, 62/87 of 10 December 2007, 63/270 of 7 April
2009, 64/228 of 22 December 2009, 65/269 of 4 April 2011, section III of its resolution 66/258 of 9 April 2012,
section V of its resolution 67/246 and section IV of its resolution 68/247 A and its decisions 58/566 of 8 April 2004,
65/543 of 24 December 2010 and 66/555 of 24 December 2011,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the update of the eleventh annual progress report
on the implementation of the capital master plan23 and on updated information on final expenditure for associated
costs for the period from 2008 to 201324 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,25
1.

Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General;23,24

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee,25
subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
A.

Update of the eleventh annual progress report

3. Welcomes with appreciation the donations from Member States that are contributing to the capital
master plan project;
4. Notes that as at 28 March 2014 an amount of 678,214 dollars in assessments remained unpaid to the
capital master plan for 2013 and prior periods, and urges the Member States concerned to arrange for the
disbursement of those contributions expeditiously;
5. Stresses the special role of the host country Government with regard to support for United Nations
Headquarters in New York;
6. Notes the benefits, including economic ones, accruing to host countries from the presence of the United
Nations, and the costs incurred;
_______________
21

A/68/748.
A/68/808.
23
A/68/352/Add.2.
24
A/68/352/Add.3.
25
A/68/797.
22

86

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

7. Recalls paragraphs 7 and 8 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and urges the Secretary-General to
make every effort to reduce the delay in the schedule for the completion of the project, to confirm the timing of the
closure for the Office of the Capital Master Plan and to report, in the context of the twelfth annual progress report on
the implementation of the capital master plan, on the plans for the management and supervision of the work
remaining after the closure of the Office, including the accountability mechanisms that will be put in place;
8. Also recalls paragraphs 7 and 12 of section IV of its resolution 68/247 A, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to report thereon in the context of the twelfth annual progress report;
9. Reaffirms the scope of the capital master plan project in accordance with paragraph 10 of its
resolution 61/251 and as affirmed in subsequent resolutions;
10. Notes that the Secretary-General refers in his report23 to the funding shortfall as an unfunded portion of
the project scope, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to take fully into account the provisions of
paragraph 6 of section IV of its resolution 68/247 A in the context of the twelfth annual progress report;
11. Invites the Secretary-General to provide, from within existing resources, adequate office space for the
Group of 77 and China in the Secretariat Building, with at least the same square footage as it had before the
initiation of the capital master plan project and with due regard paid to its functional needs;
B.

Funding of the project

12. Recognizes the need to fund the budget shortfalls, including those related to associated costs, on the basis
of project costs provided by the Secretary-General in the twelfth annual progress report and that a decision on the
final appropriation will be required at the main part of the sixty-ninth session;
13. Authorizes the Secretary-General, on an exceptional basis, to make use of the Working Capital Fund and
the Special Account established by the General Assembly in its resolution 3049 A (XXVII) of 19 December 1972 as
a bridging mechanism to address possible cash flow challenges of the project during the time remaining until its
completion, and requests the Secretary-General to submit a report thereon to the Assembly at the main part of its
sixty-ninth session;
14. Decides, in this context, that the bridging mechanism will be replenished at the main part of the sixtyninth session of the General Assembly through the established budget assessment in order to maintain the robust
liquidity of the Organization;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to keep Member States informed with regard to the liquidity of the
Organization, as appropriate;
16. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to make every effort to find savings to offset the budget
shortfall, including through value engineering and other exercises;
17. Further requests the Secretary-General to make every effort to solicit additional voluntary contributions
to help finance the budget shortfall;
VIII
Terms of reference for the representative of the Secretary-General
for the investment of the assets of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Fund
Recalling paragraphs 7 and 8 of section VII of its resolution 68/247 A,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on proposed terms of reference for the representative of
the Secretary-General for the investment of the assets of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund26 and the
related report of the Advisory Committee,27
_______________
26
27

A/68/753.
A/68/805.

87

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;26

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee,27
subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3. Decides to establish the post of a full-time representative of the Secretary-General for the investment of
the assets of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund at the Assistant Secretary-General level;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure broad dissemination of the vacancy announcement for the post
of his representative for the investment of the assets of the Fund, including by circulating notes verbales to Member
States and targeting industry publications and relevant institutions to allow for a competitive pool of candidates, and
to report thereon in the context of the report on the investments of the Fund;
5. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the process of the recruitment of his representative for
the investment of the assets of the Fund is undertaken in strict adherence to the relevant provisions governing
recruitment in the United Nations, subject to the terms of reference annexed to the present resolution;
6. Decides that the terms of reference for the representative of the Secretary-General for the investment of
the assets of the Fund shall be as annexed to the present resolution;
7. Requests the Secretary-General, in the context of future reports on the investments of the Fund, to
provide information on the performance of his representative in discharging his or her responsibilities.
Annex
Terms of reference of the representative of the Secretary-General (Assistant Secretary-General) for the
investment of the assets of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund
1. Article 19 (a) of the regulations of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund provides that the investment of
the assets of the Fund shall be decided upon by the Secretary-General after consultation with an Investments
Committee and in the light of observations and suggestions made from time to time by the United Nations Joint
Staff Pension Board on the investments policy. The General Assembly, in its resolution 35/216 B of 17 December
1980, reaffirmed the fiduciary responsibility of the Secretary-General for the interests of the participants and
beneficiaries of the Fund under the Regulations and Rules of the Fund. In addition, on numerous occasions, the
Assembly has emphasized that the Secretary-General’s decisions concerning the investment of the assets of the
Fund should be guided by the key criteria of safety, profitability, liquidity and convertibility.
2. In order to assist the Secretary-General in carrying out the fiduciary responsibilities for the investment of the
assets of the Fund, the Secretary-General shall appoint a representative for the investment of the assets of the Fund.
The representative shall oversee the Investment Management Division of the Fund.
Responsibilities
3. The representative of the Secretary-General, reporting to the Secretary-General and in consultation with the
Investments Committee of the Fund and in the light of observations and suggestions made from time to time by the
Board on investments policy, will exercise discretionary authority over the investment of the assets of the Fund and
will be responsible for the overall investment policy and for oversight and management of the investments of
the Fund.
4. The representative of the Secretary-General will lead the investment operations in terms of strategy and policy
analysis, asset allocation, portfolio management and investment decision-making; risk management and compliance
and monitoring; and back-office accounting, trade settlement, cash management and systems and information
technology requirements. The representative, supervising the Director of the Investment Management Division, will
ensure that all the operations and functions of the Division are properly coordinated and coherent, are aligned to
safeguard fiduciary responsibilities, support the goals of the office and enhance the long-term sustainability of the
Fund. He or she will work closely with the Chief Executive Officer of the Fund. The representative is responsible
for investment policy, strategic and tactical asset allocation and the appropriate investment strategy in consultation
with the Investments Committee and in the light of observations and suggestions made from time to time by the
Board on investment policy. He or she will oversee the implementation of investment decisions and ensure that the
approved investment policy and asset allocation are followed. He or she will be responsible for carrying out the
88

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

responsibilities of the Secretary-General under article 19 (b) of the regulations of the Fund, including to ensure that
detailed accounts of all investments and other transactions relating to the Fund are maintained and to report to the
Board, the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions and the General Assembly on the
Fund’s investments.
5. Within delegated authority, the representative of the Secretary-General will provide overall oversight and
management of the investment of the Fund, involving the following:
(a) Investments. In consultation with the Investments Committee established in accordance with article 20
of the regulations of the Fund, and in the light of observations and suggestions made from time to time by the Board
on investment policy, the representative will be responsible for an investment strategy and a coherent framework of
investment operations aimed at meeting and exceeding the long-term real rate of return goal. In consultation with
the Investments Committee, he or she will define the Investment Management Division’s globally diversified
portfolio and the strategic and tactical asset allocation of the Fund; define the main investment strategies for
diversified portfolios to generate investment returns corresponding to the long-term real rate of return issued in the
Fund’s actuarial assumptions to meet its long-term obligations of maintaining the solvency of the Fund; ensure
adherence to the investment criteria established by the General Assembly (i.e., safety, profitability, liquidity and
convertibility) and to the objectives of preserving the principal of the Fund and of obtaining optimal investment
return without undue risk; ensure consistency between investments and overall established risk tolerance; ensure the
implementation of the established investment strategy and asset allocation; and conduct general monitoring and
management of the investments and portfolio management;
(b) Risk and compliance. The representative will ensure the establishment and maintenance of appropriate
internal controls and risk management systems;
(c) Operations. The representative will ensure the alignment of the operations and information systems
technology with the Fund’s investment strategy and policy;
(d) Accounting. The representative will be responsible for carrying out the responsibilities of the SecretaryGeneral under article 19 (b) of the regulations of the Fund to maintain detailed accounts of all investments and other
transactions relating to the Fund and ensure the integrity and reliability of investment data reflected in the financial
statements of the Fund, as well as to implement risk management and adequate financial controls on investments;
(e) Intergovernmental bodies. The representative will liaise with the Board, the Advisory Committee and
the General Assembly on the performance of the Fund’s investments, providing answers and explanations to
questions on performance, structure of the portfolio, investment policies and strategies, custodial arrangements,
global economic and market conditions, investment forecast/outlook and requirements for the financing of
operations; present proposals on the financing and servicing of the Investment Management Division; and liaise and
work closely with the Board and its committees;
(f) Oversight bodies. The representative will liaise and consult with the Fund’s oversight bodies (the United
Nations Board of Auditors, the Audit Committee of the Fund and the Office of Internal Oversight Services of the
Secretariat) and ensure the implementation of the accepted recommendations of such oversight bodies as
appropriate.
6. The representative of the Secretary-General must also work closely and effectively with the Chief Executive
Officer of the Fund with regard to the performance of their respective functions. The representative must collaborate
closely with the Chief Executive Officer to ensure optimum results with respect to the Fund’s asset/liability
management.
Competencies
7.

The competencies are as follows:

(a) Professionalism. Demonstrated competence in and adherence to the standards of conduct of the
profession and in the application of best practices; strong conceptual and analytical skills; proven conscientiousness
and efficiency in meeting commitments, observing deadlines and achieving results; ability to direct, review and
guide the work of others, particularly in terms of substantive soundness;
(b) Vision. Demonstrated ability to identify strategic issues, opportunities and risks and to generate and
communicate broad and compelling organizational direction and objectives to all stakeholders;
89

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

(c) Leadership. Proven track record of excellent management and technical leadership skills; proven ability
to develop clear goals that are consistent with agreed strategies and to establish good relationships and build team
spirit with a broad range of people; demonstrated competence for incorporating gender perspectives and ensuring
the equal participation of women and men in all areas of work; demonstrated knowledge of strategies and
commitment to the goal of gender balance in staffing;
(d) Planning and organizing. Demonstrated excellence in successful planning with strong managerial skills;
proven ability to plan and establish priorities and to ensure effective work structure to maximize productivity and
achieve goals;
(e) Judgement/decision-making. Mature judgement and initiative, imagination and resourcefulness, energy
and tact; demonstrated ability to provide strategic direction; proven ability to identify key issues in complex
situations and to take adequate decisions while being aware of their impact on others and on the Organization;
(f) Communication. Excellent oral and written communication and negotiation skills with proven ability to
defend and explain difficult issues with respect to key decisions and positions to intergovernmental bodies, senior
officials and staff; proven ability to communicate complex concepts orally; ability to prepare written reports that are
clear, concise and meaningful;
(g) Teamwork. Good interpersonal skills; demonstrated ability to work in a multicultural, multi-ethnic
environment and to maintain effective working relations; ability to lead and gain the assistance of others in a team
endeavour.
Qualifications
8.

The qualifications are as follows:

(a) Education. Advanced university degree (master’s degree or equivalent) in business management,
economics, finance, banking and portfolio investment management or related fields;
(b) Work experience. Over 20 years of proven progressively responsible experience in the management of
economic, social security and/or financial policies and activities for governmental or intergovernmental
organizations or for substantial private concerns, including a proven track record of extensive relevant experience in
the management of the investment of complex portfolios of assets of various classes, such as pension funds,
including their risk management, and in financial markets. Demonstrated direct knowledge of and experience in
managing financial, economic and investment policies, including:
(i) Defining and overseeing investment policy for substantial and diversified investment portfolios having
long-term return objectives, including policies for investment objectives, risk appetite and tolerance, the risk
framework, the investment milieu, restrictions on investments and social responsibility considerations;
(ii) Developing strategic asset allocation for portfolios aiming for long-term rates of return, particularly for
defined-benefit pension or other similar long-term social security and similar benefit schemes where longterm asset/liability management considerations are paramount;
(iii) Developing, implementing and monitoring investment strategies and overseeing research on economic
and other trends affecting financial markets;
(iv) Managing interdisciplinary and internationally diverse teams of financial professionals;
(v) Reporting to and coordinating with governing organs (e.g., legislative bodies, boards and committees)
on investment, financial and/or technical matters;
(c)

Appointment and terms of service:

(i) The representative of the Secretary-General shall be appointed for a term of up to 5 years, with the
possibility of reappointment(s) up to a total maximum service of 10 years;
(ii) The representative may be removed by the Secretary-General, in accordance with existing procedures,
for unsatisfactory performance in discharging his or her responsibilities;
(d) Languages. English and French are the working languages of the United Nations Secretariat. For the
post, fluency in oral and written English is required. Knowledge of other official languages is desirable.
90

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 68/258 B
A/RES/68/258B

Adopted at the 99th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2014, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/672/Add.1, para. 6)

68/258. Financing of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
B28
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei29 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,30
Recalling Security Council resolution 1990 (2011) of 27 June 2011, by which the Council established the
United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei for a period of six months, and the subsequent resolutions by
which the Council extended the mandate of the Force, the latest of which was resolution 2156 (2014) of 29 May
2014, by which the Council extended the mandate of the Force until 15 October 2014,
Recalling also its resolution 66/241 A of 24 December 2011 on the financing of the Force and its subsequent
resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 68/258 A of 27 December 2013,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Force with the financial resources necessary to enable it to
fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of formulating future budget
proposals in full accordance with the provisions of its resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006,
61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289 of 30 June 2011 and 66/264 of 21 June 2012, as well as
other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei as at
30 April 2014, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 41.2 million United States dollars,
representing some 6 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only 58 Member States
have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to
ensure payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed contributions in full,
and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure payment of their assessed contributions to
the Force in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as
regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing to overdue payments by
Member States of their assessments;
5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and nondiscriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate resources for the
effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
_______________
28
Resolution 68/258, in section VI of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 49 and
corrigenda (A/68/49 and A/68/49 (Vol. I)/Corr.1 and 3), vol. I, becomes resolution 68/258 A.
29
A/68/604 and A/68/728.
30
A/68/782/Add.4.

91

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are based on the relevant
legislative mandates;
8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,30 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of its
resolutions 59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269, 65/289 and 66/264;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the Force is administered
with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013
11. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the Force for the period
from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013;31
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015
12. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
the amount of 343,815,800 dollars for the period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015, inclusive of 318,925,200 dollars
for the maintenance of the Force, 20,636,700 dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations
and 4,253,900 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy;
Financing of the appropriation
13. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 99,817,490 dollars for the period from 1 July
to 15 October 2014, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 67/239 of 24 December 2012, taking into
account the scale of assessments for 2014, as set out in its resolution 67/238 of 24 December 2012;
14. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955,
there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 13 above, their
respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 1,094,633 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment
income of 604,045 dollars approved for the Force, the prorated share of 380,265 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 110,323 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
15. Further decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 243,998,310 dollars for the period
from 16 October 2014 to 30 June 2015, at a monthly rate of 28,651,317 dollars, in accordance with the levels
updated in its resolution 67/239, taking into account the scale of assessments for 2014 and 2015, as set out in its
resolution 67/238, subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Force;
16. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 15 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 2,675,767 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 1,476,555 dollars
approved for the Force, the prorated share of 929,535 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the support account and the prorated share of 269,677 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the United Nations Logistics Base;
17. Also decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the Force, there
shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 13 above, their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of 6,992,400 dollars in respect of the financial period ended
30 June 2013, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 67/239, taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2013, as set out in its resolution 67/238;
_______________
31

92

A/68/604.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

18. Further decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the Force,
there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the unencumbered balance and
other income in the amount of 6,992,400 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2013, in
accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 17 above;
19. Decides that the increase of 178,700 dollars in the estimated staff assessment income in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2013 shall be added to the credits in the amount of 6,992,400 dollars referred to in
paragraphs 17 and 18 above;
20. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from other active
peacekeeping missions;
21. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure the safety and
security of all personnel participating in the Force under the auspices of the United Nations, bearing in mind
paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
22. Invites voluntary contributions to the Force in cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable to
the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance with the procedure and practices
established by the General Assembly;
23. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei”.
RESOLUTION 68/259 B
A/RES/68/259B

Adopted at the 99th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2014, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/680/Add.1, para. 6)

68/259. Financing of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
B32
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali33 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,34
Recalling Security Council resolution 2100 (2013) of 25 April 2013, by which the Council established the
Mission, requested the Secretary-General to subsume the United Nations Office in Mali into the Mission, with the
Mission assuming responsibility for the discharge of the mandated tasks of the Office, as from 25 April 2013, and
decided that authority be transferred from the African-led International Support Mission in Mali to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali on 1 July 2013, at which point the latter would
commence implementation of its mandate as defined in paragraphs 16 and 17 of resolution 2100 (2013), for an
initial period of 12 months, and subsequent resolution 2164 (2014) of 25 June 2014, by which the Council extended
the mandate of the Mission until 30 June 2015,
Recalling also its resolutions 67/286 of 28 June 2013 and 68/259 A of 27 December 2013 on the financing of
the Mission,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
_______________
32
Resolution 68/259, in section VI of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 49 and
corrigenda (A/68/49 and A/68/49 (Vol. I)/Corr.1 and 3), vol. I, becomes resolution 68/259 A.
33
A/68/823.
34
A/68/782/Add.13.

93

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources necessary to enable it
to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of formulating future budget
proposals in full accordance with the provisions of its resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006,
61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289 of 30 June 2011 and 66/264 of 21 June 2012, as well as
other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali as at 30 April 2014, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 156.8 million United
States dollars, representing some 23.1 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only 58
Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those
in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed contributions in full,
and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure payment of their assessed contributions to
the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as
regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing to overdue payments by
Member States of their assessments;
5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and nondiscriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate resources for the
effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are based on the relevant
legislative mandates;
8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,34 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the Mission is administered
with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of its
resolutions 59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269, 65/289 and 66/264;
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015
11. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali the amount of 895,534,000 dollars for the period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015,
inclusive of 830,701,700 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission, 53,752,200 dollars for the support account for
peacekeeping operations and 11,080,100 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy;
Financing of the appropriation
12. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 895,534,000 dollars for the period from
1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 67/239 of 24 December
2012, taking into account the scale of assessments for 2014 and 2015, as set out in its resolution 67/238 of
24 December 2012;
13. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955,
there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 12 above, their
respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 14,340,200 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment
income of 9,938,700 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 3,411,600 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 989,900 dollars of the estimated
staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
94

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

14. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from other active
peacekeeping missions;
15. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure the safety and
security of all personnel participating in the Mission under the auspices of the United Nations, bearing in mind
paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
16. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable
to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance with the procedure and practices
established by the General Assembly;
17. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali”.
RESOLUTION 68/260 B
A/RES/68/260B

Adopted at the 99th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2014, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/671/Add.1, para. 6)

68/260. Financing of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
B35
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force36 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,37
Recalling Security Council resolution 350 (1974) of 31 May 1974 regarding the establishment of the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate
of the Force, the latest of which was resolution 2163 (2014) of 25 June 2014,
Recalling also its resolution 3211 B (XXIX) of 29 November 1974 on the financing of the United Nations
Emergency Force and of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force and its subsequent resolutions thereon,
the latest of which was resolution 68/260 A of 27 December 2013,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force with the
financial resources necessary to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of formulating future budget
proposals in full accordance with the provisions of its resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006,
61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289 of 30 June 2011 and 66/264 of 21 June 2012, as well as
other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force as at
30 April 2014, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 28.5 million United States dollars,
representing some 2 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only 63 Member States
have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to
ensure payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
_______________
35
Resolution 68/260, in section VI of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 49 and
corrigenda (A/68/49 and A/68/49 (Vol. I)/Corr.1 and 3), vol. I, becomes resolution 68/260 A.
36
A/68/596 and A/68/725.
37
A/68/782/Add.6.

95

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed contributions in full,
and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure payment of their assessed contributions to
the Force in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as
regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing to overdue payments by
Member States of their assessments;
5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and nondiscriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate resources for the
effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are based on the relevant
legislative mandates;
8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,37 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of its
resolutions 59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269, 65/289 and 66/264;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the Force is administered
with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013
11. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the Force for the period
from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013;38
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015
12. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
the amount of 69,114,400 dollars for the period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015, inclusive of 64,110,900 dollars
for the maintenance of the Force, 4,148,400 dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations
and 855,100 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy;
Financing of the appropriation
13. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 34,557,200 dollars for the period from 1 July
to 31 December 2014, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 67/239 of 24 December 2012, taking
into account the scale of assessments for 2014, as set out in its resolution 67/238 of 24 December 2012;
14. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955,
there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 13 above, their
respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 913,100 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income
of 743,250 dollars approved for the Force, the prorated share of 131,650 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 38,200 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
15. Further decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 34,557,200 dollars for the period
from 1 January to 30 June 2015, at a monthly rate of 5,759,533 dollars, in accordance with the levels updated in its
resolution 67/239, taking into account the scale of assessments for 2015, as set out in its resolution 67/238, subject to
a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Force;
16. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 15 above, their respective share in the Tax
_______________
38

96

A/68/596.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Equalization Fund of 913,100 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 743,250 dollars
approved for the Force, the prorated share of 131,650 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the support account and the prorated share of 38,200 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the United Nations Logistics Base;
17. Also decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the Force, there
shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 13 above, their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of 668,200 dollars in respect of the financial period ended
30 June 2013, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 67/239, taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2013, as set out in its resolution 67/238;
18. Further decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the Force,
there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the unencumbered balance and
other income in the amount of 668,200 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2013, in accordance
with the scheme set out in paragraph 17 above;
19. Decides that the decrease of 11,200 dollars in the estimated staff assessment income in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2013 shall be set off against the credits in the amount of 668,200 dollars referred to
in paragraphs 17 and 18 above;
20. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from other active
peacekeeping missions;
21. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure the safety and
security of all personnel participating in the Force under the auspices of the United Nations, bearing in mind
paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
22. Invites voluntary contributions to the Force in cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable to
the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance with the procedure and practices
established by the General Assembly;
23. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled “Financing
of the United Nations peacekeeping forces in the Middle East”, the sub-item entitled “United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force”.
RESOLUTION 68/263
A/RES/68/263

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 9 April 2014, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/691/Add.1, para. 10)

68/263. Procurement
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on United Nations procurement activities,39 the pilot
project on the independent procurement challenge system,40 the response to the comprehensive report of the Office of
Internal Oversight Services on United Nations procurement activities,41 the procurement governance arrangements
within the United Nations42 and sustainable procurement,43 the related reports of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions44 and the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the audit of
procurement management in the Secretariat,45
_______________
39

A/64/284 and A/67/683 and Corr.1 and 2.
A/67/683/Add.1.
41
A/67/683/Add.2.
42
A/64/284/Add.1.
43
A/64/284/Add.2.
44
A/64/501 and A/67/801.
45
A/64/369.
40

97

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Having also considered the reports of the Joint Inspection Unit on offshoring in United Nations system
organizations46 and the environmental profile of the United Nations system organizations,47 as well as the related
notes by the Secretary-General transmitting his comments and those of the United Nations System Chief Executives
Board for Coordination thereon,48
Requests the Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive report on United Nations procurement activities
for consideration by the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session.
RESOLUTION 68/264
A/RES/68/264

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 9 April 2014, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/691/Add.1, para. 10)

68/264. Progress towards an accountability system in the United Nations Secretariat
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 59/272 of 23 December 2004 and 60/254 of 8 May 2006, section I of its
resolution 60/260 of 8 May 2006 and its resolutions 60/283 of 7 July 2006, 61/245 of 22 December 2006, 63/276 of
7 April 2009, 64/259 of 29 March 2010, 66/257 of 9 April 2012 and 67/253 of 12 April 2013,
Having considered the third progress report of the Secretary-General on the accountability system in the
United Nations Secretariat49 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,50
Reaffirming its commitment to strengthening accountability in the United Nations Secretariat and the
accountability of the Secretary-General for the performance of the Secretariat to all Member States,
Emphasizing that accountability is a central pillar of effective and efficient management that requires attention
and strong commitment at all levels of the Secretariat, especially at the highest level,
Recognizing and reaffirming the important role of the oversight bodies in the development of an
accountability system that is relevant to the United Nations,
1. Takes note of the third progress report of the Secretary-General on the accountability system in the
United Nations Secretariat;49
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,50 subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3. Emphasizes the importance of promoting a culture of accountability, results-based management,
enterprise risk management and internal control at all levels in the Secretariat through the continued leadership and
commitment of senior managers, and reiterates its request that the Secretary-General take appropriate measures to
that end, including the training of relevant staff;
4.

Reiterates the provisions of paragraphs 4, 5, 9, 10, 12, 13, 15, 17 and 19 of section I of its resolution 66/257;

5. Stresses the role and responsibility of the Management Committee in promoting and advancing the
accountability system as a whole;
6. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue strengthening and improving the accountability
framework by taking advantage of the benefits related to the deployment of the International Public Sector
Accounting Standards and Umoja, and requests him to report thereon in the context of the next progress report on
accountability;
_______________
46

A/65/63.
A/65/346.
48
A/65/63/Add.1 and A/65/346/Add.1.
49
A/68/697.
50
A/68/783.
47

98

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

7. Reaffirms that results-based management and performance reporting are essential pillars of a comprehensive
accountability framework;
8. Reiterates that results-based management will require the Organization to create a sustained focus on
results, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to take concrete measures to achieve a cultural change
throughout the Organization;
9. Also reiterates the provisions of paragraph 29 of section I of its resolution 66/257 and paragraph 6 (b) of
its resolution 67/253;
10. Welcomes the efforts made by the Secretary-General to implement the results-based management
framework at the United Nations in a phased manner, and requests him to implement the recommendations of the
results-based-management working group, taking into account the lessons learned and challenges related to the
implementation, as referred to in the report of the Secretary-General;
11. Recalls the recommendations contained in paragraph 16 of the report of the Advisory Committee,51 as
approved by the General Assembly in its resolution 64/259, and reiterates its request to the Secretary-General in
this regard;
12. Also recalls paragraph 11 of its resolution 64/259, and reiterates its request that the Secretary-General
identify appropriate methods and tools to portray the efficiency with which the Secretariat undertakes its work;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to promote a culture of self-evaluation throughout the
Organization, to continue to mainstream the use of relevant monitoring and evaluation tools in programme planning
and implementation, to continue to provide staff with adequate training, as appropriate, and to include in his report
on the implementation of the present resolution information on measures taken in this regard;
14. Recalls paragraph 7 of its resolution 67/253, notes the progress made by the Secretary-General towards
the implementation of enterprise risk management, and urges him to complete the current Secretariat-wide risk
assessment as a matter of priority;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to include the outcome of the Secretariat-wide risk assessment in the
next progress report on accountability, including information on the development of risk registers, response plans
and a comprehensive risk treatment plan;
16. Reiterates that compacts and end-of-year assessments are unique accountability tools for senior
managers and contribute to transparency in the Organization;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to consider the inclusion in the senior managers’ compacts of a new
standard managerial indicator related to the issuance of official documentation to intergovernmental bodies and
General Assembly committees and to report thereon in the context of the next progress report on accountability;
18. Reiterates its requests to the Secretary-General to take further concrete measures to ensure that the
compacts system becomes a meaningful and powerful instrument of accountability, to take actions to address
systemic issues that prevent managers from meeting their targets and to report to the General Assembly on the
progress achieved in this regard in the context of the next progress report on accountability;
19. Recalls paragraph 20 of its resolution 66/257 and paragraph 21 of the report of the Advisory
Committee,50 and notes with concern that the current appraisal system lacks credibility;
20. Also recalls paragraphs 5 and 7 of section I of its resolution 68/252 of 27 December 2013, and looks
forward to considering the comprehensive performance management proposal of the Secretary-General under the
agenda item on human resources management at the sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly;
21. Further recalls paragraph 15 of the report of the Advisory Committee, encourages the Secretary-General
to ensure the full implementation of the zero-tolerance policy of the Organization regarding any kind of sexual
exploitation or abuse, and looks forward to its consideration of this matter in the context of the next report on crosscutting issues related to peacekeeping operations;
_______________
51

A/64/683 and Corr.1.

99

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

22. Emphasizes the importance of establishing and fully implementing real, effective and efficient
mechanisms that foster institutional and personal accountability at all levels;
23. Welcomes the ongoing efforts and recent initiatives undertaken by the Secretariat to strengthen ethics in
the Organization, and urges the timely implementation of the proposed action plan;
24. Emphasizes the importance of enhancing the processes and responses of the Organization to ensure that
it encourages the reporting of serious misconduct, protects whistle-blowers from retaliation and intervenes to
prevent retaliation from occurring;
25. Looks forward to the results and outcomes of the comprehensive review of the regulatory framework for
the updating of the Secretary-General’s bulletin on protection against retaliation for reporting misconduct and for
cooperating with duly authorized audits or investigations;52
26. Recognizes the importance of criminal accountability of United Nations officials and experts on mission,
and reaffirms the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, which provide the basis for the guidance of the
Secretary-General in this regard;
27. Requests the Secretary-General to take appropriate measures to hold all staff, in particular senior
managers, accountable for mismanagement and wrongful or improper decisions and to report cases handled by the
Secretary-General and the types of disciplinary measures that have been imposed;
28. Stresses the need also to address poor decision-making in an effective manner, in particular to reduce
such instances by sharing lessons learned and best practices;
29. Emphasizes that the timely submission of documents is an important aspect of the Secretariat’s
accountability to Member States;
30. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at the first part of its resumed sixtyninth session on the implementation of the present resolution, and decides to keep under review the frequency of
future progress reports.
RESOLUTION 68/265
A/RES/68/265

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 9 April 2014, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/690/Add.1, para. 7)

68/265. Mobility framework
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 67/255 of 12 April 2013 and 68/252 of 27 December 2013 as well as its decision 68/549
of 27 December 2013,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General entitled “Towards a global, dynamic and adaptable
workforce: mobility”,53 the letter dated 22 October 2013 from the President of the General Assembly addressed to
the Chair of the Fifth Committee54 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions,55
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General entitled “Towards a global, dynamic and adaptable
workforce: mobility”53 and the letter dated 22 October 2013 from the President of the General Assembly addressed
to the Chair of the Fifth Committee;54
_______________
52

ST/SGB/2005/21.
A/68/358.
54
A/C.5/68/10.
55
A/68/601.
53

100

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

2. Recalls its resolutions expressing support for staff mobility in the Organization, in particular section IV
of its resolution 67/255, and welcomes the efforts made by the Secretary-General in submitting his refined managed
mobility framework, as well as an alternative proposal, to the General Assembly;
3.

Approves the refined managed mobility framework, subject to the provisions of the present resolution;

4. Emphasizes that the managed mobility framework should ensure a fair sharing of the burden of service
in hardship duty stations;
5. Recalls regulation 1.2 (c) of the United Nations Staff Regulations, and in this regard underlines that the
calculation of post occupancy for staff members under the managed mobility framework shall include time served
in their current posts;
6. Decides that staff members who have reached the maximum occupancy limit when managed mobility
comes into effect for their job network will not be subject to reassignment in the first year of operationalization in
that job network;
7. Authorizes the Secretary-General to implement the refined mobility framework with a view to
commencing mobility for one job network in 2016 and one in 2017, followed by two job networks each year
thereafter;
8. Decides that the number of geographic moves for the job networks in 2016 and 2017 shall be no greater
than the average number of geographic moves in those networks in 2014 and 2015;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that managed mobility shall not have a negative effect on
mandate implementation under the peace and security, development and human rights pillars of the United
Nations;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General, when considering applicants for vacancies, to give equal treatment
to internal and external candidates;
11. Acknowledges that additional information is required on the managed mobility framework, and requests
the Secretary-General to include in his first annual report, to be submitted to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth
session, inter alia, data and information on the following:
(a) Current staff mobility statistics and an analysis of trends, including the tracking of actual costs related to
geographic and non-geographic moves and of vacancy rates by job network and other potential costs that may arise;
(b) The number of posts open to external candidates and the number of external candidates selected in 2013
and the first quarter of 2014;
(c) The number of staff moves within and among duty stations and the direct and indirect costs of each
move by job network in 2013 and the first quarter of 2014;
(d) An explanation of the criteria to be applied in the implementation of paragraph 8 above should the
number of staff reaching the post occupancy limit exceed the average number of geographic moves in 2014
and 2015;
(e)
(f)
panel;

The comprehensive list of non-rotational positions;
The terms of reference and operating guidelines of the job network boards and the special constraints

(g) An analysis of the link between the recruitment and selection recommendations of the job network
boards and the future workforce planning agenda for the Organization;
(h) An analysis of how the recommendations of the job network boards would incorporate the
Organization’s gender balance and geographical representation targets and ensure the equal treatment of internal and
external candidates;
101

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

(i)

The training and knowledge management plans associated with the refined framework;

(j) The structure and reporting lines involved in the functioning of the job network boards, including all
expected numbers, configurations and roles of staff members involved in the semi-annual staffing exercises;
(k)

Transitional measures to ensure the sustainable implementation of mobility for staff;

12. Decides that the job network boards shall include a staff representative in an observer capacity;
13. Also decides that the minimum post occupancy limits for duty stations classified as D and E will be one
year and for all other duty stations will be two years, with the exception of special circumstances in which the
movement of staff members earlier than the minimum post occupancy limit is necessary for their health and safety
or for the prompt delivery of mandates;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the fair treatment of all staff members in the context of the
reassignment pool related to the managed mobility framework;
15. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to explore ways of assisting spouses and children of
staff members in resolving family issues arising from mobility requirements;
16. Further requests the Secretary-General to identify the number of posts open to external candidates and
the number of external candidates selected in 2014 and the first quarter of 2015 and to report thereon in his second
annual report, to be submitted to the General Assembly at its seventieth session;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to identify the number of staff moves within and among duty stations
and the direct and indirect costs of each move by job network in 2014 and the first quarter of 2015 and to report
thereon in his second annual report;
18. Also requests the Secretary-General to provide a full estimate of and rationale for the financial resources
required for mobility in 2016 and 2017, including requests for any additional geographic moves necessary to
achieve the strategic objectives of mobility, in his regular and peacekeeping-related budget requests over the course
of that period;
19. Recalls paragraph 78 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,55 and, in the context of the managed mobility framework, emphasizes the importance of a thorough
reform of performance management, to be implemented at the same time as the framework, and requests the
Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at the main part of its sixty-ninth session an update on
progress and further proposals in this regard;
20. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly annual reports on mobility until its
seventy-second session, a five-year comprehensive review of the mobility framework at its seventy-third session
and biennial reports on mobility thereafter.

RESOLUTION 68/266
A/RES/68/266

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 9 April 2014, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/819,
para. 6)

68/266. Joint Inspection Unit
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the Joint Inspection Unit, in particular resolutions 31/192 of
22 December 1976, 50/233 of 7 June 1996, 54/16 of 29 October 1999, 57/284 A and B of 20 December 2002,
58/286 of 8 April 2004, 59/267 of 23 December 2004, 60/258 of 8 May 2006, 61/238 of 22 December 2006, 61/260
of 4 April 2007, 62/226 of 22 December 2007, 62/246 of 3 April 2008, 64/262 of 29 March 2010, 65/270 of 4 April
2011, 66/259 of 9 April 2012 and 67/256 of 12 April 2013,
102

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Reaffirming the statute of the Unit56 and the unique role of the Unit as the only external and independent
system-wide inspection, evaluation and investigation body,
Having considered the report of the Unit for 2013 and programme of work for 201457 and the note by the
Secretary-General on the report of the Unit for 2013,58
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Joint Inspection Unit for 2013 and programme of work
for 2014;57
2.

Takes note of the note by the Secretary-General on the report of the Unit for 2013;58

3. Reaffirms that oversight is a shared responsibility of Member States, the organizations and the internal
and external oversight bodies;
4. Stresses the importance of the oversight functions of the Unit in identifying concrete managerial,
administrative and programming questions within the participating organizations and providing the General
Assembly and other legislative organs of participating organizations with practical and action-oriented
recommendations to improve and strengthen the governance of the United Nations as a whole;
5. Recognizes the need to continue to enhance the impact of the Unit on the management efficiency and
transparency of the participating organizations within the United Nations system;
6.

Notes the need to enhance the effectiveness of the Unit and its system-wide oversight capability;

7. Welcomes the reform efforts undertaken by the Unit to better serve the interests of the participating
organizations and Member States, including a self-evaluation, a peer review and the completion of norms and
standards, in this regard encourages the Unit to continue its efforts, including on selection of the subjects for its
programme of work, and looks forward to receiving updates in the context of the annual reports of the Unit;
8. Recalls section II of its resolution 61/238 and section II of its resolution 64/262, and in this regard
reaffirms the existing procedure for the appointment of the inspectors in accordance with article 3 of the statute of
the Unit;56
9. Reiterates its request to the executive heads of the participating organizations to fully comply with the
statutory procedures for consideration of the reports of the Unit and, in particular, to submit their comments,
including information on what they intend to do regarding the recommendations of the Unit, to distribute reports in
time for their consideration by legislative organs and to provide information on the steps to be taken to implement
those recommendations accepted by the legislative organs and the executive heads of participating organizations;
10. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General and the other executive heads of the participating
organizations to fully assist the Unit with the timely provision of all information requested by it;
11. Reiterates its request to the Unit to consider optimizing the number of projects in its programme of work
through prioritization;
12. Also reiterates its request to the Unit to issue its reports well in advance of meetings of the legislative
organs of participating organizations so that the reports can be thoroughly and effectively utilized in their
deliberations;
13. Reaffirms article 20 of the statute of the Unit, in which it is stipulated that the Unit shall be invited to be
represented at meetings when its budget estimates are being discussed;
14. Requests the heads of participating organizations to make full use of the web-based system of the Unit
and to provide an in-depth analysis of how the recommendations of the Unit are being implemented;
15. Welcomes the benefit and utility of the web-based system for tracking recommendations.
_______________
56

Resolution 31/192, annex.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 34 (A/68/34).
58
A/68/739.
57

103

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 68/267
A/RES/68/267

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 9 April 2014, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/683/Add.1, para. 6)

68/267. Construction of a new facility for the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals,
Arusha branch
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 66/240 B of 21 June 2012, 67/244 A of 24 December 2012, 67/244 B of 12 April
2013 and 68/257 of 27 December 2013,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General59 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,60
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;59

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions;60
3. Notes with appreciation the continued efforts of the Government of the United Republic of Tanzania in
facilitating the construction project;
4. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to include local knowledge and capacity in the
implementation of the project;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to take all measures necessary to mitigate potential risks and to ensure
that the construction project is monitored closely and is completed within the approved timeline and resources;
6. Notes the ongoing consultations with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the
Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994 and the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991 with respect to the use of useable furniture and equipment of the
Tribunals for the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, and in this regard encourages the
Secretary-General to continue to explore the possibilities for the use of such furniture and equipment and to report
thereon in the context of future progress reports;
7. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to apply flexible use of office space in the Arusha branch
project, upon approval by the General Assembly of flexible workspace arrangements in the Secretariat;
8. Notes that an environmental impact assessment will be carried out to assess the potential hazards and
impact of the construction, and looks forward to receiving updates in this regard in the context of the next progress
report;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure that the procurement of goods and services for the
construction project is carried out in strict compliance with the existing regulations, rules and relevant provisions of
General Assembly resolutions governing procurement in the United Nations;
10. Reaffirms paragraph 33 of its resolution 62/269 of 20 June 2008;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to update Member States regularly, through the Office of
Central Support Services of the Department of Management of the Secretariat, on the progress of the construction
project;
_______________
59
60

104

A/68/724.
A/68/777.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

12. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at the first part of its resumed
sixty-ninth session a progress report on the implementation of the project, outlining, inter alia, the project
expenditures and total costs.
RESOLUTION 68/280
A/RES/68/280

Adopted at the 99th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2014, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/68/689/Add.2, para. 7)

68/280. Estimates in respect of special political missions, good offices and other political initiatives
authorized by the General Assembly and/or the Security Council
The General Assembly,
Recalling section VI of its resolution 68/247 A of 27 December 2013, its resolution 68/248 A of 27 December
2013 and section II of its resolution 68/247 B of 9 April 2014,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the estimates in respect of special political
missions, good offices and other political initiatives authorized by the General Assembly and/or the Security
Council concerning the Office of the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Yemen, the Office of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sahel, the Panel of Experts on Yemen, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia and the United Nations Support Mission in Libya61 and the related reports of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,62
1.

Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General;61

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the reports of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,62 subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to strictly abide by all relevant General Assembly resolutions and related
internal guidance on the standard of accommodation for air travel in the preparation of future budgets;
4.

Takes note of paragraphs 12 and 13 of the report of the Advisory Committee;63

5. Recalls paragraph 5 of the report of the Advisory Committee,63 and notes that the guard unit of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia will provide “inner-ring” static protection within Mogadishu
International Airport and that the associated costs are included in the resources for the Mission;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to provide to the General Assembly for consideration at its sixty-ninth
session detailed information on support requirements for the Mission provided by the United Nations Support
Office for the African Union Mission in Somalia;
7. Decides to adjust the resource requirements for military and police personnel relating to the guard unit to
reflect the delayed deployment of personnel;
8. Takes note of paragraph 9 of the report of the Advisory Committee,64 and decides to apply a vacancy
rate of 25 per cent for the period from May to December 2014 in respect of the additional posts in the Office of the
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Yemen;
9. Encourages close collaboration between the security and close protection operations of the Office of the
Special Adviser and the Panel of Experts on Yemen, in order to avoid, to the extent possible, any duplication;
_______________
61

A/68/327/Add.10–12.
A/68/7/Add.26–28.
63
A/68/7/Add.26.
64
A/68/7/Add.27.
62

105

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

10. Recalls paragraph 14 of the report of the Advisory Committee,64 and in this regard decides to defer
consideration of this matter to the main part of its sixty-ninth session;
11. Also recalls paragraph 9 of the report of the Advisory Committee,65 decides to consider the question of
temporary duty assignments at its sixty-ninth session, while maintaining existing arrangements in the interim, and
emphasizes that such assignments are intended to meet temporary requirements for up to 90 days;
12. Takes note of paragraph 15 of the report of the Advisory Committee,65 and decides to establish one Local
level position in the Transport and Movement Control Section of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya;
13. Decides to approve the total amount of 47,693,200 United States dollars net for the budgets of the five
special political missions authorized by the General Assembly and/or the Security Council included in the reports of
the Secretary-General;61
14. Also decides to approve a charge totalling 47,693,200 dollars net against the provision appropriated for
special political missions under section 3, Political affairs, of the programme budget for the biennium 2014–2015.
RESOLUTION 68/281
A/RES/68/281

Adopted at the 99th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2014, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/918,
para. 12)

68/281. Rates of reimbursement to troop-contributing countries
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 65/289 of 30 June 2011 and 67/261 of 10 May 2013,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the results of the revised survey to establish the
standard rate of reimbursement to troop-contributing countries, as approved by the General Assembly in its
resolution 67/261 on the report of the Senior Advisory Group on rates of reimbursement to troop-contributing
countries,66 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,67
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;66

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions;67
3. Expresses its appreciation to the sample countries for their active participation in the revised survey and
to the Secretary-General for facilitating the collection of data;
4. Reaffirms its resolution 67/261, welcomes the results of the revised survey, and decides to establish a
single rate of reimbursement to countries contributing contingent personnel to United Nations field operations in the
amount of 1,332 United States dollars per person per month as from 1 July 2014, increasing to 1,365 dollars per
person per month as from 1 July 2016 and increasing to 1,410 dollars per person per month as from 1 July 2017;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to make such payments as he authorizes for the premium payments68
from the accounts of the qualifying missions, and also requests the Secretary-General to report on such payments
and on any implications for approved funding levels in the report on the budget performance of each peacekeeping
operation.
_______________
65

A/68/7/Add.28.
A/68/813.
67
A/68/859.
68
See A/68/813, paras. 59–69.
66

106

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 68/282
A/RES/68/282

Adopted at the 99th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2014, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/918,
para. 12)

68/282. Triennial review of the rates and standards for reimbursement to Member States for contingentowned equipment
The General Assembly,
Having considered the letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Chair of the 2014 Working Group on
Contingent-Owned Equipment to the Chair of the Fifth Committee transmitting the report of the Working Group,69
the report of the Secretary-General on the triennial review of the rates and standards for reimbursement to Member
States for contingent-owned equipment70 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions,71
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General70 and the report of the 2014 Working Group on
Contingent-Owned Equipment;69
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,71 and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to include in the performance report of each peacekeeping operation any
implications of costs for the rotation of aged contingent-owned equipment for approved funding levels.
RESOLUTION 68/283
A/RES/68/283

Adopted at the 99th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2014, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/918,
para. 12)

68/283. Support account for peacekeeping operations
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 45/258 of 3 May 1991, 47/218 A of 23 December 1992, 48/226 A of 23 December
1993, 50/221 B of 7 June 1996, section I of its resolution 55/238 of 23 December 2000, its resolutions 55/271 of
14 June 2001, 56/241 of 24 December 2001, 56/293 of 27 June 2002, 57/318 of 18 June 2003, 58/298 of 18 June
2004, 59/301 of 22 June 2005, 60/268 of 30 June 2006, 61/279 of 29 June 2007, 62/250 of 20 June 2008, 63/287
of 30 June 2009, 64/271 of 24 June 2010, 65/290 of 30 June 2011, 66/265 of 21 June 2012 and 67/287 of 28 June
2013 and its other relevant resolutions, as well as its decisions 49/469 of 23 December 1994 and 50/473 of
23 December 1995,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the support account for
peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 201372 and on the budget for the support
account for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015,73 the report of the
Independent Audit Advisory Committee on the proposed budget of the Office of Internal Oversight Services under
the support account for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 201574 and the related
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,75
_______________
69

A/C.5/68/22.
A/68/830.
71
A/68/867.
72
A/68/648 and Add.1.
73
A/68/742.
74
A/68/773.
75
A/68/861.
70

107

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Recognizing the importance of the United Nations being able to respond and deploy rapidly to a peacekeeping
operation upon the adoption of a relevant resolution of the Security Council, within 30 days for traditional
peacekeeping operations and 90 days for complex peacekeeping operations,
Recognizing also the need for adequate support during all phases of peacekeeping operations, including the
liquidation and termination phases,
Mindful that the level of the support account should broadly correspond to the mandate, number, size and
complexity of peacekeeping missions,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget for the support account for peacekeeping
operations for the period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 201573 and the report of the Independent Audit Advisory
Committee on the proposed budget of the Office of Internal Oversight Services under the support account for
peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015;74
2. Reaffirms its role in carrying out a thorough analysis and approval of human and financial resources and
policies with a view to ensuring the full, effective and efficient implementation of all mandated programmes and
activities and the implementation of policies in this regard;
3. Also reaffirms that the Fifth Committee is the appropriate Main Committee of the General Assembly
entrusted with responsibility for administrative and budgetary matters;
4.

Further reaffirms rule 153 of its rules of procedure;

5. Reaffirms that the support account funds shall be used for the sole purpose of financing human resources
and non-human resource requirements for backstopping and supporting peacekeeping operations at Headquarters,
and that any changes in this limitation require the prior approval of the General Assembly;
6. Also reaffirms the need for adequate funding for the backstopping of peacekeeping operations, as well as
the need for full justification for that funding in support account budget submissions;
7. Further reaffirms the need for effective and efficient administration and financial management of
peacekeeping operations, and urges the Secretary-General to continue to identify measures to increase the
productivity and efficiency of the support account;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of its
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006, 61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010,
65/289 of 30 June 2011 and 66/264 of 21 June 2012 and its other relevant resolutions;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,75 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
10. Decides to maintain, for the financial period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015, the funding mechanism
for the support account used in the current period, from 1 July 2013 to 30 June 2014, as approved in paragraph 3 of
its resolution 50/221 B;
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013
11. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the support account for
peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013;72
Budget estimates for the financial period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015
12. Approves the requirements for the support account in the amount of 326,047,300 United States dollars
for the financial period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015, inclusive of the amount of 20,054,700 dollars for the
Umoja enterprise resource planning project and 821,500 dollars for information and systems security, including
1,292 continuing posts and 38 new temporary posts, as well as the redeployment, reassignment and reclassification
of posts, as set out in annex I to the present resolution, 105 continuing and 23 new general temporary assistance
positions and 77 person-months, as set out in annex II, as well as related post and non-post requirements;
108

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Financing of the support account for peacekeeping operations for the financial periods from 1 July 2012 to
30 June 2013 and from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015
13. Decides that the requirements for the support account for peacekeeping operations for the financial
period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015 shall be financed as follows:
(a) An amount of 11,692,300 dollars to be assessed in respect of the financial period from 1 July 2012 to
30 June 2013;
(b) The amount of 1,323,200 dollars, comprising interest income of 451,700 dollars, other miscellaneous
income of 141,300 dollars and cancellation of prior-period obligations of 732,700 dollars, taking into account priorperiod adjustments of 2,500 dollars (decrease), to be applied to the resources required for the financial period from
1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013;
(c) The amount of 838,800 dollars, representing the excess of the authorized level of the Peacekeeping
Reserve Fund in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2013, to be applied to the resources required for the
financial period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015;
(d) The balance of 335,577,600 dollars to be prorated among the budgets of the active peacekeeping
operations for the financial period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015;
(e) The net estimated staff assessment income of 21,299,100 dollars, comprising the amount of 25,254,500
dollars for the financial period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015 and the decrease of 3,955,400 dollars in respect of
the financial period ended 30 June 2013, to be offset against the balance referred to in subparagraph (d) above, to be
prorated among the budgets of the individual active peacekeeping operations.
Annex I
A.

Posts to be established under the support account for peacekeeping operations for the period from
1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015
Posts

Organizational unit

Number Level

Function

Status

GTA conversion

Department of Peacekeeping Operations
Office of Operations

Office of Military Affairs

Office of Rule of Law and
Security Institutions

Africa II Division

1

D-1

Team Leader (MINUSMA
Integrated Operational Team)

1

P-5

Political Affairs Officer
GTA conversion
(MINUSMA Integrated Operational
Team)

Integrated Operational
Team

1

P-4

Military Liaison Officer
GTA conversion
(MINUSMA Integrated Operational
Team specialist)

Military Planning Service

1

GS (OL)

Team Assistant

GTA conversion

Current Military
Operations Service

1

GS (OL)

Team Assistant

GTA conversion

Office of the Assistant
Secretary-General

1

P-4

Security Sector Reform Officer
(MINUSMA)

GTA conversion

1

P-4

Rule of Law Officer (MINUSMA
Integrated Operational Team
specialist)

GTA conversion

1

P-4

Training Adviser (standing
police capacity)

New

1

P-3

Police Reform Officer (standing
police capacity)

New

1

P-3

Investigations Officer (standing
police capacity)

New

Police Division

109

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Posts
Organizational unit

Number Level

Criminal Law and Judicial
Advisory Service

Mine Action Service

Function

Status

1

P-4

Judicial Affairs Officer (Islamic law) GTA conversion

1

P-4

Judicial Affairs Officer
(MINUSMA)

GTA conversion

1

P-3

Corrections Officer (force
generation)

GTA conversion

1

P-3

Programme Officer (MINUSMA)

GTA conversion

Subtotal

14

MINUSMA Headquarters
Support Team

1

P-5

Senior Support Officer
(MINUSMA)

GTA conversion

2

P-4

Planning Officer (MINUSMA)

GTA conversion

1

GS (OL)

Administrative Assistant
(MINUSMA)

GTA conversion

Integrated Operational
Team

1

P-4

Support Officer (MINUSMA
Integrated Operational Team
specialist)

GTA conversion

Field Budget and Finance
Division

Budget and Performance
Reporting Service

1

P-4

Finance and Budget Officer
(MINUSMA)

GTA conversion

Logistics Support Division

Supply Section

1

P-4

Supply Officer (MINUSMA)

GTA conversion

Movement Control
Section

1

GS (OL)

Movement Control Assistant
(MINUSMA)

GTA conversion

1

P-4

Telecommunications Engineer
(MINUSMA)

GTA conversion

1

P-4

Capacity Development Officer

GTA conversion

1

GS (OL)

Training and Analysis Assistant

GTA conversion

Department of Field Support
Office of the UnderSecretary-General

Information and
Field Information and
Communications Technology Communications
Division
Technology Support
Section
Subtotal

9

Department of Management
Office of the UnderSecretary-General

Headquarters Committee
on Contracts

Office of Programme
Planning, Budget and
Accounts

Treasury

1

P-3

Finance Officer

GTA conversion

Office of Central Support
Services

Office of the Assistant
Secretary-General

1

P-3

Administrative Officer

GTA conversion

Procurement Division

3

P-3

Procurement Officer
(engineering/logistics/vehicles)

GTA conversion

Facilities and Commercial
Services Division

1

P-3

Office Space Planning Officer

GTA conversion

Subtotal

8

Office of Internal Oversight Services
Internal Audit Division

Headquarters

1

P-4

Information and Communications
Technology Auditor

GTA conversion

United Nations Support
Office for AMISOM

1

P-4

Resident Auditor

GTA conversion

Subtotal

110

2

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Posts
Organizational unit

Number Level

Function

Status

Office of the United Nations Ombudsman and
Mediation Services
Headquarters

Subtotal
Ethics Office

Subtotal

1

P-4

Case Officer

GTA conversion

1

GS (OL)

Administrative Assistant

GTA conversion

1

P-5

Corporate Ethics and Compliance
Officer

New

1

GS (OL)

Administrative Assistant

GTA conversion

Senior Human Rights Officer

New

2

2

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
Field Operations and
Technical Cooperation
Division

Peace Mission Support
Unit (Headquarters)

1

Subtotal

1

Total

38

P-5

Note: The specific assignment and location of each of the new posts is set out in the report of the Secretary-General (A/68/742) and
referenced in the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (A/68/861).
Abbreviations: AMISOM, African Union Mission in Somalia; GS (OL), General Service (Other level); GTA, general temporary
assistance; MINUSMA, United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali.

B.

Restructuring, redeployment, reassignment and reclassification of posts under the support account for
peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015

Restructuring
Department of Peacekeeping Operations/Office of Operations
Renaming of the existing Integrated Mission Planning Process Unit in the Office of the Assistant Secretary-General
to the Integrated Assessment and Planning Unit
Department of Peacekeeping Operations/Office of Operations/Africa II Division/ Somalia Coordination and
Planning Team
Redeployment of the Somalia Coordination and Planning Team and its 4 posts (D-1 Principal Officer, P-4 Political
Affairs Officer, P-3 Political Affairs Officer, GS (OL) Team Assistant) to the Office of the Director of the Africa I
Division
Department of Field Support/Logistics Support Division/Strategic Support Service/Engineering Section
Establishment of a Waste Management Unit in the Engineering Section
Redeployments
Department of Peacekeeping Operations/Office of Operations/Asia and Middle East Division/Asia Integrated
Operational Team
Redeployment of 1 post (P-5 Political Affairs Officer) to the Office of the Assistant Secretary-General

111

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Department of Peacekeeping Operations/Office of Operations/Africa II Division/West Africa Integrated
Operational Team
Redeployment of 1 post (P-4 Senior Political Affairs Officer) to the Mali Integrated Operational Team
Department of Peacekeeping Operations/Office of Operations/Europe and Latin America Division/Haiti Integrated
Operational Team
Redeployment of 2 posts (P-3 Political Affairs Officer, GS (OL) Team Assistant) to the Mali Integrated Operational
Team in the Africa II Division
Department of Field Support/Office of the Under-Secretary-General/Strategic Support Team
Redeployment of 1 post (P-3 Programme Officer) to the Audit Response and Boards of Inquiry Section
Department of Field Support/Field Budget and Finance Division/Office of the Director/Front office
Redeployment of 1 post (P-4 Finance Officer) to the Memorandum of Understanding and Claims Management
Section
Department of Field Support/Field Budget and Finance Division/Office of the Director
Redeployment of 1 post (P-3 Finance Officer) to the Capacity Development Section of the Budget and Performance
Reporting Service
Office of Internal Oversight Services/Internal Audit Division/Peacekeeping Audit Service at Headquarters
Redeployment of 1 post (D-1 Chief of Service) to the Resident Audit Office in Entebbe, Uganda
Office of Internal Oversight Services/Internal Audit Division/Resident Audit Office in the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti
Redeployment of 1 post (P-4 Resident Auditor) to the Resident Audit Office in the United Nations Support Office
for the African Union Mission in Somalia
Reassignments
Department of Field Support/Field Budget and Finance Division/Budget and Performance Reporting
Service/Capacity Development Section
Reassignment of 1 post (GS (OL) Computer Information Systems Assistant) to the Memorandum of Understanding
and Claims Management Section as an Administrative Assistant
Department of Field Support/Logistics Support Division/Logistics Operations Section
Reassignment of 1 post (P-4 Logistics Officer) to the Engineering Section of the Strategic Support Service as a
Waste Management Officer
Reclassification
Department of Field Support/Logistics Support Division/Strategic Transport Service/Air Transport Section
Reclassification of 1 post (P-5 Chief to D-1 Chief)
Abbreviations: GS (OL), General Service (Other level).

112

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Annex II
General temporary assistance positions to be established under the support account for peacekeeping
operations for the period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015
Position
Organizational unit

Number

Level

Function

Status

1

P-4

Organizational Resilience Continuation
Officer

1

GS (OL)

Administrative Assistant Continuation
(organizational resilience)

–

4 months,
3 P-3

Leave replacement

Continuation

–

4 months, Leave replacement
3 GS (OL)

Continuation

1

P-5

Senior Political Affairs
Officer (MINUSCA)

New

1

P-4

Political Affairs Officer
(MINUSCA)

New

Office of the Assistant
Secretary-General

1

P-4

Rule of Law and Security New
Institutions Officer
(MINUSCA Integrated
Operational Team
specialist)

Police Division

1

P-4

Police Programme
Officer (MINUSCA)

New

Criminal Law and Judicial
Advisory Service

1

P-4

Judicial Affairs Officer

Continuation

Disarmament,
Demobilization and
Reintegration Section

1

P-4

Policy and Planning
Officer (disarmament,
demobilization and
reintegration)
(MINUSCA)

New

Policy and Best Practices
Service

1

P-4

Coordination Officer
(protection of civilians)

Continuation

–

4 months,
1 P-3

Leave replacement

New

–

4 months,
1 NGS

Leave replacement

New

1

P-5

Senior Support Officer

Continuation

1

P-4

Support Officer

Continuation

1

GS (OL)

Administrative Assistant

Continuation

Programme
Implementation
Coordination Team

1

D-1

Team Leader (global field Continuation
support strategy)

Operational Support Team

1

P-4

Planning Officer
(MINUSCA)

Department of Peacekeeping Operations
Office of the UnderSecretary-General

Front office of the Chief of
Staff

Executive Office

Office of Operations

Office of Rule of Law and
Security Institutions

Policy, Evaluation and
Training Division

Africa II Division

Subtotal
United Nations Office to the African Union

Subtotal

9

–

Department of Field Support
Office of the UnderSecretary-General

United Nations Support
Office for AMISOM
Headquarters Support
Team

New

113

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Position
Organizational unit

Field Budget and Finance
Division

Field Personnel Division

Logistics Support Division

Number

Level

Function

Status

1

P-5

Senior Programme
Officer (troop cost
survey)

Continuation

1

GS (OL)

Administrative Assistant
(troop cost survey)

Continuation

1

P-3

Finance Officer
(MINUSCA)

New

Africa I Section

1

P-4

Human Resources Officer New
(MINUSCA)

Africa II Section

1

P-4

Human Resources Officer Continuation
(MINUSMA)

Quality Assurance and
Information Management
Section

1

P-3

Human Resources Officer Continuation
(administration of justice)

Recruitment, Outreach and
Career Development
Section

12

P-3

Human Resources Officer Continuation
(occupational groups)

4

GS (OL)

Human Resources
Assistant (occupational
groups)

–

9 months,
1 P-3

Human Resources Officer New
(MINUSCA)

1

P-5

Senior Logistics
Operations Officer
(MINUSCA)

New

1

P-4

Planning Officer
(engineer) (MINUSCA)

New

–

10 months, Supply Officer
1 P-3
(MINUSCA)

New

Memorandum of
Understanding and Claims
Management Section

Logistics Operations
Section

Subtotal

Continuation

29

Department of Management
Office of the UnderSecretary-General

Management Evaluation
Unit

1

P-3

Legal Officer

Continuation

Office of Programme
Planning, Budget and
Accounts

Office of the Controller

1

P-5

Project Manager
(International Public
Sector Accounting
Standards)

Continuation

1

P-4

International Public
Sector Accounting
Standards Officer

Continuation

2

P-3

International Public
Sector Accounting
Standards Officer

Continuation

1

GS (OL)

Finance Assistant
(insurance)

Continuation

1

P-4

Finance Officer
(MINUSCA)

New

1

P-2

Associate Finance Officer Continuation

Accounts Division

Treasury

114

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Position
Organizational unit

Number

Level

Function

Status

1

P-4

Finance and Budget
Officer (MINUSMA)

Continuation

1

P-4

Finance and Budget
Officer (MINUSCA)

New

2

P-3

Finance and Budget
Officer

Continuation

Office of Human Resources Human Resources Policy
Management
Service

1

P-2

Associate Legal Officer

Continuation

Learning, Development
and Human Resources
Services Division

1

P-3

Human Resources Officer Continuation
(mobility)

1

P-3

Human Resources Officer Continuation
(performance
management)

1

GS (OL)

Human Resources
Assistant

Continuation

1

P-4

Project Manager

Continuation

1

P-4

Project Manager (data
warehouse)

Continuation

1

P-3

Business Analyst (Inspira) Continuation

1

GS (OL)

Integrated Management Continuation
Information System Help
Desk Assistant

1

P-3

Development Officer

Continuation

1

P-3

Development and
Production Support
Analyst

Continuation

1

P-2

Associate Applications
Support Officer

Continuation

1

GS (PL)

Customer Support
Representative

Continuation

6

GS (OL)

Customer Support
Representative

Continuation

1

GS (OL)

Database Administrator

Continuation

1

GS (OL)

Administrative Assistant

Continuation

1

P-3

Procurement Officer
(vendor registration)

Continuation

1

GS (OL)

Procurement Assistant

Continuation

1

P-3

Procurement Officer
(engineer) (MINUSCA)

New

Facilities and Commercial
Services Division

1

P-2

Associate Information
Management Officer

Continuation

Resource Management
Section

1

P-4

Project Manager (rations New
management system)

1

P-3

Information Systems
Continuation
Officer (customer
relationship management
for the troop contribution
management project)

1

P-3

Information Systems
Continuation
Officer (fuel management
system)

Peacekeeping Financing
Division

Human Resources
Information Systems
Section (Headquarters)

Human Resources
Information Systems
Section (Bangkok)

Office of Central Support
Services

Office of Information and
Communications
Technology

Procurement Division

Subtotal

39

115

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Position
Organizational unit

Number

Level

Function

Status

–

4 months,
2 P-3

Leave replacement

Continuation

–

4 months, Leave replacement
3 GS (OL)

Continuation

Office of Internal Oversight Services
Executive Office

Investigations Division

Vienna

Nairobi
Entebbe, Uganda

UNMIL

UNMISS
UNOCI

Internal Audit Division

MINUSCA

MINUSMA

D-1

Deputy Director

Continuation

P-5

Senior Investigator

Continuation

2

P-4

Investigator

Continuation

1

P-4

Forensic Investigator

Continuation

4

P-3

Investigator

Continuation

1

P-3

Investigator
(MINUSMA)

New

1

GS (PL)

Investigations Assistant

Continuation

1

GS (OL)

Information Technology
Assistant

Continuation

1

GS (OL)

Investigations Assistant

Continuation

1

P-4

Forensic Investigator

Continuation

1

P-3

Investigator

Continuation

3

P-3

Investigator

Continuation

1

P-3

Investigator (MINUSCA) New

1

NGS

Administrative Assistant

Continuation

1

P-5

Chief Resident
Investigator

Continuation

1

P-4

Investigator

Continuation

3

P-3

Investigator

Continuation

1

NGS

Administrative Assistant

Continuation

2

P-3

Investigator

Continuation

1

NGS

Administrative Assistant

Continuation

1

P-5

Chief Resident
Investigator

Continuation

1
2

P-4
P-3

Investigator
Investigator

Continuation
Continuation

1
1

NGS
P-5

Administrative Assistant
Chief Resident Auditor
(MINUSCA)

Continuation
New

3

P-4

Resident Auditor
(MINUSCA)

New

2

P-3

Resident Auditor
(MINUSCA)

New

1

P-5

Chief Resident Auditor
(MINUSMA)

Continuation

3

P-4

Resident Auditor
(MINUSMA)

Continuation

2

P-3

Resident Auditor
(MINUSMA)

Continuation

P-3

Legal Officer

Continuation

Subtotal

46

Subtotal

1
1

Office of Staff Legal Assistance

116

1
1

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Position
Organizational unit

Office of Legal Affairs
General Legal Division

Number

Administration of Justice
Cluster

Subtotal

Level

Function

Status

–

6 months,
1 P-4

Leave replacement

Continuation

1

P-4

Legal Officer
Continuation
(administration of justice)

1

P-3

Legal Officer
Continuation
(administration of justice)

P-4

Administrative
Management Officer

Continuation

P-4

Human Rights Officer
(MINUSMA)

New

2
1

Secretariat of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions
Subtotal
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights
Field Operations and
Technical Cooperation
Division, Africa Branch
(Geneva)

1

1

Subtotal

1

Total

128

positions
and 77 person-months (positions of
less than 12 months duration)a

Note: The specific assignment and location of each of the general temporary assistance positions is set out in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (A/68/742) and referenced in the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (A/68/861).
Abbreviations: AMISOM, African Union Mission in Somalia; GS (OL), General Service (Other level); GS (PL) General Service
(Principal level); MINUSCA, United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic;
MINUSMA, United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali; NGS, national General Service; UNMIL, United
Nations Mission in Liberia; UNMISS, United Nations Mission in South Sudan; UNOCI, United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire.
a

Person-months are indicated in the column entitled “Level”.

RESOLUTION 68/284
A/RES/68/284

Adopted at the 99th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2014, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/918,
para. 12)

68/284. Financing of the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy
The General Assembly,
Recalling section XIV of its resolution 49/233 A of 23 December 1994 and its resolution 62/231 of
22 December 2007,
Recalling also its decision 50/500 of 17 September 1996 on the financing of the United Nations Logistics Base at
Brindisi, Italy, and its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 67/288 of 28 June 2013,
Recalling further its resolution 56/292 of 27 June 2002 concerning the establishment of the strategic
deployment stocks and its subsequent resolutions on the status of the implementation of the strategic deployment
stocks, the latest of which was resolution 67/288,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations Logistics
Base76 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,77
_______________
76
77

A/68/575 and A/68/727.
A/68/782/Add.8.

117

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Reiterating the importance of establishing an accurate inventory of assets,
1. Notes with appreciation the facilities provided by the Government of Italy to the United Nations
Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, and by the Government of Spain to the secondary active telecommunications
facility in Valencia, Spain;
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,77 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of its
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006, 61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010,
65/289 of 30 June 2011 and 66/264 of 21 June 2012, as well as other relevant resolutions;
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013
4. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the United Nations
Logistics Base for the period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013;78
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015
5. Approves the cost estimates for the United Nations Logistics Base amounting to 70,338,600 United
States dollars for the period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015;
Financing of the budget estimates
6. Decides that the requirements for the United Nations Logistics Base for the period from 1 July 2014 to
30 June 2015 shall be financed as follows:
(a) The unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of 1,165,200 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2013, to be applied against the resources required for the period from 1 July 2014 to
30 June 2015;
(b) The balance of 69,173,400 dollars, to be prorated among the budgets of the active peacekeeping
operations for the period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015;
(c) The estimated staff assessment income of 6,179,900 dollars, comprising the amount of 6,241,400 dollars
for the period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015 and the decrease of 61,500 dollars in respect of the period from
1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013, to be offset against the balance referred to in subparagraph (b) above, to be prorated
among the budgets of the individual active peacekeeping operations;
7. Also decides to consider at its sixty-ninth session the question of the financing of the United Nations
Logistics Base.
RESOLUTION 68/285
A/RES/68/285

Adopted at the 99th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2014, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/922,
para. 6)

68/285. Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire79 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,80
_______________
78

A/68/575.
A/68/632 and A/68/758.
80
A/68/782/Add.11.
79

118

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Recalling Security Council resolution 1528 (2004) of 27 February 2004, by which the Council established the
United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire for an initial period of 12 months as from 4 April 2004, and the
subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the Operation, the latest of which was
resolution 2162 (2014) of 25 June 2014, by which the Council extended the mandate of the Operation until
30 June 2015,
Recalling also its resolution 58/310 of 18 June 2004 on the financing of the Operation and its subsequent
resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 67/271 of 28 June 2013,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Operation with the financial resources necessary to enable
it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of formulating future budget
proposals in full accordance with the provisions of its resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006,
61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289 of 30 June 2011 and 66/264 of 21 June 2012, as well as
other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire as at 30 April
2014, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 35.6 million United States dollars, representing some
1 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only 85 Member States have paid their
assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of
their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed contributions in full,
and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure payment of their assessed contributions to
the Operation in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as
regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing to overdue payments by
Member States of their assessments;
5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and nondiscriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate resources for the
effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are based on the relevant
legislative mandates;
8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,80 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
9. Stresses that the exceptional arrangement set out in paragraph 14 below does not set a precedent for the
budgetary process and that it shall not have a negative impact on mandate delivery;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of its
resolutions 59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269, 65/289 and 66/264;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the Operation is
administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013
12. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the Operation for the
period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013;81
_______________
81

A/68/632.

119

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015
13. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire the
amount of 532,091,100 dollars for the period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015, inclusive of the amount of
493,570,300 dollars for the maintenance of the Operation, 31,937,500 dollars for the support account for
peacekeeping operations and 6,583,300 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy;
Financing of the appropriation
14. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 246,785,150 dollars for the period from
1 July to 31 December 2014 for the maintenance of the Operation, in accordance with the levels updated in its
resolution 67/239 of 24 December 2012, taking into account the scale of assessments for 2014, as set out in its
resolution 67/238 of 24 December 2012;
15. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955,
there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 14 above, their
respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 4,448,000 dollars, representing the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the Operation for the period from 1 July to 31 December 2014;
16. Further decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 31,937,500 dollars for the support
account and the amount of 6,583,300 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base for the period from 1 July 2014
to 30 June 2015, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 67/239, taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2014 and 2015, as set out in its resolution 67/238;
17. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 16 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 2,615,200 dollars, for the period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015, comprising the prorated
share of 2,027,100 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support account and the
prorated share of 588,100 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the United Nations
Logistics Base;
18. Also decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the Operation, there
shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 14 above, their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of 7,067,600 dollars in respect of the financial period ended
30 June 2013, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 67/239, taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2013, as set out in its resolution 67/238;
19. Further decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Operation, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the unencumbered
balance and other income in the amount of 7,067,600 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2013,
in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 18 above;
20. Decides that the increase of 832,400 dollars in the estimated staff assessment income in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2013 shall be added to the credits in the amount of 7,067,600 dollars referred to in
paragraphs 18 and 19 above;
21. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from other active
peacekeeping missions;
22. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure the safety and
security of all personnel participating in the Operation under the auspices of the United Nations, bearing in mind
paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
23. Invites voluntary contributions to the Operation in cash and in the form of services and supplies
acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance with the procedures and
practices established by the General Assembly;
24. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire”.
120

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 68/286
A/RES/68/286

Adopted at the 99th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2014, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/923,
para. 6)

68/286. Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping
Force in Cyprus82 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,83
Recalling Security Council resolution 186 (1964) of 4 March 1964 regarding the establishment of the United
Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate
of the Force, the latest of which was resolution 2135 (2014) of 30 January 2014, by which the Council extended the
mandate of the Force until 31 July 2014,
Recalling also its resolution 47/236 of 14 September 1993 on the financing of the Force and its subsequent
resolutions and decisions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 67/272 of 28 June 2013,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Force by certain Governments,
Noting that voluntary contributions were insufficient to cover all the costs of the Force, including those
incurred by troop-contributing Governments prior to 16 June 1993, and regretting the absence of an adequate
response to appeals for voluntary contributions, including that contained in the letter dated 17 May 1994 from the
Secretary-General to all Member States,84
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Force with the financial resources necessary to enable it to
fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of formulating future budget
proposals in full accordance with the provisions of its resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006,
61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289 of 30 June 2011 and 66/264 of 21 June 2012, as well as
other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus as at
30 April 2014, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 19.3 million United States dollars,
representing some 4 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only 53 Member States
have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to
ensure payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed contributions in full,
and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure payment of their assessed contributions to
the Force in full;
4. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and nondiscriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
5. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate resources for the
effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
_______________
82

A/68/584 and A/68/700.
A/68/782/Add.7.
84
S/1994/647.
83

121

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

6. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are based on the relevant
legislative mandates;
7. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,83 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of its
resolutions 59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269, 65/289 and 66/264;
9. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the Force is administered
with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013
10. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the Force for the period
from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013;85
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015
11. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus the
amount of 62,531,500 dollars for the period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015, inclusive of 58,004,500 dollars for
the maintenance of the Force, 3,753,300 dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations and 773,700
dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy;
Financing of the appropriation
12. Notes with appreciation that a one-third share of the net appropriation, equivalent to 19,949,267 dollars,
will be funded through voluntary contributions from the Government of Cyprus and the amount of 6.5 million
dollars from the Government of Greece;
13. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 3,006,852 dollars for the period from 1 to
31 July 2014, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 67/239 of 24 December 2012, taking into
account the scale of assessments for 2014, as set out in its resolution 67/238 of 24 December 2012;
14. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955,
there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 13 above, their
respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 223,641 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income
of 198,033 dollars approved for the Force, the prorated share of 19,850 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 5,758 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
15. Further decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 33,075,381 dollars for the period
from 1 August 2014 to 30 June 2015, at a monthly rate of 3,006,852 dollars, in accordance with the levels updated
in its resolution 67/239, taking into account the scale of assessments for 2014 and 2015, as set out in its
resolution 67/238, subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Force;
16. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 15 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 2,460,059 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 2,178,367 dollars
approved for the Force, the prorated share of 218,350 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the support account and the prorated share of 63,342 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the United Nations Logistics Base;
17. Also decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the Force, there
shall be set off against the apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 13 above, their respective share of the
_______________
85

122

A/68/584.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of 638,101 dollars in respect of the financial period ended
30 June 2013, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 67/239, taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2013, as set out in its resolution 67/238;
18. Further decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the Force,
there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the unencumbered balance and
other income in the amount of 638,101 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2013, in accordance
with the scheme set out in paragraph 17 above;
19. Decides that the increase of 183,200 dollars in the estimated staff assessment income in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2013 shall be added to the credits in the amount of 638,101 dollars referred to in
paragraphs 17 and 18 above;
20. Also decides, taking into account its voluntary contribution for the financial period ended 30 June 2013,
that one third of the net unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of 388,333 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2013 shall be returned to the Government of Cyprus;
21. Further decides, taking into account its voluntary contribution for the financial period ended 30 June
2013, that the prorated share of the net unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of 138,566 dollars in
respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2013 shall be returned to the Government of Greece;
22. Decides that, taking into account the provision in paragraph 19 of its resolution 67/272, for Member
States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the Force, there shall be set off against the apportionment, as
provided for in paragraph 13 above, their respective additional share of the unencumbered balance and other income
in the amount of 12,284 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2012, in accordance with the levels
updated in its resolution 64/249 of 24 December 2009, taking into account the scale of assessments for 2012, as set
out in its resolution 64/248 of 24 December 2009;
23. Also decides that, taking into account the provision in paragraph 20 of its resolution 67/272, for Member
States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the Force, there shall be set off against their outstanding
obligations their respective additional share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of 12,284
dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2012, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 22
above;
24. Further decides, taking into account the provision in paragraph 22 of its resolution 67/272, that the
additional amount of 44,200 dollars, representing one third of the unencumbered balance and other income in
respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2012, shall be returned to the Government of Cyprus;
25. Decides, taking into account the provision in paragraph 23 of its resolution 67/272, that the additional
amount of 15,016 dollars, representing the prorated share of the unencumbered balance and other income in respect
of the financial period ended 30 June 2012, shall be returned to the Government of Greece;
26. Also decides to continue to maintain as separate the account established for the Force for the period prior
to 16 June 1993, invites Member States to make voluntary contributions to that account, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to continue his efforts in appealing for voluntary contributions to the account;
27. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from other active
peacekeeping missions;
28. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure the safety and
security of all personnel participating in the Force under the auspices of the United Nations, bearing in mind
paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
29. Invites voluntary contributions to the Force in cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable to
the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance with the procedure and practices
established by the General Assembly;
30. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus”.
123

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 68/287
A/RES/68/287

Adopted at the 99th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2014, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/924,
para. 6)

68/287. Financing of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo86 and the related report of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,87
Recalling Security Council resolution 1925 (2010) of 28 May 2010, by which the Council decided that, as
from 1 July 2010, the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo would bear
the title “United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo” and
authorized a maximum of 19,815 military personnel, 760 military observers, 391 police personnel and 1,050
personnel of formed police units for the Mission, and recalling also the subsequent resolutions by which the Council
extended the mandate of the Mission, the latest of which was resolution 2147 (2014) of 28 March 2014, by which
the Council extended the mandate of the Mission until 31 March 2015,
Recalling also its resolution 54/260 A of 7 April 2000 on the financing of the Mission and its subsequent
resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 67/273 of 28 June 2013,
Recalling further its resolution 58/315 of 1 July 2004,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Mission,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources necessary to enable it
to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of formulating future budget
proposals in full accordance with the provisions of its resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006,
61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289 of 30 June 2011 and 66/264 of 21 June 2012, as well as
other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo as at 30 April 2014, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of
367.7 million United States dollars, representing some 3 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with
concern that only 28 Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member
States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed contributions in full,
and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure payment of their assessed contributions to
the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as
regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing to overdue payments by
Member States of their assessments;
5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and nondiscriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
_______________
86
87

124

A/68/686 and Corr.1 and A/68/788.
A/68/782/Add.14.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate resources for the
effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are based on the relevant
legislative mandates;
8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,87 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of its
resolutions 59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269, 65/289 and 66/264;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the Mission is
administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013
11. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the Mission for the
period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013;88
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015
12. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo the amount of 1,506,067,900 dollars for the period from 1 July 2014 to
30 June 2015, inclusive of 1,397,036,000 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission, 90,398,000 dollars for the
support account for peacekeeping operations and 18,633,900 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base at
Brindisi, Italy;
Financing of the appropriation
13. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 1,129,550,925 dollars for the period from 1 July
2014 to 31 March 2015, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 67/239 of 24 December 2012, taking
into account the scale of assessments for 2014 and 2015, as set out in its resolution 67/238 of 24 December 2012;
14. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955,
there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 13 above, their
respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 24,050,100 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment
income of 18,498,375 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 4,303,200 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 1,248,525 dollars of the estimated
staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
15. Further decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 376,516,975 dollars for the period
from 1 April to 30 June 2015, at a monthly rate of 125,505,658 dollars, in accordance with the levels updated in its
resolution 67/239, taking into account the scale of assessments for 2015, as set out in its resolution 67/238, subject to
a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Mission;
16. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 15 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 8,016,700 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 6,166,125 dollars
approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 1,434,400 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved
for the support account and the prorated share of 416,175 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved
for the United Nations Logistics Base;
17. Also decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission, there
shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 13 above, their respective share of the
_______________
88

A/68/686 and Corr.1.

125

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of 23,403,900 dollars in respect of the financial period
ended 30 June 2013, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 67/239, taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2013, as set out in its resolution 67/238;
18. Further decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission,
there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the unencumbered balance and
other income in the amount of 23,403,900 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2013, in
accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 17 above;
19. Decides that the increase of 1,000 dollars in the estimated staff assessment income in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2013 shall be added to the credits in the amount of 23,403,900 dollars referred to in
paragraphs 17 and 18 above;
20. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from other active
peacekeeping missions;
21. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure the safety and
security of all personnel participating in the Mission under the auspices of the United Nations, bearing in mind
paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
22. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable
to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance with the procedure and practices
established by the General Assembly;
23. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo”.

RESOLUTION 68/288
A/RES/68/288

Adopted at the 99th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2014, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/919,
para. 6)

68/288.

Financing of the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste for the period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 201389 and the related report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,90
Recalling Security Council resolution 1704 (2006) of 25 August 2006, by which the Council established a
follow-on mission in Timor-Leste, the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste, for an initial period of six
months, with the intention to renew it for further periods, and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council
extended the mandate of the Mission, the latest of which was resolution 2037 (2012) of 23 February 2012, by which
the Council extended the mandate of the Mission until 31 December 2012,
Recalling also its resolutions 61/249 A of 22 December 2006 and 61/249 B of 2 April 2007 on the financing of
the Mission, and its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 67/245 B of 28 June 2013,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
1. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste as at
30 April 2014, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 2.4 million United States dollars,
_______________
89
90

126

A/68/607.
A/68/782/Add.2.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

representing some 0.2 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only 114 Member States
have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to
ensure payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed contributions in full,
and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure payment of their assessed contributions to
the Mission in full;
3. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,90 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
4. Recalls paragraph 9 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and requests the Secretary-General to
clearly provide, in the future reports on the budget performance of the Mission, detailed information, including the
quantities and values, on non-expendable assets transferred to other offices, peacekeeping missions and reserve of
the United Nations, as well as the list of offices to which those non-expendable assets were transferred;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report all remaining surpluses, including unencumbered balances, as
well as other income, in the context of the final performance report of the Mission and to ensure that all balances are
credited to the Member States that have paid their assessed contributions in full;
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013
6. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the Mission for the
period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013;89
7. Also takes note of the amount of 6,155,600 dollars comprising the unencumbered balance of 1,500
dollars in respect of the financial period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013, as well as the other income and
adjustments in the amount of 6,154,100 dollars in respect of the same period, and decides to defer action thereon
until it considers the final performance report of the Mission;
8. Further takes note of the amount of 1,800,400 dollars representing the increase in estimated staff
assessment income in respect of the financial period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013, and decides to defer action
thereon until it considers the final performance report of the Mission;
9. Takes note of the amount of 5,826,300 dollars comprising the unencumbered balance of 3,757,300
dollars in respect of the financial period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012 and other income and adjustments in the
amount of 2,069,000 dollars in respect of the same period, and decides to defer action thereon until it considers the
final performance report of the Mission;
10. Also takes note of the amount of 168,400 dollars representing the decrease in the estimated staff
assessment income in respect of the financial period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012, and decides to defer action
thereon until it considers the final performance report of the Mission;
11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste”.
RESOLUTION 68/289
A/RES/68/289

Adopted at the 99th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2014, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/925,
para. 6)

68/289. Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti91 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,92
_______________
91
92

A/68/626 and A/68/737.
A/68/782/Add.10.

127

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Recalling Security Council resolution 1529 (2004) of 29 February 2004, by which the Council declared its
readiness to establish a United Nations stabilization force to support continuation of a peaceful and constitutional
political process and the maintenance of a secure and stable environment in Haiti,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 1542 (2004) of 30 April 2004, by which the Council established the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti for an initial period of six months, and the subsequent resolutions by
which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission, the latest of which was resolution 2119 (2013) of
10 October 2013, by which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission until 15 October 2014 and decided
that the overall force levels of the Mission would consist of up to 5,021 troops and a police component of up
to 2,601 personnel,
Recalling further its resolution 58/315 of 1 July 2004,
Recalling its resolution 58/311 of 18 June 2004 on the financing of the Mission and its subsequent resolutions
thereon, the latest of which was resolution 67/275 of 28 June 2013,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources necessary to enable it
to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of formulating future budget
proposals in full accordance with the provisions of its resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006,
61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289 of 30 June 2011 and 66/264 of 21 June 2012, as well as
other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti as at
30 April 2014, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 46.9 million United States dollars,
representing some 0.7 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only 75 Member States
have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to
ensure payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed contributions in full,
and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure payment of their assessed contributions to
the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as
regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing to overdue payments by
Member States of their assessments;
5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and nondiscriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate resources for the
effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are based on the relevant
legislative mandates;
8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,92 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of its
resolutions 59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269, 65/289 and 66/264;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the Mission is
administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
128

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013
11. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the Mission for the
period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013;93
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015
12. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti the
amount of 539,109,400 dollars for the period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015, inclusive of 500,080,500 dollars for
the maintenance of the Mission, 32,358,700 dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations and
6,670,200 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy;
Financing of the appropriation
13. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 157,240,240 dollars for the period from
1 July to 15 October 2014, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 67/239 of 24 December 2012,
taking into account the scale of assessments for 2014, as set out in its resolution 67/238 of 24 December 2012;
14. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955,
there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 13 above, their
respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 4,355,195 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment
income of 3,582,370 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 599,025 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 173,800 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
15. Further decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 381,869,160 dollars for the period
from 16 October 2014 to 30 June 2015, at a monthly rate of 44,925,783 dollars, in accordance with the levels
updated in its resolution 67/239, taking into account the scale of assessments for 2014 and 2015, as set out in its
resolution 67/238, subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Mission;
16. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 15 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 10,576,905 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 8,700,030 dollars
approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 1,454,775 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved
for the support account and the prorated share of 422,100 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved
for the United Nations Logistics Base;
17. Also decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission, there
shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 13 above, their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of 36,472,900 dollars in respect of the financial period
ended 30 June 2013, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 67/239, taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2013, as set out in its resolution 67/238;
18. Further decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission,
there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the unencumbered balance and
other income in the amount of 36,472,900 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2013, in
accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 17 above;
19. Decides that the increase in the estimated staff assessment income of 1,426,400 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2013 shall be added to the credits in the amount of 36,472,900 dollars referred to in
paragraphs 17 and 18 above;
20. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from other active
peacekeeping missions;
_______________
93

A/68/626.

129

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

21. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure the safety and
security of all personnel participating in the Mission under the auspices of the United Nations, bearing in mind
paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
22. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable
to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance with the procedure and practices
established by the General Assembly;
23. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti”.
RESOLUTION 68/290
A/RES/68/290

Adopted at the 99th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2014, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/926,
para. 6)

68/290. Financing of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo94 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions,95
Recalling Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) of 10 June 1999 regarding the establishment of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo,
Recalling also its resolution 53/241 of 28 July 1999 on the financing of the Mission and its subsequent
resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 67/276 of 28 June 2013,
Acknowledging the complexity of the Mission,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources necessary to enable it
to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
Mindful also of the need to ensure coordination and cooperation with the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of formulating future budget
proposals in full accordance with the provisions of its resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006,
61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289 of 30 June 2011 and 66/264 of 21 June 2012, as well as
other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo as at 30 April 2014, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 32.9 million United States
dollars, representing some 1 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only 95 Member
States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears,
to ensure payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed contributions in full,
and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure payment of their assessed contributions to
the Mission in full;
_______________
94
95

130

A/68/578 and A/68/701.
A/68/782/Add.5.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as
regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing to overdue payments by
Member States of their assessments;
5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and nondiscriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate resources for the
effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are based on the relevant
legislative mandates;
8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,95 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of its
resolutions 59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269, 65/289 and 66/264;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the Mission is
administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013
11. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the Mission for the
period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013;96
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015
12. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo the amount of 46,325,400 dollars for the period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015, inclusive of 42,971,600
dollars for the maintenance of the Mission, 2,780,600 dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations
and 573,200 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy;
Financing of the appropriation
13. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 46,325,400 dollars, in accordance with the
levels updated in its resolution 67/239 of 24 December 2012, taking into account the scale of assessments for 2014
and 2015, as set out in its resolution 67/238 of 24 December 2012;
14. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955,
there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 13 above, their
respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 4,095,600 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment
income of 3,867,900 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 176,500 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 51,200 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
15. Further decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission,
there shall be set off against the apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 13 above, their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of 3,329,000 dollars in respect of the financial period ended
30 June 2013, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 67/239, taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2013, as set out in its resolution 67/238;
16. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission, there
shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other
income in the amount of 3,329,000 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2013, in accordance with
the scheme set out in paragraph 15 above;
_______________
96

A/68/578.

131

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

17. Also decides that the decrease of 60,000 dollars in the estimated staff assessment income in respect of
the financial period ended 30 June 2013 shall be set off against the credits in the amount of 3,329,000 dollars
referred to in paragraphs 15 and 16 above;
18. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from other active
peacekeeping missions;
19. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure the safety and
security of all personnel participating in the Mission under the auspices of the United Nations, bearing in mind
paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
20. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable
to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance with the procedure and practices
established by the General Assembly;
21. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo”.

RESOLUTION 68/291
A/RES/68/291

Adopted at the 99th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2014, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/927,
para. 6)

68/291. Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations Mission in
Liberia97 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,98
Recalling Security Council resolution 1497 (2003) of 1 August 2003, by which the Council declared its
readiness to establish a United Nations stabilization force to support the transitional government and to assist in the
implementation of a comprehensive peace agreement in Liberia,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 1509 (2003) of 19 September 2003, by which the Council
established the United Nations Mission in Liberia for a period of 12 months, and the subsequent resolutions by
which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission, the latest of which was resolution 2116 (2013) of
18 September 2013, by which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission until 30 September 2014,
Recalling further its resolution 58/315 of 1 July 2004,
Recalling its resolution 58/261 A of 23 December 2003 on the financing of the Mission and its subsequent
resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 67/277 of 28 June 2013,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Mission,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources necessary to enable it
to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of formulating future budget
proposals in full accordance with the provisions of its resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006,
61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289 of 30 June 2011 and 66/264 of 21 June 2012, as well as
other relevant resolutions;
_______________
97
98

132

A/68/621 and A/68/761.
A/68/782/Add.16.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Mission in Liberia as at 30 April 2014,
including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 40.2 million United States dollars, representing some
1 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only 73 Member States have paid their
assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of
their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed contributions in full,
and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure payment of their assessed contributions to
the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as
regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing to overdue payments by
Member States of their assessments;
5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and nondiscriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate resources for the
effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are based on the relevant
legislative mandates;
8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,98 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
9. Stresses that the exceptional arrangement set out in paragraph 18 below does not set a precedent for the
budgetary process and that it shall not have a negative impact on mandate delivery;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of its
resolutions 59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269, 65/289 and 66/264;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the Mission is
administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013
12. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the Mission for the
period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013;99
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015
13. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Mission in Liberia the amount of
460,613,200 dollars for the period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015, inclusive of 427,267,000 dollars for the
maintenance of the Mission, 27,647,200 dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations and 5,699,000
dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy;
Financing of the appropriation
14. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 106,816,750 dollars for the period from
1 July to 30 September 2014 for the maintenance of the Mission, in accordance with the levels updated in its
resolution 67/239 of 24 December 2012, taking into account the scale of assessments for 2014, as set out in its
resolution 67/238 of 24 December 2012;
_______________
99

A/68/621.

133

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

15. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955,
there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 14 above, their
respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 2,242,500 dollars, representing the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the Mission for the period from 1 July to 30 September 2014;
16. Further decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 27,647,200 dollars for the support
account and the amount of 5,699,000 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base for the period from 1 July 2014
to 30 June 2015, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 67/239, taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2014 and 2015, as set out in its resolution 67/238;
17. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 16 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 2,264,000 dollars, for the period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015, comprising the prorated
share of 1,754,800 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support account and the
prorated share of 509,200 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the United Nations
Logistics Base;
18. Also decides to apportion among Member States, without setting a precedent, the amount of
106,816,750 dollars for the period from 1 October to 31 December 2014 for the maintenance of the Mission, at a
monthly rate of 35,605,583 dollars, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 67/239, taking into
account the scale of assessments for 2014, as set out in its resolution 67/238, subject to a decision of the Security
Council to extend the mandate of the Mission;
19. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off
against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 18 above, their respective share in
the Tax Equalization Fund of 2,242,500 dollars, representing the estimated staff assessment income approved for the
Mission for the period from 1 October to 31 December 2014;
20. Decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission, there shall
be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 14 above, their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of 6,749,300 dollars in respect of the financial period ended
30 June 2013, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 67/239, taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2013, as set out in its resolution 67/238;
21. Also decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission,
there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the unencumbered balance and
other income in the amount of 6,749,300 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2013, in
accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 20 above;
22. Further decides that the increase of 709,700 dollars in the estimated staff assessment income in respect
of the financial period ended 30 June 2013 shall be added to the credits in the amount of 6,749,300 dollars referred
to in paragraphs 20 and 21 above;
23. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from other active
peacekeeping missions;
24. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure the safety and
security of all personnel participating in the Mission under the auspices of the United Nations, bearing in mind
paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
25. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable
to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance with the procedure and practices
established by the General Assembly;
26. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Mission in Liberia”.

134

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 68/292
A/RES/68/292

Adopted at the 99th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2014, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/928, para. 10),100 by
a recorded vote of 138 to 3, with 1 abstention, as follows:
In favour: Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belgium, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, South Sudan,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Zimbabwe
Against: Canada, Israel, United States of America
Abstaining: Zambia

68/292. Financing of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon101 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,102
Recalling Security Council resolution 425 (1978) of 19 March 1978 regarding the establishment of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the
Force, the latest of which was resolution 2115 (2013) of 29 August 2013, by which the Council extended the
mandate of the Force until 31 August 2014,
Recalling also its resolution S-8/2 of 21 April 1978 on the financing of the Force and its subsequent
resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 67/279 of 28 June 2013,
Reaffirming its resolutions 51/233 of 13 June 1997, 52/237 of 26 June 1998, 53/227 of 8 June 1999, 54/267 of
15 June 2000, 55/180 A of 19 December 2000, 55/180 B of 14 June 2001, 56/214 A of 21 December 2001,
56/214 B of 27 June 2002, 57/325 of 18 June 2003, 58/307 of 18 June 2004, 59/307 of 22 June 2005, 60/278 of
30 June 2006, 61/250 A of 22 December 2006, 61/250 B of 2 April 2007, 61/250 C of 29 June 2007, 62/265 of
20 June 2008, 63/298 of 30 June 2009, 64/282 of 24 June 2010, 65/303 of 30 June 2011, 66/277 of 21 June 2012
and 67/279,
Reaffirming also the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations,
as stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Force,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Force with the financial resources necessary to enable it to
fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of formulating future budget
proposals in full accordance with the provisions of its resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006,
61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289 of 30 June 2011 and 66/264 of 21 June 2012, as well as
other relevant resolutions;
_______________
100

The draft resolution recommended in the report was introduced in the Committee by the representative of the Plurinational State of
Bolivia (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China).
101
A/68/618 and A/68/757.
102
A/68/782/Add.12.

135

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon as at 30 April
2014, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 32.6 million United States dollars, representing
some 0.5 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only 74 Member States have paid their
assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of
their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed contributions in full,
and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure payment of their assessed contributions to
the Force in full;
4. Expresses deep concern that Israel did not comply with resolutions 51/233, 52/237, 53/227, 54/267,
55/180 A, 55/180 B, 56/214 A, 56/214 B, 57/325, 58/307, 59/307, 60/278, 61/250 A, 61/250 B, 61/250 C, 62/265,
63/298, 64/282, 65/303, 66/277 and 67/279;
5. Stresses once again that Israel should strictly abide by resolutions 51/233, 52/237, 53/227, 54/267,
55/180 A, 55/180 B, 56/214 A, 56/214 B, 57/325, 58/307, 59/307, 60/278, 61/250 A, 61/250 B, 61/250 C, 62/265,
63/298, 64/282, 65/303, 66/277 and 67/279;
6. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as
regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing to overdue payments by
Member States of their assessments;
7. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and nondiscriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
8. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate resources for the
effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are based on the relevant
legislative mandates;
10. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,102 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of its
resolutions 59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269, 65/289 and 66/264;
12. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the Force is administered
with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
13. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to take the measures necessary to ensure the full
implementation of paragraph 8 of resolution 51/233, paragraph 5 of resolution 52/237, paragraph 11 of resolution 53/227,
paragraph 14 of resolution 54/267, paragraph 14 of resolution 55/180 A, paragraph 15 of resolution 55/180 B,
paragraph 13 of resolution 56/214 A, paragraph 13 of resolution 56/214 B, paragraph 14 of resolution 57/325,
paragraph 13 of resolution 58/307, paragraph 13 of resolution 59/307, paragraph 17 of resolution 60/278, paragraph 21 of
resolution 61/250 A, paragraph 20 of resolution 61/250 B, paragraph 20 of resolution 61/250 C, paragraph 21 of
resolution 62/265, paragraph 19 of resolution 63/298, paragraph 18 of resolution 64/282, paragraph 15 of
resolution 65/303, paragraph 13 of resolution 66/277 and paragraph 13 of resolution 67/279, stresses once again that Israel
shall pay the amount of 1,117,005 dollars resulting from the incident at Qana on 18 April 1996, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to report on this matter to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session;
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013
14. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the Force for the period
from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013;103

_______________
103

136

A/68/618.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015
15. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon the
amount of 549,322,600 dollars for the period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015, inclusive of 509,554,400 dollars for
the maintenance of the Force, 32,971,700 dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations and 6,796,500
dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy;
Financing of the appropriation
16. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 91,553,770 dollars for the period from 1 July
to 31 August 2014, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 67/239 of 24 December 2012, taking into
account the scale of assessments for 2014, as set out in its resolution 67/238 of 24 December 2012;
17. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955,
there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 16 above, their
respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 2,407,130 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment
income of 1,957,150 dollars approved for the Force, the prorated share of 348,780 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 101,200 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
18. Further decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 457,768,830 dollars for the period
from 1 September 2014 to 30 June 2015 at a monthly rate of 45,776,883 dollars, in accordance with the levels
updated in its resolution 67/239, taking into account the scale of assessments for 2014 and for 2015, as set out in its
resolution 67/238, subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Force;
19. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 18 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 12,035,670 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 9,785,750 dollars
approved for the Force, the prorated share of 1,743,920 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved
for the support account and the prorated share of 506,000 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved
for the United Nations Logistics Base;
20. Also decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the Force, there
shall be set off against the apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 16 above, their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of 7,003,900 dollars in respect of the financial period ended
30 June 2013, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 67/239, taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2013, as set out in its resolution 67/238;
21. Further decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the Force,
there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the unencumbered balance and
other income in the amount of 7,003,900 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2013, in
accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 20 above;
22. Decides that the increase of 2,250,200 dollars in the estimated staff assessment income in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2013 shall be added to the credits in the amount of 7,003,900 dollars referred to in
paragraphs 20 and 21 above;
23. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from other active
peacekeeping missions;
24. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure the safety and
security of all personnel participating in the Force under the auspices of the United Nations, bearing in mind
paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
25. Invites voluntary contributions to the Force in cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable to
the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance with the procedure and practices
established by the General Assembly;
26. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session, under the item entitled “Financing
of the United Nations peacekeeping forces in the Middle East”, the sub-item entitled “United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon”.
137

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 68/293
A/RES/68/293

Adopted at the 99th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2014, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/929,
para. 6)

68/293. Financing of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan104 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,105
Recalling Security Council resolution 1996 (2011) of 8 July 2011, by which the Council established, as from
9 July 2011, the United Nations Mission in South Sudan for an initial period of one year with the intention to renew
for further periods as might be required, and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate
of the Mission, the latest of which was resolution 2155 (2014) of 27 May 2014, by which the Council extended the
mandate of the Mission until 30 November 2014 and decided that the Mission will consist of a military component
of up to 12,500 troops of all ranks and a police component, including formed police units, of up to 1,323 personnel,
Recalling also its resolution 66/243 A of 24 December 2011 on the financing of the Mission and its
subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 67/280 of 28 June 2013,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources necessary to enable it
to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of formulating future budget
proposals in full accordance with the provisions of its resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006,
61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289 of 30 June 2011 and 66/264 of 21 June 2012;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Mission in South Sudan as at 30 April
2014, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 52.3 million United States dollars, representing
some 2 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only 91 Member States have paid their
assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of
their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed contributions in full,
and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure payment of their assessed contributions to
the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as
regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing to overdue payments by
Member States of their assessments;
5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and nondiscriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate resources for the
effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are based on the relevant
legislative mandates;
_______________
104
105

138

A/68/616 and A/68/828.
A/68/782/Add.17.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,105 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
9. Recalls paragraphs 17 and 36 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides to consider the
administrative arrangements associated with inter-mission cooperation during the second part of the resumed sixtyninth session, while maintaining existing arrangements;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of its
resolutions 59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269, 65/289 and 66/264;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the Mission is
administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013
12. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the Mission for the
period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013;106
Financing arrangements for the period from 1 July to 31 December 2014
13. Authorizes the Secretary-General to enter into commitments for the Mission for the period from 1 July to
31 December 2014 in a total amount not exceeding 580,830,400 dollars;
Financing of the appropriation
14. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 484,025,333 dollars for the period from
1 July to 30 November 2014, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 67/239 of 24 December 2012,
taking into account the scale of assessments for 2014, as set out in its resolution 67/238 of 24 December 2012;
15. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955,
there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 14 above, their
respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 8,253,500 dollars, representing the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the Mission for the period from 1 July to 30 November 2014;
16. Further decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 96,805,067 dollars for the period
from 1 to 31 December 2014, at a monthly rate of 96,805,067 dollars, in accordance with the levels updated in its
resolution 67/239, taking into account the scale of assessments for 2014, as set out in its resolution 67/238, subject to
a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Mission;
17. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 16 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 1,650,700 dollars, representing the estimated staff assessment income approved for the
Mission for the period from 1 to 31 December 2014;
18. Also decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission, there
shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 14 above, their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of 22,996,700 dollars in respect of the financial period
ended 30 June 2013, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 67/239, taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2013, as set out in its resolution 67/238;
19. Further decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission,
there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the unencumbered balance and
other income in the amount of 22,996,700 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2013, in
accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 18 above;
_______________
106

A/68/616.

139

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

20. Decides that the increase of 706,300 dollars in the estimated staff assessment income in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2013 shall be added to the credits in the amount of 22,996,700 dollars referred to in
paragraphs 18 and 19 above;
21. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from other active
peacekeeping missions;
22. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure the safety and
security of all personnel participating in the Mission under the auspices of the United Nations, bearing in mind
paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
23. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable
to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance with the procedure and practices
established by the General Assembly;
24. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan”.
RESOLUTION 68/294
A/RES/68/294

Adopted at the 99th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2014, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/920,
para. 6)

68/294. Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan107 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,108
Recalling Security Council resolution 1590 (2005) of 24 March 2005, by which the Council established the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan for an initial period of six months as from 24 March 2005, the subsequent
resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission, and resolution 1997 (2011) of 11 July 2011,
by which the Council decided to withdraw the Mission effective 11 July 2011 and called upon the SecretaryGeneral to complete the withdrawal of all uniformed and civilian Mission personnel, other than those required for
the liquidation of the Mission, by 31 August 2011,
Recalling also its resolution 59/292 of 21 April 2005 on the financing of the Mission and its subsequent
resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 67/281 of 28 June 2013,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Trust Fund in Support of the
Peace Process in the Sudan,
1. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Mission in the Sudan as at 30 April 2014,
including the credits in the amount of 17.7 million United States dollars;
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,108 and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
3. Notes with concern the delay in the Secretary-General’s request for approval by the General Assembly to
transfer assets of the Mission, and in this regard stresses the need to abide by the relevant provisions, regulations and
rules governing the transfer of the assets of missions;
_______________
107
108

140

A/68/709 and Corr.1.
A/68/866.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Disposition of assets of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
4.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financing of the Mission;107

5. Approves the donation of assets of the Mission, with a total inventory value of 6,276,200 dollars and
corresponding residual value of 2,114,800 dollars, to the Government of the Sudan;
6. Also approves the donation of assets of the Mission, with a total inventory value of 47,400 dollars and
corresponding residual value of 25,600 dollars, to the Joint Integrated Units;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan”.

RESOLUTION 68/295
A/RES/68/295

Adopted at the 99th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2014, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/921,
para. 6)

68/295. Financing of the United Nations Supervision Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations Supervision
Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic for the period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013109 and the related report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,110
Recalling Security Council resolution 2043 (2012) of 21 April 2012, by which the Council established for an
initial period of 90 days the United Nations Supervision Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic under the command of
a Chief Military Observer, and Council resolution 2059 (2012) of 20 July 2012, by which the Council renewed the
mandate for a final period of 30 days,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources necessary to enable it
to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
1. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Supervision Mission in the Syrian Arab
Republic as at 30 April 2014, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 0.5 million United States
dollars, representing some 3 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only 122 Member
States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears,
to ensure payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,110 and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013
3. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Supervision Mission in the Syrian
Arab Republic the amount of 6,530,100 dollars, previously authorized by the Advisory Committee for the period
from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013, under the terms of section VI of its resolution 64/269 of 24 June 2010;
_______________
109
110

A/68/597 and Corr.1.
A/68/782/Add.1.

141

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Financing of the appropriation for the period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013
4. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 6,530,100 dollars for the period from 1 July
2012 to 30 June 2013, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 64/249 of 24 December 2009, taking
into account the scale of assessments for 2012, as set out in its resolution 64/248 of 24 December 2009;
5. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955,
there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 4 above, their
respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 162,400 dollars, representing the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the Mission for the period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013;
6. Further decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Supervision Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic”.

RESOLUTION 68/296
A/RES/68/296

Adopted at the 99th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2014, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/930,
para. 6)

68/296. Financing of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara111 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions,112
Recalling Security Council resolution 690 (1991) of 29 April 1991, by which the Council established the
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara, and the subsequent resolutions by which the
Council extended the mandate of the Mission, the latest of which was resolution 2152 (2014) of 29 April 2014, by
which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission until 30 April 2015,
Recalling also its resolution 45/266 of 17 May 1991 on the financing of the Mission and its subsequent
resolutions and decisions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 67/283 of 28 June 2013,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Mission,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources necessary to enable it
to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of formulating future budget
proposals in full accordance with the provisions of its resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006,
61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289 of 30 June 2011 and 66/264 of 21 June 2012, as well as
other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara as at 30 April 2014, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 42.3 million United States
dollars, representing some 4 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only 99 Member
States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears,
to ensure payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
_______________
111
112

142

A/68/608 and A/68/699.
A/68/782/Add.3.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed contributions in full,
and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure payment of their assessed contributions to
the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as
regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing to overdue payments by
Member States of their assessments;
5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and nondiscriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate resources for the
effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are based on the relevant
legislative mandates;
8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,112 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
9. Recalls paragraph 28 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides to consider the question of
the authority to move staff within the area of an individual mission during the second part of its resumed sixty-ninth
session, while maintaining existing arrangements;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of its
resolutions 59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269, 65/289 and 66/264;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the Mission is
administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013
12. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the Mission for the
period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013;113
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015
13. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in
Western Sahara the amount of 58,126,500 dollars for the period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015, inclusive of
53,918,400 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission, 3,488,900 dollars for the support account for peacekeeping
operations and 719,200 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy;
Financing of the appropriation
14. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 48,438,750 dollars for the period from 1 July
2014 to 30 April 2015, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 67/239 of 24 December 2012, taking
into account the scale of assessments for 2014 and 2015, as set out in its resolution 67/238 of 24 December 2012;
15. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955,
there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 14 above, their
respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 2,138,800 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment
income of 1,900,700 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 184,500 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 53,600 dollars of the estimated
staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
_______________
113

A/68/608.

143

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

16. Further decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 9,687,750 dollars for the period from
1 May to 30 June 2015, at a monthly rate of 4,843,875 dollars, in accordance with the levels updated in its
resolution 67/239, taking into account the scale of assessments for 2015 as set out in its resolution 67/238, subject to
a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Mission;
17. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 16 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 427,700 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 380,100 dollars
approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 36,900 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved
for the support account and the prorated share of 10,700 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved
for the United Nations Logistics Base;
18. Also decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission, there
shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 14 above, their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of 2,785,700 dollars in respect of the financial period ended
30 June 2013, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 67/239, taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2013, as set out in its resolution 67/238;
19. Further decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission,
there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the unencumbered balance and
other income in the amount of 2,785,700 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2013, in
accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 18 above;
20. Decides that the decrease of 6,800 dollars in the estimated staff assessment income in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2013 shall be set off against the credits in the amount of 2,785,700 dollars referred to
in paragraphs 18 and 19 above;
21. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from other active
peacekeeping missions;
22. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure the safety and
security of all personnel participating in the Mission under the auspices of the United Nations, bearing in mind
paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
23. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable
to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance with the procedure and practices
established by the General Assembly;
24. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara”.
RESOLUTION 68/297
A/RES/68/297

Adopted at the 99th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2014, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/931,
para. 6)

68/297. Financing of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur114 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,115
_______________
114
115

144

A/68/619 and A/68/754.
A/68/782/Add.15.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Recalling Security Council resolution 1769 (2007) of 31 July 2007, by which the Council established the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur for an initial period of 12 months from 31 July 2007, and
the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the Operation, the latest of which was
resolution 2113 (2013) of 30 July 2013, by which the Council extended the mandate of the Operation until
31 August 2014,
Recalling also its resolution 62/232 A of 22 December 2007 on the financing of the Operation and its
subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 67/284 of 28 June 2013,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Operation with the financial resources necessary to enable
it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
Noting the hybrid nature of the Operation, and in that regard stressing the importance of ensuring full
coordination of efforts between the African Union and the United Nations at the strategic level, unity of command at
the operational level and clear delegation of authority and accountability lines,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of formulating future budget
proposals in full accordance with the provisions of its resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006,
61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289 of 30 June 2011 and 66/264 of 21 June 2012, as well as
other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur as at 30 April 2014, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 95.9 million United States
dollars, representing some 1 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only 85 Member
States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears,
to ensure payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed contributions in full,
and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure payment of their assessed contributions to
the Operation in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as
regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing to overdue payments by
Member States of their assessments;
5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and nondiscriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate resources for the
effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are based on the relevant
legislative mandates;
8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,115 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
9. Recognizes the significant role played by quick-impact projects in achieving the overall objectives of the
mission mandate, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to ensure the implementation of planned projects
as a matter of priority;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of its
resolutions 59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269, 65/289 and 66/264;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the Operation is
administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
145

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013
12. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the Operation for the
period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013;116
Estimates for the period from 1 July to 31 December 2014
13. Authorizes the Secretary-General to enter into commitments for the Operation in a total amount not
exceeding 639,654,200 dollars for the period from 1 July to 31 December 2014;
Financing of the commitment authority
14. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 213,218,068 dollars for the period from
1 July to 31 August 2014, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 67/239 of 24 December 2012,
taking into account the scale of assessments for 2014, as set out in its resolution 67/238 of 24 December 2012;
15. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955,
there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 14 above, their
respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 3,898,783 dollars, representing the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the period from 1 July to 31 August 2014;
16. Further decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 426,436,132 dollars for the period
from 1 September to 31 December 2014, at a monthly rate of 106,609,033 dollars, in accordance with the levels
updated in its resolution 67/239, taking into account the scale of assessments for 2014, as set out in its
resolution 67/238, subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Operation;
17. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 16 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 7,797,567 dollars, representing the estimated staff assessment income approved for the period
from 1 September to 31 December 2014;
18. Also decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the Operation, there
shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 14 above, their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of 59,715,100 dollars in respect of the financial period
ended 30 June 2013, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 67/239, taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2013, as set out in its resolution 67/238;
19. Further decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Operation, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the unencumbered
balance and other income in the amount of 59,715,100 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2013,
in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 18 above;
20. Decides that the decrease of 2,158,100 dollars in the estimated staff assessment income in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2013 shall be set off against the credits in the amount of 59,715,100 dollars referred
to in paragraphs 18 and 19 above;
21. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from other active
peacekeeping missions;
22. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure the safety and
security of all personnel participating in the Operation under the auspices of the United Nations, bearing in mind
paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
_______________
116

146

A/68/619.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

23. Invites voluntary contributions to the Operation in cash and in the form of services and supplies
acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance with the procedure and
practices established by the General Assembly;
24. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled “Financing of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur”.
RESOLUTION 68/298
A/RES/68/298

Adopted at the 99th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2014, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/933,
para. 6)

68/298. Financing of the activities arising from Security Council resolution 1863 (2009)
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations Support Office
for the African Union Mission in Somalia117 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions,118
Recalling Security Council resolution 1863 (2009) of 16 January 2009, in which the Council expressed its
intent to establish a United Nations peacekeeping operation in Somalia as a follow-on force to the African Union
Mission in Somalia, subject to a further decision of the Council by 1 June 2009, and requested the SecretaryGeneral, in order for the forces of the Mission to be incorporated into a United Nations peacekeeping operation, to
provide a United Nations logistical support package to the Mission, including equipment and services,
Recalling also the subsequent resolutions of the Council by which the logistical support package for the
Mission was extended, the latest of which was resolution 2124 (2013) of 12 November 2013, by which the Council
extended the logistical support package until 31 October 2014,
Recalling further its resolution 63/275 A of 7 April 2009 on the financing of the activities arising from
Security Council resolution 1863 (2009) and its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was
resolution 67/285 of 28 June 2013,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the United Nations Trust Fund
established to support the African Union Mission in Somalia,
1. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Support Office for the African Union
Mission in Somalia as at 30 April 2014, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 115.0 million
United States dollars, representing some 7 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only
74 Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular
those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,118 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;

_______________
117
118

A/68/605 and A/68/745.
A/68/782/Add.9.

147

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013
3. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the Support Office for
the period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013;119
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015
4. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Support Office for the African
Union Mission in Somalia the amount of 528,207,800 dollars for the period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015,
inclusive of 489,968,100 dollars for the maintenance of the Support Office, 31,704,400 dollars for the support
account for peacekeeping operations and 6,535,300 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy;
Financing of the appropriation
5. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 176,069,267 dollars for the period from
1 July to 31 October 2014, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 67/239 of 24 December 2012,
taking into account the scale of assessments for 2014, as set out in its resolution 67/238 of 24 December 2012;
6. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955,
there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 5 above, their
respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 2,360,767 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment
income of 1,495,367 dollars approved for the Support Office, the prorated share of 670,767 dollars of the estimated
staff assessment income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 194,633 dollars of the estimated
staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
7. Further decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 352,138,533 dollars for the period
from 1 November 2014 to 30 June 2015 at a monthly rate of 44,017,317 dollars, in accordance with the levels
updated in its resolution 67/239, taking into account the scale of assessments for 2014 and 2015, as set out in its
resolution 67/238, subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Support Office;
8. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 7 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 4,721,533 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 2,990,733 dollars
approved for the Support Office, the prorated share of 1,341,533 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 389,267 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
9. Also decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the Support Office,
there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 5 above, their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of 28,473,800 dollars in respect of the financial period
ended 30 June 2013, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 67/239, taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2013, as set out in its resolution 67/238;
10. Further decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the Support
Office, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the unencumbered balance
and other income in the amount of 28,473,800 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2013, in
accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 9 above;
11. Decides that the increase of 420,700 dollars in the estimated staff assessment income in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2013 shall be added to the credits in the amount of 28,473,800 dollars referred to in
paragraphs 9 and 10 above;
12. Invites voluntary contributions to the United Nations Trust Fund established to support the African
Union Mission in Somalia;
13. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled “Financing of the
activities arising from Security Council resolution 1863 (2009)”.
_______________
119

148

A/68/605.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 68/299
A/RES/68/299

Adopted at the 99th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2014, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/68/932,
para. 6)

68/299. Financing of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the
Central African Republic
The General Assembly,
Having considered the note by the Secretary-General on the financing arrangements for the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic120 and the related report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,121
Recalling Security Council resolution 2149 (2014) of 10 April 2014, by which the Council established the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic as from 10 April
2014 for an initial period until 30 April 2015, requested the Secretary-General to subsume the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic into the Mission as from the same date, decided
that, as from 15 September 2014, the Mission will initially comprise up to 10,000 military personnel, including
240 military observers and 200 staff officers, and 1,800 police personnel, comprising 1,400 formed police unit
personnel and 400 individual police officers, and 20 corrections officers, and also decided that the transfer of
authority from the African-led International Support Mission in the Central African Republic to the Mission will
take place on 15 September 2014,
1. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,121 and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
2. Recalls paragraph 16 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides to consider the
administrative arrangements associated with inter-mission cooperation during the second part of the resumed sixtyninth session, while maintaining existing arrangements;
Estimates for the period from 10 April to 31 December 2014
3. Authorizes the Secretary-General to establish a special account for the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic for the purpose of accounting for the income
received and the expenditure incurred in respect of the Mission;
4. Also authorizes the Secretary-General to enter into commitments for the Mission in an amount not
exceeding 312,976,400 United States dollars for the period from 10 April to 31 December 2014, inclusive of the
amount of 59,552,000 dollars previously authorized by the Advisory Committee for the period from 10 April to
30 June 2014 under the terms of section VI of its resolution 64/269 of 24 June 2010;
Financing of the commitment authority
5. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 59,552,000 dollars for the period from
10 April to 30 June 2014, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 67/239 of 24 December 2012,
taking into account the scale of assessments for 2014, as set out in its resolution 67/238 of 24 December 2012;
6. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955,
there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 5 above, their
respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 621,900 dollars, for the period from 10 April to 30 June 2014
representing the estimated staff assessment income approved for the Mission;
_______________
120
121

A/68/874.
A/68/782/Add.18.

149

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

7. Further decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 253,424,400 dollars for the period
from 1 July to 31 December 2014, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 67/239, taking into
account the scale of assessments for 2014, as set out in its resolution 67/238;
8. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 7 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 3,649,800 dollars, for the period from 1 July to 31 December 2014, representing the estimated
staff assessment income approved for the Mission;
9. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable
to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance with the procedure and practices
established by the General Assembly;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic”.

150

IV. Decisions
Contents
Decision
number

Title

Page

A. Elections and appointments
68/404.

Election of seven members of the Committee for Programme and Coordination ................................................................. 153
Decision B ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 153

68/407.

Appointment of members of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions ................................ 153
Decision B ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 153

68/408.

Appointment of members of the Committee on Contributions ............................................................................................... 154
Decision B ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 154
Decision C ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 154

68/412.

Appointment of members of the Independent Audit Advisory Committee............................................................................ 154
Decision B ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 154

68/414.

Appointment of members of the Committee on Conferences ................................................................................................. 155
Decision B ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 155
Decision C ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 155
Decision D...................................................................................................................................................................................... 155

68/416.

Election of the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme ........................................................... 155

68/417.

Election of members of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law ........................................................ 155

68/418.

Election of the President of the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session ......................................................................... 156

68/419.

Election of the Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session .............................................................. 156

68/420.

Approval of the appointment of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights ............................................. 156

68/421.

Election of the Executive Director of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat)........................ 156

68/422.

Appointment of members and alternate members of the United Nations Staff Pension Committee .................................. 156

68/423.

Election of the Chairs of the Main Committees of the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session ................................... 157
B. Other decisions
1. Decisions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

68/504.

Adoption of the agenda and allocation of agenda items ........................................................................................................... 158
Decision B ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 158

68/551.

Building a peaceful and better world through sport and the Olympic ideal ........................................................................... 159

68/552.

Commemorative meeting of the General Assembly on the occasion of the International Day for the Elimination
of Racial Discrimination............................................................................................................................................................... 159

68/553.

Commemorative meeting of the General Assembly on the occasion of the International Day of Remembrance
of the Victims of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade .................................................................................................... 159

68/554.

The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy .......................................................................................................... 160

151

IV. Decisions
Decision
number

Title

Page

68/555.

Implementation of the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS and the Political Declarations on HIV/AIDS........... 160

68/556.

Extension of the intergovernmental process of the General Assembly on a programme for the implementation
of the International Decade for People of African Descent ...................................................................................................... 160

68/557.

Question of equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council
and related matters......................................................................................................................................................................... 160

68/558.

Programme of activities for the implementation of the International Decade for People of African Descent ................... 161

68/559.

Report of the Security Council..................................................................................................................................................... 161

68/660.

The situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan.............................................................................................................. 161

68/661.

Question of the Comorian island of Mayotte ............................................................................................................................. 161

68/662.

The rule of law at the national and international levels ............................................................................................................. 161

68/663.

International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens
Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States
between 1 January and 31 December 1994 ................................................................................................................................ 162

68/664.

International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991 ......................................................... 162

68/665.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad........................................................... 162

68/666.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in East Timor .......................................................................................................... 162

68/667.

Investigation into the conditions and circumstances resulting in the tragic death of Dag Hammarskjöld
and of the members of the party accompanying him ................................................................................................................ 162

68/668.

Report of the Human Rights Council.......................................................................................................................................... 162
2. Decisions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

68/549.

Questions deferred for future consideration ............................................................................................................................... 162
Decision B ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 162
Decision C ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 163

152

IV. Decisions

A. Elections and appointments
68/404. Election of seven members of the Committee for Programme and Coordination
B1
At its 88th plenary meeting, on 23 May 2014, the General Assembly, on the basis of nominations by the
Economic and Social Council2 and in accordance with the annex to Council resolution 2008 (LX) of 14 May 1976,
paragraph 1 of Council resolution 1987/94 of 4 December 1987, as well as Assembly decision 42/450 of
17 December 1987, elected the REPUBLIC OF KOREA as a member of the Committee for Programme and
Coordination for a term of office beginning on 23 May 2014 and expiring on 31 December 2016.
As a result, the Committee for Programme and Coordination is composed of the following 31 Member
States:3 ARGENTINA,* BELARUS,* BENIN,*** BOTSWANA,** BRAZIL,* BULGARIA,* CAMEROON,* CHINA,***
CUBA,* EL SALVADOR,** ETHIOPIA,*** FRANCE,** GUINEA,* GUINEA BISSAU,* HAITI,*** IRAN (ISLAMIC
REPUBLIC OF),* ITALY,* JAPAN,*** KAZAKHSTAN,* MALAYSIA,* MOROCCO,*** PAKISTAN,* PERU,** REPUBLIC OF
KOREA,*** REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA,* RUSSIAN FEDERATION,** UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND
NORTHERN IRELAND,* UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA,** UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,* URUGUAY* and
ZIMBABWE.*
___________________
*

Term of office expires on 31 December 2014.

**
***

Term of office expires on 31 December 2015.
Term of office expires on 31 December 2016.

68/407. Appointment of members of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
B4
At its 75th plenary meeting, on 7 March 2014, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the Fifth
Committee,5 appointed Mr. Ye Xuenong as a member of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions for a term of office beginning on 7 March 2014 and ending on 31 December 2016, as a result of the
passing away of Mr. Zhang Wanhai.
As a result, the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions is composed as follows:
Mr. Toshihiro AIKI (Japan),*** Mr. Mohanad AL-MUSAWI (Iraq),** Mr. Bruno BRANT (Brazil),* Mr. Pavel
CHERNIKOV (Russian Federation),* Ms. Jasminka DINIĆ (Croatia),** Mr. Conrod HUNTE (Antigua and
Barbuda),*** Mr. Richard MOON (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland),*** Mr. Jean Christian
OBAME (Gabon),* Mr. Carlos RUIZ MASSIEU (Mexico),*** Mr. Babou SENE (Senegal),** Mr. Tesfa Alem SEYOUM
(Eritrea),** Mr. David TRAYSTMAN (United States of America),* Mr. Devesh UTTAM (India),*** Ms. Catherine
VENDAT (France)*** and Mr. YE Xuenong (China).***
___________________
*
**

Term of office expires on 31 December 2014.
Term of office expires on 31 December 2015.

***

Term of office expires on 31 December 2016.

_______________
1

Decision 68/404, in section A of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 49 (A/68/49), vol. II,
becomes decision 68/404 A.
2
See A/68/302/Add.2; see also Economic and Social Council decision 2014/201 A.
3
Three vacancies remain to be filled for members from Western European and other States: two for a term of office beginning on the date of
election and expiring on 31 December 2014 and one for a term of office beginning on the date of election and expiring on 31 December 2015.
4
Decision 68/407, in section A of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 49 (A/68/49), vol. II,
becomes decision 68/407 A.
5
A/68/557/Add.1, para. 3.

153

IV. Decisions

68/408. Appointment of members of the Committee on Contributions
B6
At its 79th plenary meeting, on 26 March 2014, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the Fifth
Committee,7 appointed Mr. Edward Faris as a member of the Committee on Contributions for a term of office
beginning on 26 March 2014 and ending on 31 December 2015 and Mr. Shigeki Sumi as a member of the
Committee on Contributions for a term of office beginning on 1 April 2014 and ending on 31 December 2015, as a
result of the resignations of Ms. Susan M. McLurg and Mr. Kazuo Watanabe, respectively.
C
At its 85th plenary meeting, on 13 May 2014, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the Fifth
Committee,8 appointed Mr. Fu Daopeng and Mr. Kunal Khatri as members of the Committee on Contributions for a
term of office beginning on 13 May 2014 and ending on 31 December 2014, as a result of the resignations of
Mr. Sun Xudong and Mr. Thomas David Smith, respectively.
As a result, the Committee on Contributions is composed as follows: Mr. Andrzej T. ABRASZEWSKI
(Poland),** Mr. Syed Yawar ALI (Pakistan),** Mr. Jean Pierre DIAWARA (Guinea),*** Mr. Gordon ECKERSLEY
(Australia),*** Mr. Edward FARIS (United States of America),** Mr. FU Daopeng (China),* Mr. Bernardo GREIVER
DEL HOYO (Uruguay),*** Mr. Ihor V. HUMENNYI (Ukraine),** Mr. Kunal KHATRI (United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland),* Mr. Ali A. Ali KURER (Libya),*** Mr. Nikolay LOZINSKIY (Russian
Federation),* Mr. Pedro Luis PEDROSO CUESTA (Cuba),*** Ms. Gönke ROSCHER (Germany),* Mr. Henrique da
Silveira SARDINHA PINTO (Brazil),* Mr. Ugo SESSI (Italy),*** Mr. Shigeki SUMI (Japan),** Mr. Josiel Motumisi
TAWANA (South Africa)** and Mr. YOO Dae-jong (Republic of Korea).*
___________________
*
**

Term of office expires on 31 December 2014.
Term of office expires on 31 December 2015.

***

Term of office expires on 31 December 2016.

68/412. Appointment of members of the Independent Audit Advisory Committee
B9
At its 79th plenary meeting, on 26 March 2014, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the Fifth
Committee,10 appointed Ms. Patricia Arriagada as a member of the Independent Audit Advisory Committee for a
term of office beginning on 26 March 2014 and ending on 31 December 2016.
As a result, the Independent Audit Advisory Committee is composed as follows: Ms. Patricia ARRIAGADA
(Chile),** Ms. Natalia A. BOCHAROVA (Russian Federation),** Mr. J. Christopher MIHM (United States
of America),* Mr. John F. S. MUWANGA (Uganda)* and Ms. Maria Gracia Pulido TAN (Philippines).**
___________________
*
**

Term of office expires on 31 December 2014.
Term of office expires on 31 December 2016.

_______________
6

Decision 68/408, in section A of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 49 (A/68/49), vol. II,
becomes decision 68/408 A.
7
A/68/558/Add.1, para. 3.
8
A/68/558/Add.2, para. 3.
9
Decision 68/412, in section A of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 49 (A/68/49), vol. II,
becomes decision 68/412 A.
10
A/68/562/Add.2, para. 3.

154

IV. Decisions

68/414. Appointment of members of the Committee on Conferences
B11
At its 74th plenary meeting, on 10 February 2014, the General Assembly, in accordance with paragraph 2 of
its resolution 43/222 B of 21 December 1988, took note of the appointment by its President, after consultations with
the Chair of the regional group concerned, of JAMAICA as a member of the Committee on Conferences for a term of
office beginning on 10 February 2014 and ending on 31 December 2016.
C
At its 75th plenary meeting, on 7 March 2014, the General Assembly, in accordance with paragraph 2 of its
resolution 43/222 B of 21 December 1988, took note of the appointment by its President, after consultations with
the Chair of the regional group concerned, of URUGUAY as a member of the Committee on Conferences for a term
of office beginning on 7 March 2014 and ending on 31 December 2015.
D
At its 81st plenary meeting, on 9 April 2014, the General Assembly, in accordance with paragraph 2 of its
resolution 43/222 B of 21 December 1988, took note of the appointment by its President, after consultations with
the Chair of the regional group concerned, of PARAGUAY as a member of the Committee on Conferences for a term
of office beginning on 9 April 2014 and ending on 31 December 2014.
As a result, the Committee on Conferences is composed of the following 21 Member States: BOSNIA AND
HERZEGOVINA,** CONGO,* CÔTE D’IVOIRE,** DENMARK,*** FRANCE,* IRAQ,** ISRAEL,** JAMAICA,***
JAPAN,*** MAURITANIA,*** NAMIBIA,* PARAGUAY,* PERU,** PHILIPPINES,* QATAR,*** RUSSIAN FEDERATION,*
SENEGAL,** SRI LANKA,* UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA,*** UNITED STATES OF AMERICA*** and URUGUAY.**
___________________
*
**

Term of office expires on 31 December 2014.
Term of office expires on 31 December 2015.

***

Term of office expires on 31 December 2016.

68/416. Election of the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme
At its 75th plenary meeting, on 7 March 2014, the General Assembly, on the proposal of the SecretaryGeneral,12 re-elected Mr. Achim STEINER as Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme, for
a two-year term of office beginning on 15 June 2014 and ending on 14 June 2016.
68/417. Election of members of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
At its 79th plenary meeting, on 26 March 2014, the General Assembly, in accordance with section II,
paragraphs 1 to 3, of its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December 1966, as amended by paragraph 8 of its resolution
3108 (XXVIII) of 12 December 1973 and paragraph 10 (b) of its resolution 31/99 of 15 December 1976, as well as
its resolution 57/20 of 19 November 2002, elected POLAND as a member of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law for the remaining term of office of UKRAINE, 13 beginning in July 2014, on the first day of
the forty-seventh session of the Commission.
As a result, the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law is composed of the following
60 Member States: ALGERIA,* ARGENTINA,* ARMENIA,** AUSTRALIA,* AUSTRIA,* BELARUS,* BOTSWANA,*
BRAZIL,* BULGARIA,** CAMEROON,** CANADA,** CHINA,** COLOMBIA,* CÔTE D’IVOIRE,** CROATIA,*
DENMARK,** ECUADOR,** EL SALVADOR,** FIJI,* FRANCE,** GABON,* GEORGIA,* GERMANY,** GREECE,**
HONDURAS,** HUNGARY,** INDIA,* INDONESIA,** IRAN (ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF),* ISRAEL,* ITALY,* JAPAN,**
_______________
11

Decision 68/414, in section A of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 49 (A/68/49),
vol. II, becomes decision 68/414 A.
12
See A/68/770.
13
See A/68/778.

155

IV. Decisions

JORDAN,* KENYA,* KUWAIT,** LIBERIA,** MALAYSIA,** MAURITANIA,** MAURITIUS,* MEXICO,** NAMIBIA,**
NIGERIA,* PAKISTAN,* PANAMA,** PARAGUAY,* PHILIPPINES,* POLAND,* REPUBLIC OF KOREA,** RUSSIAN
FEDERATION,** SIERRA LEONE,** SINGAPORE,** SPAIN,* SWITZERLAND,** THAILAND,* TURKEY,* UGANDA,*
UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND,** UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,* VENEZUELA
(BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF)* and ZAMBIA.**
___________________
*

Term of office expires on the last day prior to the beginning of the forty-ninth session of the Commission in 2016.

**

Term of office expires on the last day prior to the beginning of the fifty-second session of the Commission in 2019.

68/418. Election of the President of the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session14
At its 93rd plenary meeting, on 11 June 2014, the General Assembly, in accordance with Article 21 of the
Charter of the United Nations, rule 30 of the rules of procedure of the Assembly and paragraph 1 of the annex to
resolution 33/138 of 19 December 1978, elected Mr. Sam KUTESA of Uganda as President of the General Assembly
at its sixty-ninth session.
68/419. Election of the Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session14
At its 93rd plenary meeting, on 11 June 2014, the General Assembly, in accordance with rule 30 of the rules of
procedure of the Assembly15 and paragraphs 2 and 3 of the annex to resolution 33/138 of 19 December 1978,
elected by acclamation the following 21 Member States as Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly at its sixtyninth session: ARGENTINA, BURKINA FASO, CHINA, CYPRUS, DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO, FRANCE,
GEORGIA, GRENADA, ICELAND, KIRIBATI, LIBYA, NIGER, OMAN, PAKISTAN, PORTUGAL, RUSSIAN FEDERATION,
SAINT LUCIA, SWAZILAND, TAJIKISTAN, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND and
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.
68/420. Approval of the appointment of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
At its 98th plenary meeting, on 16 June 2014, the General Assembly approved the appointment by the
Secretary-General16 of Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid AL-HUSSEIN (Jordan) as United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights for a four-year term of office beginning on 1 September 2014 and expiring on 31 August 2018.
68/421. Election of the Executive Director of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat)
At its 104th plenary meeting, on 17 July 2014, the General Assembly, on the proposal of the SecretaryGeneral,17 re-elected Mr. Joan CLOS (Spain) as Executive Director of the United Nations Human Settlements
Programme (UN-Habitat) for a term of office beginning on 18 October 2014 and ending on 31 December 2017.
68/422. Appointment of members and alternate members of the United Nations Staff Pension Committee
At its 104th plenary meeting, on 17 July 2014, the General Assembly appointed Mr. Jörg Stosberg as a
member of the United Nations Staff Pension Committee for a term of office beginning on 17 July 2014 and ending
on 31 December 2016, as a result of the resignation of Mr. Gerhard Küntzle.18

_______________
14
In accordance with rule 38 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, the General Committee consists of the President of the
Assembly, the 21 Vice-Presidents and the Chairs of the six Main Committees.
15
Earlier at the same meeting, the General Assembly decided to proceed to elect the Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly on the
understanding that the elections of the Chairs of the Main Committees would conform with decision 68/505 of 1 October 2013 and would
not have an impact on the geographical distribution of the Vice-Presidents of the Assembly and the representative character of the General
Committee.
16
See A/68/904.
17
See A/68/915.
18
See A/68/940.

156

IV. Decisions

As a result, the United Nations Staff Pension Committee is composed as follows: Mr. Dmitry S. CHUMAKOV
(Russian Federation), Ms. Valeria María GONZÁLEZ POSSE (Argentina), Mr. Hitoshi KOZAKI (Japan),
Mr. Lovemore MAZEMO (Zimbabwe), Mr. Philip Richard Okanda OWADE (Kenya), Mr. Md. Mustafizur RAHMAN
(Bangladesh), Mr. Thomas A. REPASCH, Jr. (United States of America) and Mr. Jörg STOSBERG (Germany).
68/423. Election of the Chairs of the Main Committees of the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session14
On 18 June 2014, the six Main Committees of the General Assembly held meetings in accordance with
rules 99 (a) and 103 of the rules of procedure of the Assembly for the purpose of electing their Chairs.
At the 105th plenary meeting, on 31 July 2014, the President of the General Assembly announced that the
following persons had been elected as Chairs of the six Main Committees of the Assembly at its sixty-ninth session:
First Committee:

Mr. E. Courtenay RATTRAY (Jamaica)

Special Political and
Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee):
Mr. Durga Prasad BHATTARAI (Nepal)
Second Committee:

Mr. Sebastiano CARDI (Italy)

Third Committee:

Ms. Sofia MESQUITA BORGES (Timor-Leste)

Fifth Committee:

Mr. František RUŽIČKA (Slovakia)

Sixth Committee:

Mr. Tuvako Nathaniel MANONGI (United Republic of Tanzania)

157

IV. Decisions

B. Other decisions
1. Decisions adopted without reference to a Main Committee
68/504. Adoption of the agenda and allocation of agenda items
B19
At its 75th plenary meeting, on 7 March 2014, the General Assembly, on the proposal of the SecretaryGeneral,20 having waived the relevant provisions of rule 40 of its rules of procedure, decided to include in the
agenda of its sixty-eighth session an additional sub-item entitled “Election of members of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law” as sub-item (f) of agenda item 115 entitled “Elections to fill vacancies in
subsidiary organs and other elections”, under heading I (Organizational, administrative and other matters), and to
consider it directly in plenary meeting.
At its 76th plenary meeting, on 21 March 2014, the General Assembly decided to reopen consideration of subitem (a) of agenda item 67, entitled “Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance”, under heading D (Promotion of human rights), and to consider it directly in plenary meeting.
At its 79th plenary meeting, on 26 March 2014, the General Assembly decided to reopen consideration of subitem (b) entitled “Appointment of members of the Committee on Contributions” of agenda item 116 entitled
“Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other appointments”, under heading I (Organizational,
administrative and other matters), and to proceed expeditiously with the consideration of the report of the Fifth
Committee.21
At the same meeting, the General Assembly decided to reopen consideration of sub-item (f) entitled
“Appointment of members of the Independent Audit Advisory Committee” of agenda item 116 entitled
“Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other appointments”, under heading I (Organizational,
administrative and other matters), and to proceed expeditiously with the consideration of the report of the Fifth
Committee.22
At its 83rd plenary meeting, on 14 April 2014, the General Assembly, on the proposal of the SecretaryGeneral,23 having waived the relevant provisions of rule 40 of its rules of procedure, decided to include in the
agenda of its sixty-eighth session an additional item entitled “Financing of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic”, as agenda item 176, under heading I
(Organizational, administrative and other matters), and to allocate it to the Fifth Committee.
At its 85th plenary meeting, on 13 May 2014, the General Assembly decided to reopen consideration of subitem (b) entitled “Appointment of members of the Committee on Contributions” of agenda item 116 entitled
“Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other appointments”, under heading I (Organizational,
administrative and other matters), and to proceed expeditiously with the consideration of the report of the Fifth
Committee.24
At its 87th plenary meeting, on 20 May 2014, the General Assembly decided to reopen consideration of subitem (a) of agenda item 65, entitled “Promotion and protection of the rights of children”, under heading D
(Promotion of human rights), to consider it directly in plenary meeting and to proceed expeditiously with the
consideration of a draft resolution.25
_______________
19
Decision 68/504, in section B.1 of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 49 (A/68/49),
vol. II, becomes decision 68/504 A.
20
A/68/233.
21
A/68/558/Add.1.
22
A/68/562/Add.2.
23
A/68/234.
24
A/68/558/Add.2.
25
A/68/L.46.

158

IV. Decisions

At its 88th plenary meeting, on 23 May 2014, the General Assembly decided to reopen consideration of subitem (a) entitled “Implementation of the Second United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty
(2008–2017)” of agenda item 23 entitled “Eradication of poverty and other development issues”, under heading A
(Promotion of sustained economic growth and sustainable development in accordance with the relevant resolutions
of the General Assembly and recent United Nations conferences), and to consider it directly in plenary meeting.
At its 99th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2014, the General Assembly, on the proposal of the SecretaryGeneral,26 having waived the relevant provisions of rule 40 of its rules of procedure, decided to include in the
agenda of its sixty-eighth session an additional sub-item entitled “Appointment of members and alternate members
of the United Nations Staff Pension Committee”, as sub-item (j) of agenda item 116 entitled “Appointments to fill
vacancies in subsidiary organs and other appointments”, under heading I (Organizational, administrative and other
matters), and to consider it directly in plenary meeting.
At its 109th plenary meeting, on 15 September 2014, the General Assembly decided to consider directly in
plenary meeting sub-item (a) entitled “Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further
Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable Development and of the
United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development” of agenda item 19 entitled “Sustainable development”,
under heading A (Promotion of sustained economic growth and sustainable development in accordance with the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and recent United Nations conferences), and to proceed expeditiously
with the consideration of a draft resolution.27
68/551. Building a peaceful and better world through sport and the Olympic ideal
At its 73rd plenary meeting, on 29 January 2014, the General Assembly took note of the solemn appeal made
by the President of the General Assembly in connection with the observance of the Olympic Truce.28
68/552. Commemorative meeting of the General Assembly on the occasion of the International Day
for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
At its 76th plenary meeting, on 21 March 2014, the General Assembly decided, without setting a precedent, to
invite Ms. Gay McDougall, first United Nations Independent Expert on minority issues, former expert member of
the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination and Special Rapporteur of the former Subcommission
on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights, to make a statement on the occasion of the International Day for
the Elimination of Racial Discrimination.
68/553. Commemorative meeting of the General Assembly on the occasion of the International Day
of Remembrance of the Victims of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade
At its 77th plenary meeting, on 25 March 2014, the General Assembly, recalling its decision 68/502 of
20 September 2013 in which it adopted the format for commemorative meetings that included statements by the
President of the General Assembly, the Secretary-General, the Chairs of the five regional groups and the
representative of the host country,29 decided that the commemorative meeting of the Assembly on the occasion of
the International Day of Remembrance of the Victims of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade, held on
25 March 2014 pursuant to its resolution 68/7 of 21 October 2013, would, without setting a precedent, also include a
statement by Ms. Michaëlle Jean, Special Envoy for Haiti of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization and member of the International Scientific Committee of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization Slave Route Project.

_______________
26

A/68/235.
A/68/L.62.
28
A/68/710.
29
A/68/250, para. 49.
27

159

IV. Decisions

68/554. The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
At its 97th plenary meeting, on 13 June 2014, the General Assembly, on the proposal of its President, decided,
without setting a precedent, to invite Mr. Taleb Rifai, Secretary-General of the World Tourism Organization, to
make a statement at the meeting.
68/555. Implementation of the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS and the Political Declarations
on HIV/AIDS
At its 99th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2014, the General Assembly, on the proposal of its President,30 guided
by the 2001 Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS31 and the 2006 and 2011 Political Declarations on
HIV/AIDS:32
(a) Took note of the report of the Secretary-General entitled “Towards ending the AIDS epidemic: meeting
the 2015 targets and planning for the post-2015 era”,33 and the recommendations contained therein, as input for
consideration in the discussions on formulation of the post-2015 development agenda, and acknowledged the
progress achieved and the remaining challenges and gaps in the fight against HIV/AIDS;
(b) Decided to convene a high-level meeting on HIV/AIDS in 2016, preferably in the second half of the
year, and to undertake the necessary consultations to determine the modalities and organizational arrangements for
such a meeting during the seventieth session of the General Assembly, but no later than December 2015;
(c) Also decided to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session the item entitled
“Implementation of the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS and the Political Declarations on HIV/AIDS”.
68/556. Extension of the intergovernmental process of the General Assembly on a programme for the
implementation of the International Decade for People of African Descent
At its 99th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2014, the General Assembly, on the proposal of its President,34
recalling its resolution 68/237 of 23 December 2013 in which it requested the President of the Assembly, through
the facilitator, to continue consultations with States members of the Assembly and other stakeholders, with a view to
elaborating a programme for the implementation of the International Decade for People of African Descent, to be
finalized and adopted during the sixty-eighth session of the Assembly and not later than 30 June 2014, decided to
extend the informal intergovernmental process on a programme for the implementation of the International Decade
in order to finalize the elaboration of a programme for adoption by the Assembly.
68/557. Question of equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council
and related matters
At its 106th plenary meeting, on 8 September 2014, the General Assembly:
(a) Decided to reaffirm the central role of the General Assembly on the question of equitable representation
on and increase in the membership of the Security Council and other matters related to the Security Council;
(b) Also decided to immediately continue intergovernmental negotiations on Security Council reform in
informal plenary of the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session, as mandated by Assembly decisions 62/557 of
15 September 2008, 63/565 B of 14 September 2009, 64/568 of 13 September 2010, 65/554 of 12 September 2011,
66/566 of 13 September 2012 and 67/561 of 29 August 2013, building on the informal meetings held during its
sixty-eighth session, as well as the positions of and proposals made by Member States, while welcoming the active
engagement, initiatives and intensive efforts of the President of the General Assembly, and taking note of the
previous proposals of the Chair of the intergovernmental negotiations, and noting with appreciation his active role
_______________
30

A/68/L.51.
Resolution S-26/2, annex.
32
Resolution 60/262, annex, and resolution 65/277, annex.
33
A/68/825.
34
A/68/L.52.
31

160

IV. Decisions

and concrete efforts, including the preparation of the text reflecting the positions of and proposals submitted by
Member States, with a view to an early comprehensive reform of the Security Council;
(c) Further decided to convene the Open-ended Working Group on the Question of Equitable
Representation on and Increase in the Membership of the Security Council and Other Matters related to the Security
Council during the sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly if Member States so decide;
(d) Decided to include in the agenda of the sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly an item entitled
“Question of equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council and other matters
related to the Security Council”.
68/558. Programme of activities for the implementation of the International Decade for People
of African Descent
At its 107th plenary meeting, on 9 September 2014, the General Assembly, on the proposal of its President, 35
recalling its resolution 68/237 of 23 December 2013 by which it proclaimed the International Decade for People of
African Descent, commencing on 1 January 2015 and ending on 31 December 2024, with the theme “People of
African descent: recognition, justice and development”, to be officially launched immediately following the general
debate of the sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly, and to this end emphasizing the opportunity for achieving
important synergy in combating all the scourges of racism through effective observance of the International Decade
and in that regard contributing to the implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action,36
decided to defer consideration of and action on the draft resolution on the programme of activities for the
implementation of the International Decade37 until its sixty-ninth session in order to allow time for further
consultations on the programme budget implications of the proposal.38
68/559. Report of the Security Council
At its 109th plenary meeting, on 15 September 2014, the General Assembly took note of the report of the
Security Council.39
68/660. The situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan
At its 109th plenary meeting, on 15 September 2014, the General Assembly decided to defer consideration of
the item entitled “The situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan” and to include it in the draft agenda of its
sixty-ninth session.
68/661. Question of the Comorian island of Mayotte
At its 109th plenary meeting, on 15 September 2014, the General Assembly, on the proposal of the
Comoros,40 decided to defer consideration of the item entitled “Question of the Comorian island of Mayotte” and to
include it in the draft agenda of its sixty-ninth session.
68/662. The rule of law at the national and international levels
At its 109th plenary meeting, on 15 September 2014, the General Assembly, on the proposal of Denmark and
Mexico,40 decided to consider the addendum to the report of the Secretary-General on strengthening and
coordinating United Nations rule of law activities41at its sixty-ninth session under the item entitled “The rule of law
at the national and international levels”.

_______________
35

A/68/L.58.
See A/CONF.189/12 and Corr.1, chap. I.
37
A/68/L.56.
38
See A/68/977.
39
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 2 (A/68/2).
40
See A/68/PV.109.
41
A/68/213/Add.1.
36

161

IV. Decisions

68/663. International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and
Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory
of Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994
At its 109th plenary meeting, on 15 September 2014, the General Assembly decided to defer consideration of
the item entitled “International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and
Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan
Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States
between 1 January and 31 December 1994” and to include it in the draft agenda of its sixty-ninth session.
68/664. International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991
At its 109th plenary meeting, on 15 September 2014, the General Assembly decided to include the item
entitled “International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991” in the draft agenda of its sixtyninth session.
68/665. Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad
At its 109th plenary meeting, on 15 September 2014, the General Assembly decided to defer consideration of
the item entitled “Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad” and to
include it in the draft agenda of its sixty-ninth session.
68/666. Financing of the United Nations Mission in East Timor
At its 109th plenary meeting, on 15 September 2014, the General Assembly decided to defer consideration of
the item entitled “Financing of the United Nations Mission in East Timor” and to include it in the draft agenda of its
sixty-ninth session.
68/667. Investigation into the conditions and circumstances resulting in the tragic death of Dag
Hammarskjöld and of the members of the party accompanying him
At its 109th plenary meeting, on 15 September 2014, the General Assembly, on the proposal of Sweden,40
decided to defer consideration of the item entitled “Investigation into the conditions and circumstances resulting in
the tragic death of Dag Hammarskjöld and of the members of the party accompanying him” and to include it in the
draft agenda of its sixty-ninth session.
68/668. Report of the Human Rights Council
At its 109th plenary meeting, on 15 September 2014, the General Assembly decided to defer consideration of
Human Rights Council resolution 24/24 of 27 September 201342 until its sixty-ninth session.

2.

Decisions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

68/549. Questions deferred for future consideration
B43
At its 81st plenary meeting, on 9 April 2014, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the Fifth
Committee,44
_______________
42

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/68/53/Add.1), chap. III.
Decision 68/549, in section B.6 of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 49 (A/68/49),
vol. II, becomes decision 68/549 A.
44
A/68/691/Add.1, para. 11.
43

162

IV. Decisions

Section A
Decided to defer until the second part of its resumed sixty-eighth session consideration of the following
documents:
Item 132
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations
Civilian capacity
Reports of the Secretary-General on civilian capacity in the aftermath of conflict45
Related reports of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions46
Section B
Decided to defer until its sixty-ninth session consideration of the following documents:
Item 134
Programme budget for the biennium 2014–2015
Construction and property management
Report of the Secretary-General on the study on the long-term accommodation needs at United Nations
Headquarters for the period from 2014 to 203447
Related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions48
United Nations Partnerships Facility
Proposed programme budget for the biennium 2014–201549
Related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions50
Reports of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Office for Partnerships51
C
At its 99th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2014, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the Fifth
Committee,52
Section A
Decided to defer until the sixty-ninth session consideration of the following documents:
Item 132
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations
Civilian capacity
Report of the Secretary-General on civilian capacity in the aftermath of conflict53
Related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions54
_______________
45

A/67/312-S/2012/645 and A/68/696-S/2014/5 and Corr.1.
A/67/583 and A/68/784.
47
A/68/734.
48
A/68/798.
49
A/68/6 (Sect. 1), sect. J.
50
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 7 (A/68/7), chap. II, paras. I.56–I.95.
51
A/67/165 and Corr.1 and A/68/186.
52
A/68/691/Add.2, para. 5.
53
A/67/312-S/2012/645.
54
A/67/583.
46

163

IV. Decisions

Section B
Decided to defer until the second part of its resumed sixty-ninth session consideration of the following
documents:
Item 147
Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations
Cross-cutting issues
Report of the Secretary-General entitled “Overview of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations: budget performance for the period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013 and budget for the period
from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015”55
Fourth annual progress report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the global field support
strategy56
Report of the Secretary-General on special measures for protection from sexual exploitation and sexual
abuse57
Related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions58
Report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the activities of the Office concerning peace operations
for the period 1 January to 31 December 201359
Report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the evaluation of the implementation and results of
protection of civilians mandates in United Nations peacekeeping operations60
Closed peacekeeping missions
Report of the Secretary-General on the updated financial position of closed peacekeeping missions as at
30 June 201361
Related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions62
Report of the Secretary-General on the updated financial position of closed peacekeeping missions as at
30 June 201263
Related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions64
Report of the Secretary-General on the updated financial position of closed peacekeeping missions as at
30 June 201165
Related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions66

_______________
55

A/68/731.
A/68/637 and Corr.1.
57
A/68/756.
58
A/68/782.
59
A/68/337 (Part II).
60
A/68/787.
61
A/68/666.
62
A/68/837.
63
A/67/739.
64
A/67/837.
65
A/66/665.
66
A/66/713 and Corr.1.
56

164

Annex I
Allocation of agenda itemsa
a

1. The following sub-item, which had been allocated to the Second Committee, was also considered directly in
plenary meeting during the resumed sixty-eighth session of the General Assembly, under heading A (Promotion of
sustained economic growth and sustainable development in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and recent United Nations conferences):b
19. Sustainable development:
(a)

Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and
the outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable Development and of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development.

2. The following sub-item, which had been allocated to the Second Committee, was also considered directly in
plenary meeting during the resumed sixty-eighth session, under heading A (Promotion of sustained economic
growth and sustainable development in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and recent
United Nations conferences):b
23. Eradication of poverty and other development issues:
(a)

Implementation of the Second United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (2008–2017).

3. The following sub-item, which had been allocated to the Third Committee, was also considered directly in
plenary meeting during the resumed sixty-eighth session, under heading D (Promotion of human rights):b
65. Promotion and protection of the rights of children:
(a)

Promotion and protection of the rights of children.

4. The following sub-item, which had been allocated to the Third Committee, was also considered directly in
plenary meeting during the resumed sixty-eighth session, under heading D (Promotion of human rights):b
67. Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance:
(a)

Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance.

5. The following additional sub-item was considered directly in plenary meeting during the resumed sixty-eighth
session, under heading I (Organizational, administrative and other matters):b
115. Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other elections:
(f)

Election of members of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law.

6. The following sub-items, which had been allocated to the Fifth Committee, were also considered directly in
plenary meeting during the resumed sixty-eighth session, under heading I (Organizational, administrative and other
matters):b
116. Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other appointments:
(b)

Appointment of members of the Committee on Contributions;

(f)

Appointment of members of the Independent Audit Advisory Committee.

_______________
a

Organized under headings corresponding to the priorities of the Organization.

b

See decision 68/504 B in section IV.B of the present volume.

165

Annex I – Allocation of agenda items

7. The following additional sub-item was considered directly in plenary meeting during the resumed sixty-eighth
session, under heading I (Organizational, administrative and other matters):b
116. Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other appointments:
(j)

Appointment of members and alternate members of the United Nations Staff Pension Committee.

8. The following additional item was allocated to the Fifth Committee during the resumed sixty-eighth session,
under heading I (Organizational, administrative and other matters):b
176. Financing of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic.

166

Annex II
Checklist of resolutions and decisions
Resolutions
Resolution
number

68/19.

Title

131

99th

30 June 2014

81

134

81st

9 April 2014

82

148

99th

30 June 2014

91

158

99th

30 June 2014

93

159 (a)

99th

30 June 2014

95

9

73rd

29 January 2014

2

Financing of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali
Resolution B

68/260.

Page

Financing of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
Resolution B

68/259.

Date of adoption

Special subjects relating to the programme budget for the
biennium 2014–2015
Resolution B

68/258.

Plenary
meeting

Financial reports and audited financial statements, and reports
of the Board of Auditors
Resolution B

68/247.

Item

Financing of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
Resolution B

68/261.

Fundamental Principles of Official Statistics

68/262.

Territorial integrity of Ukraine

33 (b)

80th

27 March 2014

3

68/263.

Procurement

132

81st

9 April 2014

97

68/264.

Progress towards an accountability system in the United Nations
Secretariat

132

81st

9 April 2014

98

68/265.

Mobility framework

139

81st

9 April 2014

100

68/266.

Joint Inspection Unit

140

81st

9 April 2014

102

68/267.

Construction of a new facility for the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, Arusha branch

146

81st

9 April 2014

104

68/268.

Strengthening and enhancing the effective functioning
of the human rights treaty body system

125

81st

9 April 2014

4

68/269.

Improving global road safety

12

82nd

10 April 2014

10

68/270.

Second United Nations Conference on Landlocked
Developing Countries

22 (b)

84th

23 April 2014

15

68/271.

Scope and modalities of the comprehensive review and assessment
of the progress achieved in the prevention and control
of non-communicable diseases

118

85th

13 May 2014

17

68/272.

Interaction between the United Nations, national parliaments and
the Inter-Parliamentary Union

126

86th

19 May 2014

18

68/273.

High-level meeting of the General Assembly on the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the adoption of the Convention on the Rights
of the Child

65 (a)

87th

20 May 2014

21

167

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions and decisions

Resolution
number

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

68/274.

Status of internally displaced persons and refugees from Abkhazia,
Georgia, and the Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia, Georgia

34

90th

5 June 2014

22

68/275.

United Nations Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela Prize

118

91st

6 June 2014

24

68/276.

The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy Review

119

97th

13 June 2014

24

68/277.

Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping
operations in all their aspects

53

98th

16 June 2014

78

68/278.

Implementation of the recommendations contained in the report of
the Secretary-General on the causes of conflict and the promotion
of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa

63 (b)

98th

16 June 2014

30

68/279.

Modalities for the third International Conference on Financing
for Development

18

99th

30 June 2014

36

68/280.

Estimates in respect of special political missions, good offices
and other political initiatives authorized by the General
Assembly and/or the Security Council

134

99th

30 June 2014

105

68/281.

Rates of reimbursement to troop-contributing countries

147

99th

30 June 2014

106

68/282.

Triennial review of the rates and standards for reimbursement
to Member States for contingent-owned equipment

147

99th

30 June 2014

107

68/283.

Support account for peacekeeping operations

147

99th

30 June 2014

107

68/284.

Financing of the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy

147

99th

30 June 2014

117

68/285.

Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire

150

99th

30 June 2014

118

68/286.

Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus

151

99th

30 June 2014

121

68/287.

Financing of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo

152

99th

30 June 2014

124

68/288.

Financing of the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste

154

99th

30 June 2014

126

68/289.

Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti

155

99th

30 June 2014

127

68/290.

Financing of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo

156

99th

30 June 2014

130

68/291.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia

157

99th

30 June 2014

132

68/292.

Financing of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon

159 (b)

99th

30 June 2014

135

68/293.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan

160

99th

30 June 2014

138

68/294.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan

161

99th

30 June 2014

140

68/295.

Financing of the United Nations Supervision Mission
in the Syrian Arab Republic

162

99th

30 June 2014

141

68/296.

Financing of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum
in Western Sahara

163

99th

30 June 2014

142

68/297.

Financing of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur

164

99th

30 June 2014

144

68/298.

Financing of the activities arising from Security Council
resolution 1863 (2009)

165

99th

30 June 2014

147

168

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions and decisions

Resolution
number

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

68/299.

Financing of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic

176

99th

30 June 2014

149

68/300.

Outcome document of the high-level meeting of the General
Assembly on the comprehensive review and assessment
of the progress achieved in the prevention and control
of non-communicable diseases

118

100th

10 July 2014

39

68/301.

New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress
in implementation and international support

63 (a)

104th

17 July 2014

44

68/302.

Modalities for the overall review by the General Assembly
of the implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit
on the Information Society

16

105th

31 July 2014

51

68/303.

Strengthening the role of mediation in the peaceful settlement
of disputes, conflict prevention and resolution

33 (b)

105th

31 July 2014

52

68/304.

Towards the establishment of a multilateral legal framework
for sovereign debt restructuring processes

14

107th

9 September 2014

56

68/305.

Report of the International Criminal Court

75

107th

9 September 2014

59

68/306.

Enhancement of the administration and financial functioning
of the United Nations

124 and 125

107th

9 September 2014

62

68/307.

Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly

122

108th

10 September 2014

63

68/308.

Consolidating gains and accelerating efforts to control and
eliminate malaria in developing countries, particularly
in Africa, by 2015

13

108th

10 September 2014

68

68/309.

Report of the Open Working Group on Sustainable Development
Goals established pursuant to General Assembly resolution 66/288

14

108th

10 September 2014

74

68/310.

Four one-day structured dialogues on possible arrangements for a
facilitation mechanism to promote the development, transfer and
dissemination of clean and environmentally sound technologies

19 (a)

109th

15 September 2014

75

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

115 (a)

88th

23 May 2014

153

116 (a)

75th

7 March 2014

153

Decision B

116 (b)

79th

26 March 2014

154

Decision C

116 (b)

85th

13 May 2014

154

Decisions
Decision
number

68/404.

Title

Election of seven members of the Committee for Programme
and Coordination
Decision B

68/407.

Appointment of members of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
Decision B

68/408.

Appointment of members of the Committee on Contributions

169

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions and decisions

Decision
number

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

116 (f)

79th

26 March 2014

154

Decision B

116 (g)

74th

10 February 2014

155

Decision C

116 (g)

75th

7 March 2014

155

Decision D

116 (g)

81st

9 April 2014

155

68/416.

Election of the Executive Director of the United Nations
Environment Programme

115 (d)

75th

7 March 2014

155

68/417.

Election of members of the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law

115 (f)

79th

26 March 2014

155

68/418.

Election of the President of the General Assembly
at its sixty-ninth session

4

93rd

11 June 2014

156

68/419.

Election of the Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly
at its sixty-ninth session

6

93rd

11 June 2014

156

68/420.

Approval of the appointment of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights

116 (i)

98th

16 June 2014

156

68/421.

Election of the Executive Director of the United Nations Human
Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat)

115 (e)

104th

17 July 2014

156

68/422.

Appointment of members and alternate members of the United
Nations Staff Pension Committee

116 (j)

104th

17 July 2014

156

68/423.

Election of the Chairs of the Main Committees of the General
Assembly at its sixty-ninth session

5

105th

31 July 2014

157

68/504.

Adoption of the agenda and allocation of agenda items
7

75th
76th
79th
83rd
85th
87th
88th
99th
109th

Decision B

132

81st

9 April 2014

162

Decision C

132

99th

30 June 2014

163

68/551.

Building a peaceful and better world through sport and the
Olympic ideal

11

73rd

29 January 2014

159

68/552.

Commemorative meeting of the General Assembly on the
occasion of the International Day for the Elimination of
Racial Discrimination

67 (a)

76th

21 March 2014

159

68/412.

Title

Appointment of members of the Independent Audit Advisory
Committee
Decision B

68/414.

Appointment of members of the Committee on Conferences

Decision B

68/549.

170

7 March 2014
158
21 March 2014
26 March 2014
14 April 2014
13 May 2014
20 May 2014
23 May 2014
30 June 2014
15 September 2014

Questions deferred for future consideration

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions and decisions

Decision
number

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

68/553.

Commemorative meeting of the General Assembly on the occasion
of the International Day of Remembrance of the Victims of
Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade

120

77th

25 March 2014

159

68/554.

The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy

119

97th

13 June 2014

160

68/555.

Implementation of the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS
and the Political Declarations on HIV/AIDS

10

99th

30 June 2014

160

68/556.

Extension of the intergovernmental process of the General
Assembly on a programme for the implementation of the
International Decade for People of African Descent

67 (b)

99th

30 June 2014

160

68/557.

Question of equitable representation on and increase in the
membership of the Security Council and related matters

123

106th

8 September 2014

160

68/558.

Programme of activities for the implementation of the
International Decade for People of African Descent

67 (b)

107th

9 September 2014

161

68/559.

Report of the Security Council

29

109th

15 September 2014 161

68/660.

The situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan

38

109th

15 September 2014 161

68/661.

Question of the Comorian island of Mayotte

39

109th

15 September 2014 161

68/662.

The rule of law at the national and international levels

85

109th

15 September 2014 161

68/663.

International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and
Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January and 31 December 1994

128

109th

15 September 2014 162

68/664.

International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991

129

109th

15 September 2014 162

68/665.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad

149

109th

15 September 2014 162

68/666.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in East Timor

153

109th

15 September 2014 162

68/667.

Investigation into the conditions and circumstances resulting in the
tragic death of Dag Hammarskjöld and of the members of the
party accompanying him

175

109th

15 September 2014 162

68/668.

Report of the Human Rights Council

64

109th

15 September 2014 162

171
