UNITED NATIONS

I NATIONS UNIES

•
SECURITY COUNCIL

,

r

-~

...,.~

•
I.
"

OFFICIAL RECORDS
FIFTEENTH YEAR

'.

897

r

th MEETING: 10 SEPTEMBER 1960
hne SEANCE: 10 SEPTEMBRE 1960

QUINZIEME ANNEE

..

CONSEIL DE si CURl TB
DOCUMENTS OFFICIBLS
NEW

I

YORK
./

".

TABLE OF CONTENTS
.

1

Adoption of the agenda • • • • • • .. • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •

1

Letter dated 13 July 1960 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council (8/4381): fourth report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolutions S/4387 of 14 July 1960, S/4405 of 22 July
1960 and si 4426 of 9 August 1960 (S/4482 and Add.!); letter
dated 8 September 1960 from the Permanent Representative of
Yugoslavia to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/4485) • . . . . . • . . . . • . • • . . . . • • .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/897)

.

I

P~ge

TABLE DES MATIERES

J

'....-

.I
~

"

%.

Ordre du jour provisoire (S/Agenda!897)•••••••••••••••••

1

Adoption de I'ordre du jour. • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •

]

( 19 p. )

S/PV.897

I

•

~~'.:

Sf

&0

•

~

~ 01

"'"

_

....~.. •

.~.

. '

"

.'

I

M

"

•

'

•

•

.~.

.'

,

.

~,~

•

•••••

•

•

iiJli.~n::~:;;:,·:m:~:::':;'if."tCC:.,~;'.:'.;_CJu:.~~:':~;·~::·i:::;:~:.:". -, -,'

."

~

~"

TAB LED E 8 M A TIE RES (suite)
Page

'1
"3

)

Lettre, en date du 13 juillet 1960, adress~e par le Secr~taire
g~n~ral au Pr~sident du Conseil de s~curit~ (8/4381): quatri~me rapport du Secr~taire g~n~ral sur la mise en application
des r~solutions 8/4387 du 14 juillet 1960, 8/4405 du 22 juillet
1960 et 8/4426 du 9 aout 1960 du Conseil de s6curit~ (8/4482
et Add.l); lettre, en date du 8 septembre 1960, adress6e au
Prt1sident du Conseil de s~curite par le reprt1sentant permanent de la Yougoslavie aupr~s de l'Organisation des Nations
Unies (S/4485) ..
D

•••••••••

11

•

0

••••••

11

•••

11

••••••

'.

1

Pro

1. Adoption 0
2. Letter da

General a
Council (8
General 0
cil resolu
22 July 1

and Add.1
the Perm
the United
the Securi

Relevant documents not reproduced in full in the records of the meetings of
the Security Council are published in quarterly supplements to the Official Records.
Symools tJf United Nations documents are composed of capita1letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations

The agenda

document.

*

*

Letter dated 1
addreS$ed to t
fourth report 0
of Security C
S/4405 of 22
(S/4482 and
the Penmment
Nations addre

*

Lea documents pertinents qui ne sont pas reproduits in extenso dans les
comptes rendus des s6ances du Conseil de s~urite sont publi6s dans des suppl6menta trimestriels aux Documents officiels.

I..es cotes des documents de l'Organisation des Nations Unies se composent de
lettres majuscules et de chiHres. La simple mention d'une cote clans un texte
signJiie qu'll s'agit d'un document de l'Organisation.

(5/4485)
1. The PRES
taken at our
consent of the
of Yugoslavia
cil table.

At the invitat
(Indonesia) an
the Council tab
2. The PRES
morning from
to the United
in the Congo [
invited to pal +.
810n.

I

'-

EIGHT HUNDRED AND NINETY-SEVENTH MEETING
Held in New York, on Saturday, 10 September 1960, at 3 p.m.
HUIT CENT QUATRE-VINGT-DIX-SEPTIEME SEANCE
Tenue

:-'

a New York, le samedl 10 septembre 1960, a 15 heures.

President: Mr. E. ORTONA (Itlay).

Pr6sident: M. E. ORTONA (Italie).

Present: The representatives ofthefcllowingStates:
Argentina, Ceylon, China, Ecuador, France, Italy,
Poland, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United states of America.

Pr6sents: Les repr6sentants des Etats suivants:
Argentine, Ceylan,Chine, Equateur, Etats-Unis d'Amerique, France, ltalie, Pologne, Royaume-Uni de GrandeBretagne et d'IrJande du Nord, Tunisie, Union des
R6publiques socialistes sovi6tiQles.

ProvilSional agllti1da (SI Agenda/89n

Ordre du jour piovisoire (SI Agenda/89n

1. Adoption of the agenda.

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.

2. Letter dated 13 July 1960 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/4381): fourth report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of Security Council resolutions S/4387 of 14 July 1960, S/4405 of
22 July 1960 and S/4426 of 9 August 1960 (S/4482
and Add.1); letter dated 8 September 1960 from
the Permanent Representative of Yugosla.via to
the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/4485).

20 Lettre, en date du 13 juillet 1960, adresslle par le
Secrlltaire g6n6ral au Pr6sident du Conseil de
s6curit6 (S/4381): quatri~me rapport du Secr6taire
g(meral sur la mise en application des r6so1utions
si4387 du 14 juillet 1960, S/4405 du 22 juillet 1960
et 8/4426 du 9 ao6t 1960 du Conseil de sllcurite
(Si 4482 et Add.1); lettre, en date du 8 septembre
1960, adress6e au Pr6sident du Conseil de s6curitll
par le repr6sentant permanent de la Yougoslavie
aupr~s de 1'Organisation des Nations Unies (S/4485).

Adoption of the agendc

Adoption de J'ordre du jour
L'ornre du jour est adopt~.

The agenda was adopted.

Lettre, en date du 13 juillet 1960, adressee par le Seeretaire
general au President du Cons~il de securite (S/4381:
quatrieme rapport du Secretcire general sur la mise en
app:ication des resolutions S/4387 du 14 juillet 1960,
S/4405 du 22 juillet 1960 et S/4426 diJ 9 aout 1960 du
Conseil de securite (S/4482 et Add.1); lettre, en dote
du 8 septembre 1960, adressee au President du Conzeil
de securite par le representant permanent de la Yougo$lavio
aupres de i'Organisation des Nations Unies (5/4485;

Letter doted 13 July 1960 from the Secretory-General
addressed to the Presidentofthe Security Council (S/4381):
fourth report of the Secretory-General on the implementation
of Security Council resolutions S/4387 of 14 July 1960,
S/4405 of 22 July 1960 and S/4426 of 9 August 1960
(S/4482 and Add.1); letter doted 8 September 1960 from
the Perml1nent Representative of Yugoslavia to the United
Notions addressed to the President of the Security Council

(S/4485)
1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
taken at our meeting yesterday, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite the representatives
of Yugoslavia and Indonesia to take seats at the Council table.

1. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Conformement A la decision que nous avons prise A notre seance
d'hier, je me propose, avec l'asselltiment du Conseil,
d'inviter les representants de la Yougoslavie et de
1'Indonesie A prendre place A la table du Consei!.

At the invitation of the President, Mr, Wirjopranoto
(Indonesia) and Mr. Vidi6 (Yugoslavia) took places at
the Council table.

(Indon~sie) et M.

a

2. The PRESIDENT: A letter was received this
morning from the Permanent Representative of Ghana
to the United Nations in connexion with the situation
in the Congo [S/44991. In this letter he requests to be
invited to pal.f:icipate in the Security Council discussion.

2. L: PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Dans une
lettre rec;ue ce matin et relative A la situation au
Congo [S/4499], le representant permanent du Ghana
aupr~s de l'Organisation des Nations Unies demande
A ~tre invite A participer aux debats du Conseil de
securite.
1

I

Sur l'invitation du President, M. Wirjopranoto
Vidi6 (Yougoslavie) prennent place
la table du Conseil.

3. As there is no objection, I shall also invite the
representative of Ghana to take a seat at the Council
table.

3. Puisqu'il n'y a pas d'objection, j'inviterai egalement le representant du Ghana ~ prendre place ~ la
table du Conseil.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. QuaisonSackey (Ghana) took a place at the Council table.

Sur l'invitation du President, M. Quaison-Sackey
(Ghana) prend place la table du Conseil.

4. The PRESIDENT: Before the Council proceeds to
its consideration of thE item on the agenda, I wish to
draw the attention of thE members of the Council to a
letter addressed to me this morning by the SecretaryGeneral [S/4496], which reads as follows:

4. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Avant que le
Conseil passe ~ l'examen du point qui figure A. l'ordre
du jour, je voudrais attirer son attention sur une lettre
que le SeCi.,etaire general m'R adressee ce matin
[8/4496] et dont voici le texte:

"I received this morning from Ambassador Dayal,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Leopoldville, by telegram, the information that the
Central Government of the Republic of the Congo
requests postponement of the Security Council
meeting until a Congo delegation can arrive. If
postponement is granted, the delegation would leave
11 Septemb,r."

"J'ai re9u ce matin un telegramme de M. Dayal,
representant special du Secretaire general ~ Leopoldville, m'informant que le gouvernement central
de la Republique du Congo demandaii; que la Teunion
du Conseil de securite soit remise pour permettre
~ une delegation congolaise d 'y assisi;er. Si le Conseil
accepte de remettre sa reunion, la delegation partira
le 11 septembre."

I would no', like to invite the members of the Council
to express their views on the matter.

Je voudrais demander aux membres du Conseilleur
opinion a. ce sujet.

5. Mr. KUZNETSOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): We have examined
the communication from Leopoldville and we feel that
the Security Council should take account of the wishes
of the Congolese Go"lernment and in determining the
future course of its work bear it in mind that it can
clearly deal more thoroughly and in greater detail
with the item on its agenda, that of the situation in
the Congo, if the representatives of the Congoles8
Government are present.

5. M. KOUZNETSOV (Union des Republiques sociaHstes sovietiques) [traduit du russe]: Apr~s avoi!'
etudie la communication re9ue de Leopoldville, nous
estimons que le Conseil de securite doit prendre en
consideration les vreux du Gouvernement congolais et,
en organibant sp,s travaux ulterieurs, tenir compte du
fait que la question de la situation au Congo qui est
inscrite a. son ordre du jour pourr<l.it faire l'objet d'un
examen plus circonstancie et plus approfondi en presence de representants du Gouvernement congolais.

6. For this reason the Soviet delegation would propose that the request of the Government of the Congo
should be granted.

6. Aussi la delegation sovietique proposerait-elle de

faire droit ~ la demandc du Gouvernement congolais.

7.

The PRESIDENT: The Council has heard the
statement of the representative of the Soviet Union.
We have before us a request which has been conveyed
to me by the Secretary-General, and the representative of the Soviet Union recommends that this request
be approved by the Council. Are there any comments?

7. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Le representant de 1'Union sovietique vient de recommander que
le Conseil acet:de a la demande qui m'aete transmise
par le Secretaire general. Y a-t-il d'autres observations?

8. If there is no further comment, :nay I take it that
the Council is in favour of postponing this meeting?

8. S'il n'y en apas,dois-jeenconcJ.ureque le Conseil
est favorable ~ l'ajournement de notre reunion?

9. Sir Patrick DEAN (United Kingdom): My delegation has given very careful thought to the request
made for a postponement of the Council's proceedings until Monday, 12 September, to allow time for a
representative of the Congo to be present.

9. Sir Patrick DEAN (Royaume-Uni) [traduit de
l'anglais]: Ma delegation a mtlrement reflecbi ~ la
demande tendant ~ ce que la seance du C onseil soit
remise au lundi 12 septembre, en vue de permettre ~
un representant du Congo d'y assister.

10. In our view, it is clear from the SecretaryGeneral's report [S/4482 and Add. I] and from the
grave account which he gave to the Council yesterday
evening [896th meeting] that the Security Council
should give the most urgent consideration to the item
now on its agenda. On the dher hand, we recognize
the validity of the request fOl the Congo to be represented during the current dell'lerations of the Council, although, in this connexion, it is, I e.:..:., a little
surprising that, in response to the invitation to the
Congolese authorities, of which the Secretary-General
spoke yesterday, no arrangements have yet been
made for an authoritative representative of the Congo
to be permanently available here in New York.
11. In these circumstances, my delegation would
regard any delay in the Council's proceedings as
tolerable only if there is a clear under3tanding that,
in the interval, no action capable of aggravating the
serious situation in the Congo will be taken by any

10. A notre avis, il ressort clairement du rapportdu
Secretaire general [8/4482 et Add.1] et de l'expose
inquietant qu'il nous a fait bier soir [896eme seancej
que le Conseil de securite devrait examiner de toute
urgence le point qui figure actuellement ~ son ordre
du jour. D' autre part, nous reconnaissons le bien-fonde
de la demande tendant a ce que le Congo soit represente aux presentes deliberations du Conseil, bien qu'il
me semble, ~ ce propos, un peu surprenant que les
autorites congolaises, malgre l'invitation mentionnee
hier par le Secretaire general, n'aient encore pris
aucune disposition pour que le Congo soit officiellement represente ~ New York d'une fa90n permanente.

Members 0
full support
by the repr

a

12. It wou
interval be
deliberation
ance with t
by the Coun
necessary t
in the Con
13. Accord
that, on the
the Council
the item 0
l'epresentat

14. I sho
plain that a
sentative 0
meetings d
recognition
present con
15. Mr. If.
publics) (tr
it, the Unit
to our res
Congolese
until its rep
16. At the
sentative m
to express
I see no nee
ing this pa
tions of the
comprehens
United Nati
Secretarythat it is h
any new rig
to thoBe all'
resolutions,
rity Council
refrain fro
situation in
action shoul
difficult for
it from re
with the la
gation on thi

17. M:r.CO
The decisio
extremely d
urgency and
by the Secr
statement ye
18. There
into at this
tion into the
and the adm
lems on wh!
an urgent

11. Dans ces conditions, ma delegation consid~re
qu'un renvoi des debats du Conseil n'est admissible
que s'il est expressement entendu qu'aucun Membre
de l'Organisation des Nations Unies ne prendra, dans
l'intervalle, de mesures susceptibles d'aggraver la

2

I

~

I,

•

a

• •

•

• '.'

I

•

_

'I

"

': :

_ _ ._.

",

:

.,,...,

e

e

n

-.

:1
n
e

.1

a

r

s

n

'.

u

It

n

I.

e

I.

e
e

11

•

e

a

it
~

u

e

l]

,e
e

le

l-

n

is

~.

~.

... .... ~~. ~.:

Members of the United Nations. I should like to give
full support to the remarks made in this connexion
by the representative of Tunisia at our last meeting.

situation au Congo, qui est dejil. tr~s serieuse. A cet
egard, j'appuie pleinement les observations presentees
11. notre derni~re seance par le representant de la
Tunisie.

12. It would also be our expectation that, in the
interval before the Security Council concludes its
deliberations, the Secretary-General will, in accordance with the authority already conferred upon him
by the Council, authorize whatever steps he considers
necessary to prevent a deterioration of the situation
in the Congo.

12. n devrait ~tre bien entendu egalement que. pendant
la periode qui s 'ecoulera ayant que le Conseil de securite ne termine ses deliberations, le Secretaire
general, conformement aux pouvoirs que le Conseillui
a dejil. conferes, autorisera toutes mesures qui lui
para1'l;ront necessaires pour emp~cher que la situation
au Congo ne s'aggrave.

13. Accordingly, my delegation is prepared to agree
that, on the understandings which I have described,
the Council should postpone further consideration of
the item on its agenda to allow for the arrival of a
representative of the C"ngo.

13. Ma delegation est par consequent pr~te, sous
reserve des conditions que je viens de mentionner, 11.
accepter que le Conseil ajourne l'examen du point 11.
son ordre du jour jusqu'a l'arrivee d'un representant
du Congo.

14. I should also, in conclusion, I think, make it
plain that agreement by the Council to anow a repro~
sentative of the Republic of the Congo to attend its
meetings does not, in our view, necessarily imply
recognition of ihe claims of any of the parties to the
present constitutional dispute within the Congo itself.

14. Je crois egalement utile, pour conclure, de preciser que le fait, pour le Consen, d'autoriser un
representant de la Republique du Congo 11. assister 11.
ses seances n'implique r~s necessairement, 1l. notre
avis, la reconnaissance des revendications d'aucune
des parties 1l. l'actuel differend constitutionnel a
1'interieur du Congo.

15. Mr• .t\:UZNETSOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): As I understand
it, the United Kingdom representative is not opposed
to our responding favourably to the request uf the
Congolese Government and postponing our meeting
until its representatives have arrived.

15. M. KOUZNETSOV (Union des Republiques sociaHstes sovietiques) [traduit du russe]: Si je cOID?rends
bien, le representant du Royaume-Uni ne s'oppose pas
1l. ce que le Conseil accueille favorablementla demande
du Gouverneme'1t congolais et ne se reunisse qu'apr~s
l'arrivee des representants de ce g01!vernement.

16. At the same t'me the United Kingdom representative made certain stipulations, and I should like
to express my delegation's views on them. In general
I see no need to make any sort of conditions concerning this particular interval. We have the resolutions of the Security Council, which quite clearly and
comprehensively set forth the rights and duties of the
United Nations officials and in particular those of the
Secretary-General. It would seem to me, therefore,
that it is hardly necessary for us now to formulate
any new rights for the Secretary-General in addition
to those already conferred upon him k the Council's
resolutions, the more so as all members of the Security Council have, as I understand it, undertaken to
refrain from any action which might aggravate the
situation in the Congo....and by that I mean that no
action should be taken which would make things more
difficult for the Government of the COllgo and prevent
it from restoring order in the country in accordance
with the law. Those are the views of the Soviet delegation on this subject.

16. Cependant, le re{.iresentant du Royaume-Uni a
assorti son acceptation de certaines conditions sur
lesquelles je voudrais exposer lee wes de ma delegation. n ne semble d'ailleurs nullement necess:ti.re
de fixer des conditions 11. cette interruption de nos
travaux, je dis bien cette interruption. n existe des
resolutions du Conseil qui indiquent de fac;on claire et
compl~te les droits et les obligations des fonctionnaires de 1'ONU, notamment lea droits et obligations
du Secretaire general. n n'est donc gu~re necessaire
11. l'heure actuelle, me semble-t-il, d'accorder a,
Secretaire general d'autres droits que ceux que lui
donnent deja les resolutions du Conseil. D'autant que,
si je ne me trompe, tous les membres du Conseil se
sont engages 11. ne rien faire et l ne rien entreprendre
qui puisse compliquer la. situation au Congo, et par la.
nous entendons toute action qui risquerait de rendre
plus difficile la t4che du Gouvernement congolais, qui
l'emp~cherait de retablir l'ordre legal dans le pays.
Telles sont les wes de la delegation sovietique sur la
question.

17. Ml'. CORREA (Ecuador) (translated from Spanish) :
The decision which the Council is due to take is an
extremely delicate one, and we should remember the
urgency and seriousness of the facts prese!1ted to 1!S
by the Secretary-General in his report and in his
statement yesterday.

17. M. r:ORREA (Equateur)[traduitde l'espagnol]: La
decision que le Conseil est sur le point de prendre est
extr~mement delicate et il ne faut pas, au moment
d'agir, que nous perdions de vue l'urgence et la
gravite des questions que le Secretai.re general a
posees dans son rapport et dans l'expose qu'il a fait
hier.

18. There are certain problems which I need not go
into at this stage, but which relate to outsIde infiltration into the Congo, the maintenance of law and order
and the administration of the Congo operation, problems on which the Secretary-General has asked for
an urgent ruling of the Security Council.

18. n est des situations qu'il n'est pas besoin de
rappeler ici, mais qui ne sont pas sans rapport avec
les probl~mes d'infiltration etrang~re au Congo, avec
ceux du maintien de l'ordre, et ayec ceux que pose
l'administration de l'operation entreprise au Congo,
problllmes au sujet desquels le Secretaire general a
demande au Conseil de securite de se prononcer
d'urgence.

y

e

~,_'

ie

.S

i-

3.

'e
le
'e

lS

la

I

3

,,' 1lI , ,,' , :

.

:~

,ij

' "

•

•

~.

. '

•

M

•• '

~,'

p

"

. "

_

•

•

_~.

~

~.'

..,

':..

p

..

-~.

•

~

..

' : ' '• • :

~

~

".

-.

,

19. It is quite possible that delay by the Council in
reaching a decision would cause a deterioration in
the conditions in the Congo, and the Security Council
should not assume rE'sponsibility for any such turn
for the worse.

19. Le retard que le Consen mettrait i\ prendre une
decision pourrait bien entrat'ner une aggravation de la
situation du Congo; n ne faut pas que le Conseil prenne
la responsabilite d'une pareille aggravation.

20. I am not sure that any such delay is unavoidable
and I should like to hear the views of other members
of the Council. However, if we have to adjourn the
meeting, we should not do so without formally, or at
least clearly and strongly, supporting the statement
which the Tunisian l"epresentative made yesterday.

20. Il est peut-~tre inevitable d'adopter la proposition
de remettre le dehat i\ plus tard; mais je n 'en suis
pas encore convaincu et je voudrais entendre 1'avis des
autres membres du Consen; cependant, si nous decidions d'ajourner le debat, nous ne pourrions le faire
sans appuyer officiellement - ou du moins de faQon
claire et ener!'ique - la declaration faite Wer par le
representant de la Tunisie.

The President and members of the Council will
remember that yesterday the representative of the
United Kingdom pointed out the need for an adjournment until today. ~i.e representative of Tunisia said
that if this were done, a clear appeal should be made
to all States and all parties to the conflict to abide by
the Iettel and spirit of Article 40 of the United Nations
Charter and by the Security Council's recommendations, and not to take any step which might aggravate
the situation or make the United Nations action more
difficult.

21. Le President et les membres du Conseil ne sont
pas sans se rappeler que, lorsque le representant du
Royaume-Uni a souligne hier la necessite de renvoyer
le debat i\ aUjoul'd'hui, le representant de la Tunisie a
fait observer que nous ne pouvions le faire sans demander tr~s clairement i\ tous les Etats et i\ toutes les
parties au conflit de respecter dans sa lettre et dans
son esprit l'Article 40 de la Charte des Nations Unies
et de ne rien faire qui risque d'aggraver la situation
ou d'entraver l'action entreprise par l'Organisation
des Nations Unies conformement aux recommandations
du Consen.

22. I should therefore like to support the Tunisian
representative's appeal strongly and without reservation. I would point out, however, that it would
be wrong to adjourn the discussion without a clear
understanding that tbe CouncU approves the attitude
advocated yesterday by the ~'dpresentative of Tunisia.

22. J'appuie done sans reserve et de faQon tr~s ferme
cet appel du representant de la Tunisie et je demande
aux membres du Conseil de songer aux inconvenients
qu'il y aurait i\ ajourner le debat sans preciser clairement que le Conseil approuve 1'attitude preconisee bier
par le representant de la Tunisie.

23. Mr. WADSWCRTH (United States of America):
The United States delegation is gravely concerned at
the prospect of a delay in the Security Council's dealing with the situation in the Congo. In common with
the speakers who have preceded me, particularly the
representative of the United Kingdom and the representative of Ecuador, I will not object to hearing
representatives of the legitimate Government of the
Congo. The question of the status of that Government
and its representatives is, unhappily, unclear. I hope
that the matter will be clear when the Security Council meets again.

23. M. WADSWORTH (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) [t"l"aduit de l'anglais]: La delegation des Etats-Unis est
tr~s preoccupee ~ ~'idee que l'examen de la si~uation
au Congo par le Consen de securite risque de se trouver retarde. De m~me que les orateurs qui m'ont
prbcede, en particulier le i'epresentant du RoyaumeUni et le representant de lIEquateur, je n'ai pas
d'objection ~ entendre les representants du gouvernement legitime du Congo. Malheureusement, le statut
de ce gouvernement et de ses representants nrest pas
clair. J'esp~re qu'il le sera lorsque le Conseil de
securite se reunira de nouveau.

24. In the interval, however, I wish to associate myself most Vigorously with the opinion expressed by the
representatives of the United Kingdom and Ecuador
to the effect that it is vital that the Secretary-General
take whatever measures he considers necessary in
accordance with the Security Council'S resolutions
and that he feel himself under a continuing mandate
to maintain law and order in the Congo, and, furthermore, that no unilateral actions whatsoever be taken
which would undermine the authority of the United
Nations and its power to deal with the situation. If
this is not clearly the view of the Security Council,
the United States delegation would find itself forced
to oppose the delay.

24. Entre-temps, cependant, je desire declarer de la
faQon la plus ferme qu'avec ~es representantB du
Royaume-Uni et de l'Equateur, je juge absolument
indispensable que le Secretaire general prenne toutes
mesures qu'il estimera necessaires pour donner suite
aux resolutions du Conseil de securite, et quril continue de se considerer comme charge d'assurer le
respect de l'ordre public au Congo; avec ces representants aussi, je pense quraucune action unilaterale
quelle qu r elle soit ne doit etn~ entreprise, qui serait de
nature a saper l'autorite et 1'action de l'Organisation
des Nations Unies au Congo. sril n'est pas parfaitement clair que le Conseil de securite partage cette
maniere de voir, la delegation des Etats-Unis se verra
forcee de se prononcer contre le renvoi.

25. I would further urge that, if the Council decides
in favour of a postponement under these conditions, a
date be set and agreed upon here in the Council for
the reconvening of the meeting at the earliest possible moment.

25. J'insiste egalement pour que le Conseil, srn
decide d'ajourner le debat sous reserve des conditions
que je viens d'indiquer, fixe en m~me tempB une date,
aussi proche que possible, pour la reprise de ses
seances.

26. Mr. LEWANDOWSKI (Poland): Since the first
meeting of the Security Council on the question of the
situation in the Congo, the Polish delegation has been

26. M. LEWANDOWSKl (Pologne) [traduit de l'anglais]: Depuis la premi~re reunion du Conseil de
securite sur la question de la situation au Congo, la

21.

4

....

"

•

of the 0
represent
present a
position
veyed to
[S/4496]
sentative
ou~ deUb
27. To r.
sentative
outline c
postpone
case of t.
the Unite
of future
sense of
unlimited
and his a
28. My

resolutio
14 July
[S/4426]
character
ance to th
Congo, a
revise th
sion of th
usinaf
and woul
cil. But
immediat
the reque
General b
the Congo
29. Mr.
Spanish):
been expr
able. No r
adjournin
tives of t
ments of
of Poland
idea first
and then b
and the U
record ou
the situati

30. It se
has arise
stood the
conditions
not adjou
clear, one
nothing w
worse. W
diction bet

31. For t
to overco
expedient
late befor
lines su
views whi
quently e

I

.Lt t.L j tU 1 1E

une
le la
mne

ltion
suis
ides
eciaire
1ft on
Lr le
sont

It du

Dyer
lie a
delIes
:lans
nies
Ltion
Ltion
ions

rme
mde
ents
irehier

t"l'aest
Ltion

rou-

L'ont
mepas
rne:atut
pas
1 de

:le la
sdu
nent
utes
mite

il iJio&aiiJ_.!i ... JiJii.

liUJii iti. ... &SUbiJ i!2 i Uddl 1i U U1J2iLiiS _J! iiii itlJJiJltJZJ .Ll L JiLkflll'.UIII.8JJIIIL•._tP:.. . .I~'''''''_~

of the opinion that the Councn should permit the
representatives of the Republic of the Congo to be
present at and to participate in these debates. This
position prompts me to agree with the request conveyed to us by the Secretary-General in his letter
[S/4496] to postpone our meeting until the representatives of the Congo can arrive and participat.e in
oui' deltberatio>'ls.

deH~gation polonaise a ete d'avis que le Conseil devait
permettre aux representants de la Republique du COlIgO
d'assister it ses debats et d'y participer. 11 est done
logique que j'approuve la demande que le Secretaire
general nous a transmise dans sa lettre {f/4496] et qui
tend ~ ajourner nos seances juSqu'~ ce queles repre...
sentants du Congo soient en mesure de participer it
nos deliberations.

27. To my mind, the statements made by the representatives of Ecuador and the United States not only
outline certain qual!fications and conditions for the
postponement of the meeting but, especially in the
case of the statp.ment made by the representative of
the United Stai.es, P\lt before the Council the question
of future United Nations activities in the Congo in the
sense of an unlimited mandate and the possibility of
unlimited action to be given to the Secretary-General
and his assistants.

27. Dans mon esprit, les declarations des represenbnts de 1'Equateur et des Etats-Unis non seulement
definissent certaines reserves et conditions 11 'ajournement de la seance, mals encore - et je pense en
particulier it la declaration du representant des EtatsUnis - tendraient it ce que, pour l'action future de
1'Organisation des Nations Unies au Congo, le Conseil
donne au Secretaire general et a ses collaborateurs un
mandat et des possibilit€ls d'action illimit€ls.

28. My delegation is of the opinion that the three
resolutions approved by the Security Council on
14 July [S/4387], 22 July [S/4405] and 9 A~gust
[S/4426] sufficiently and clearly define the scope,
character and purpose of the United Nations assistance to the Central Government of the Republic of the
Congo, and in our view there is no need to expand or
revise those decisions. Any question of such a revision of those decisions would, I suppose, be put before
us in a form other than the form of this suggestion
and would call for further consideration by the Council. But that would tal\..:l us away from the problem
immediately before us, which is tf: +ake a decision on
the request presented to us through the SecretaryGeneral by the Cei..~ral Government of the Republic of
the Congo.

28. Ma delegation estime que les trois resolutions
adopt€les par le Conseil de s€lcJ,!.rit6 les 14 juillet
[S/4387], 22 juillet [S/4405] et 9 aotlt [8/4426] dMlnissent d'une fa<;on suffisamment claire la portee, le
caract~re et le but de l'aide apportee par l'Organisation des Nations Unies au gouvernement central de la
Republique du Congo,etiln'estpasnecessaire,a notre
avis, d'amplifier ou de reviser ces decisions. Toute
revision eventuelle de ces decisions serait, j'imagine,
proposee sous forme plus nette et exigeralt un examen
plus approfondi de la part du Conseil. Mais cela noUB
ecarterait de la question dont neus sommes salsis pour
1'instant et sur laquelle nous devons nous prononcer:
la demande que le gouvernement central de la Republique du Congo nous a preselltee par llintermediaire
du Secretaire general.

29. Mr. AMADEO (Argentins) (translated from
Spanish): I do not think any of the views which have
been expressed in this short debate are irreconcilable. No representative had taken a firm stand against
adjourning this meeting U1ltil we can hear representatives of the Congo; and I do not think that the statements of the representatives of the Soviet Union or
of Poland contained any views incompatibie with the
idea first advanced by the representative of Ecuador
and then by the representatives of the United Kingdom
and the United States, namely, that we should place on
record our hope that nothing will be done to aggravate
the situation in the Congo.

29. M. AMADEO (Argentine) [traduit de l'espagnol]:
11 ne me semble pas y avoir ~e contradiction insU!'montable entre leg opinions qui viennent d'~re exprimees au cours de ce bref debat. Aucun representant
ne s'est vraiment oppose a ce que nous ajournions
le debat jusqu'au moment oft nous pourrons entendre
les representants du Congo; d'autre part, je n'ai
releve, dans les opinions exprimees par la representant de l'Union sovietique et celui de la Pologne, rien
qui soit en contradiction avec l'idee exposee d'abord
par le representant de l'Equateur, puis par celui du
Royaume-Uni et celui des Etats-Unis, c'est-!-dit'e
que nous devrions preciser officiellement notre espoi-:
qu'il n'interviendra aucun fait nouveau qui serait de
nature a aggraver la situation du Congo.

30. It seems to me that a slight misunderstanding
has arisen and that some representatives have understood the adjournment motion to be subject io certain
conditions. As I Bee it, the idea was that we should
not adjourn the meeting until we haC;; made it quite
clear, one way or another, that the Council hoped that
nothing would be done which might make the situation
worse. We honestly cannot see any basic contradiction between the two points of view.

30. 11 me semble cependant qu'il existe un leger
malentendu: en effet, certains representants semblent
avoir considere qu'll s'agit d'un ajoul'nement sous
condition, alors qu'a m~m avis il s'agit de ne pas
interrompre nos travaux sans avoir, d'une faQon ou
d'une autre, nettement affirme le desir unanime des
membres du Conseil de ne voir intervenir aucun fait
nouveau qui pourralt aggraver la situation. Nous
sommes sinc~rement d'avis qu'il n'y a pas contradiction intrinstlque entre les deux conceptioDB.

31. For this reason, it would be perfectly possible
to overcome the apparent difficulty by some such
expedient as asking the President himself to formulate before the adjournment, a declaration along the
lines suggested by the members who supported the
views which the representative of Tunisia so eloquently expressed at the end of yesterday's meeting.

31. Je crois done. que nous pourrions facilement
eviter la difficulte - qui n'est qu'apparente - en
demandant par exemple au President de faire, avant
de lever la seance, une declaration dans le sens
indique par les represent!U).ts partisans de la tMse
exposee avec tant d'eloquence, a la fin de la seance
d'hier, par le representant de la Tunisie.

~on­

r le
~re­

rale

It de

Ltion
Lite:ette
9rra

s'iI
ions
late,
ses

.'an1 de
D, la

I

5

i

"--;:':

"XXi

"

p .

.

32. Of course, I do not suggest that this is thfl only
possible solution. If the Council thinks there is a
better way, my delegation will certainly agree to any
other rea~onable formula. I have spokeI'!. only to make
it clear that there are no insolubl~ difficulties in
reconciling the views we have heard.

32. C'est une possibilite qui ne constitue evid~mment
pas 1'unique moyen de resuudre le problllme. 8i le
Conseil estime preferable de proceder autrement, ma
delegation se ralliera a. la solution proposee. L'objet
principal de mon intervention est simplement de :,reciser qu'il n'y a aucune difficulte inRurmontai qui
empecherait de concilier les conceptions que nous
,~
venous d'entendre exposer.

33, Mr. KUZNETSOV (Union of Soviet SociaUst Republics) (translated from Russian): I have asked for
the fiuor again in order to comment on the statements
of some members of the Council. As I said earlier, it
seemed to me at first that there is no need to set any
conditions in order, in effect, to wait one day for
the arrival of the representatives of the Congolese
Government. But the members of the Security CouncH who have spoken at this meeting appear to have
cer-iain reasons-although they have perhaps not yet
stated them explicitly-for wanting to set conditions
to this postponement.

33. M. KOUZNETSOV (Union des Republiques sociaHstes sovletiques) [tradult du russe]: J'ai pris la
Hberte de demander de nouveau la parole a. la suite
des interventions de certains membres du Conseil.
Comme je Pai deja. dit, il ne me semblait nullement
necessaire de fixer des conditions pour attendre, un
jour seulement, qu'arrivent las representants du
Gouvernement congolais. Cependant, les membres du
Coneeil qui viennent d'intervenir s 'inspirent apparemment de certaines considerations qu'ils n'ont peutetre pas encore exprimees tr~B clairement, mais, en
tout etat de cause, ils veulent ass<;!'tir de certaines
conditions cette interruption de nos travaux.

34, We are obviously all agreed that it would be useful to await the arrival of the representatives of the
Congo. I shall not dwell on that point. We are also
clearly agreed that the Secretary-General should act.
We have given him the power to do so in three l'esoluUons. These resolutions very clearly define hisl'i~hts
and duties. It seems to us unnecessary, therefore,
now to spell out these rights any further and to say
what formulae should be adopted, what actions appear
necessary, etc.

34. Quant a. nous, nous continuons evidemment A,
penser qu'il f3erait opportun d'attendre l'arrivee des
representants du Congo. Mais je ne m'attarderai pas
sur ce point. Nous pensons egalement que le Secretaire general dolt agir. Nous lui avons donne des
pouvoirs a. cet effet par trois resolutions qui defiDissent assez nettement ses droits et obligations. n
ne nous semblerait pas necessaiI'e maintenant de
preciseI' davant8.!;e ces drolts, d'exposer des formules,
des mesures, de dire ce qui semble indispensable, etc,

35. I am very anxious and concerned lest these suggestions should conceal something else. There are
some, perhaps, who want to take advantage of this
interval in the meeting of the Security Council in
order to give the Secretary-General an opportunity to
undertake some new actions, as yet unknown, which
other members of the Security Council might hter
object to. I should therefore like the situation to be
made clear. If some members of the Security Council want to use this delay in order to confer any new
powers on the Secretary-General, then let them say
so.

35. Je suis tr~s preoccupe et me demande avec
inquietude si ces formules ne cachent pas quelque
chose. Ne veut-on pas utiliser cette interruption des.
travaux du Conseil pour permettre au Secretaire general de prendre encore certdines mesures - on ne sait
lesquelles - qui pourraient etre contestees par la
suite par les membres du Conseil. C'est pourquoi
j'aimerais mettre les choses aupo~.nt.Sidesmembres
du Conseil desirent utiliser cette interruption pour
conferer au Secretaire general quelques nouveq,ux
pouvoiI's, qu'ils le disent.

36. It seems to me that it is not necessary at the
present time to discuss the question of granting the
Secretary-General new powers. In this connexion I
should like to say perfectly frankly that the role and
duties of the Secretary-General are very clearly
defined in the first resolution, that of 14 July. That
resolution states specifically that the Secretary-General should carry out all measures, particularly those
of a military kind, in consultation with the GovernmenT. of the Republic of the Congo. This is a very
clear instruction and it means that the SecretaryGeneral should undertake absolutely no measure of a
military kind without consulting the Centra! Government of the Congo.

36. Je ne vois pas la necessite d'envisager maintenant l'octroi de nouveaux pouvoirs au Secretaire
general. A ce propos, j'aimerais dire tr~s franchement que le r61e et les obligations du Secretaire
general sont definis tr~s clairement dans la premi~re
resolution du Conseil, adoptee le 14 juillet. n y est
nettement dit que le Secretaire general doit prendre
toutes les mesures necessaires, et avant tout les
mesures de c'ilXact~re militaire, en consultation avec
le Gouvernement du Congo. n s'agit lA d'unedirective
tr~s clair", qui impose au Secretaire general de
n 'entreprendre absolument aucune action de caract~re
militaire sans avoir consulte le gouvernement central
du Congo.

37. I must say quite frankly that if we are going to
discuss the Secretary-General's interpretation and
Wlderstanding of operative paragraph 4 of the resolution of 9 August as given in the sixth addendum to his
second report [8/4417/Add.6J, if we are going to dipcuss the interpretation and suggestions put forwf rd
by the Secretary-General in his fourth report is/
4482], then obviously we shall h..ve a number of
different points of view, for not all members of the
SEcurUy Council will agree on this matter.

37. Je dois declarer tr~s franchement que, si nous
discuter de l'interpretation que le
Secretaire general donne du paragraphe 4 de la resolution du 9 aol1t dans le sixi~me additif! son deuxi~me
rapport [8/4417/Add.6], si nous commen~ons A discuter de 1'interpretation et des dispositions proposees
par le Secretaire general dans son quatri~me rapport
[S/4482], nous aurons evidemment des points de vue
differents, les membres du Conseil ne seront pas tous
d'accord.

38.
additio
tions 0
mea.'s
the Se
structi
transfe
Centra
control
too, th
over t
the
either
In my
Govern
means
at pre
throng
the r
from t
Repres
allow
tion?
radio s

I

40. Fo
we are
powers
discuss
these s
now, th
tionsSecurit
any f
taryof our
we do d
of the
tion, w
Upon th
41. Th
sentati

42. Mr
publics)
43. Tb
the Sovi

44. Mr
publics)
that we
in subst
defer c
the Con

commen~ons ~

6

45. Sir
in orde
Secul'it
i,
ttiv
ton,

I

IlL aLia_! u: XSJhljjS£JM! _~. ilL .1 £ lU4lU .UU _ tLU & .!Lt LUd: kiLL! .b .1. LiWtJ1LB. et LiLQ.lU12! JilIJ2J412S LJii5UUt;a:Z!

~mment

e. Si le
(ent,ma
L'objet
de ~re­
li.: qui
le nous

I socia-

I

pris la
la suite
)onseil.
llement
ldre. un
mts du
bres du
parem.t peutlais, en
rtaines

ment ~
vee des
Irai pas
Secreme des
rl defi;ions. Il
lant de
rmules,
lIe, etc.

le avec
quelque
:ion des.
'egenemesait
pax la
ourquoi
embres
>n pour
>Uve':lUX

naiuteretaire
·ancheretaire
emi~re

38. There is, however, a measure which requires no
additional powers at all but flows out of the resolutions of the Security Councll, a necessary and urgent
mea,sure, which should be decicJ'ild upon at once: that
the Secretary~General should give immediate instructions for the release of the airfields and their
transfer to the Central Government. otherwise the
Central Government cannot maintain order or keep
control of the situation in the Congo. It is essential,
too, that the radio stations should at once be handed
over to the Central Government, since without them
the Government cannot maintain communications
either within the country or with the outside world.
In my view it is absolutely inadmissible that the
Government of a sovereign State should lack the
means to appeal directly to the United Nations. !t is
at present compelled ta address the United Nations
through the latter's representative. For it seems that
the request to hold over the meeting came to us, not
from the Government itself, but through the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. Can we
allow a sovereign State to be placed in such a situation? Of course not. And to end this situation, the
radio stations must be released at once.

38. Je penserais qu'H est une mesur'il qui n'exige
absolument aucun nouveau pouvoir mala decoule des
resolutions du Conseilt une mes..u-e urgente qui est
indiHpensable, une mesure qui appelle une decision
imT'..J.ediate: le Secretaire general doit sans ta- jer
donner 1'ordrc de liberer leB aerodromes et de les
remettre a la disposition du gouvernement central.
Ce dernier ne peut sans cela assurer 1'ordre ni garder
la situation en main dans le pays. n faut aussi que les
stations de radiodiffusion soient immediatement remises au gouvernement central. Sans elles, celui-ci
ne peut communiquer ni a l'interieur du pays ni avec
le monde extllrieur. A mon avis, il est parfaitement
inadmissible que le gouvernement d'un· Etat souverain
n'ait pas la possibilite de s'adresser lui-m~me 11.
1'Organisation des Nations Dnies. nest maintenant
oblige de s'adresfler a. FOrganisation par Pintermediai:re du representant de I'ONU. Car ce n'est pas le
gouvernement qui nous demande d'ajourner notre
seance: sa requ@te nom; est transmise par le representant special du Secretaire general. Peut-on tolerer
une telle situation dans le cas d'un Etat sou,,;,,~rain?
CerteE non. n faut done que les stations de radiodiffusion soient immediatement liberees.

39. Jf there is some intention to use the postponement of the Security Councll meeting in order tacitly
to appro~'e the suggestions contained in the fourth
report, then we cailnot agree, We categorically refuse to agre,~, for example, that the Secretary-General, at his discration, should proceed to disarm the
Congolese Na;icnal Army. We cannot agree to this
unt1l we are told clearly what army this is.

39. Si 1'0n veut utiliser ici l'ajournement de la
reunion du Conseil POt'\!" approuver tacitement ce que
contient le quatri~me rapport, noUB ne pouvons l'accepter. Nous refusons eategorlquement d'aceepter,
par exemple, que le Seeretaire general puisse de son
propre chef desarmer l'armee nationale du Congo.
NOllS ne pourrons l'aceepter aussi longtemps qu'il ne
sera pas precise de quelle armee il s'agit.

40. Following from this, I should like to say that if
we are asked to grant i'1ome sort of supplementary
-powers to the Secretary-General, then we ought tl')
discuss the matter immediately. If we are not to give
these supplementary powers to the Secretary-General
now, then let us confine ourRelves to the three resolutions-very good resolutions they are. too-which the
Security Council has adopted, and let us not discuss
any further what other particular powers the Secretary-General might have. This w1ll form the subject
of o~r discussion of the question in substance. When
we do discuss the question in substance, the members
of the Security Council, including the Soviet delegation, will, I am sure, make appropriate observations
Upon the instructions of their Governments.

40. POUl ces raiscns, je dirai que, s'iI est question
d'aecorder eu Secretaire general des pouvoirs supplementaires, il faut en diseuter maintenant. Si 1'0n ne
veut pas aecorder il. present de tela pouvoirs au Secretaire general, limitons-nous aux trois resolutions,
d'ailleurs excellentes, adoptees par le Conseil de
securite et ne discutons pas davantage des pouvoirs
speciaux que l' on pourrait accorder au Secretaire
general. Nous traiterons la question quaud nous aborderons la discuse,ioll quant au fond. A ce stade. les
membres du ConseE, notamment la delegation sovietique, exposeront bien entendu leurs vues conformement aux instructions de leur gouvernement.

41. The PRESIDENT: I give the floor to the repre-

41. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Jedonnela
parole au representant de Ceylan.

sentative of Ceylon.

n y est

;rendre
out les
mavec
re.:ltive
lral de

42. Mr. KUZNETSOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics): A point of order, Mr. President.

42. M. KOUZNETSOV (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) [traduit de 1'anglais]: Je demande
la parole pour une question d'ordre.

43. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
the Soviet Union on a point of order.

43. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'aJlglais): La paroleest au representant de I'Union sovietiqu<l pour une
question d'ordre.

44. Mr. KUZNETSOV (Union of Soviet Social1st RePublics) (translated from Russian): Since it seems
that we can now go into a discussion of this question
in substance, my delegation withdraws its proposal to
defer consideration of the question of the situation in
the Congo.

44. M. KOUZNETSOV (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) [traduit du russe]: Etant donne que
la discussion rev~t un caraet~re tel que nous pouvons
aborder deja la question quant au fond, la delegation
sovietique retire sa proposition tendant a renvoyer
l'examen de la question de la situation au Congo.

45. Sir Claude COREA (Ceylon): I asked for the floor
in order to speak on the motion which was before the
Security Councll a moment ago. I find that the repre;, ttive of the Soviet Union, who submitted that
ion, has now asked to withdraw it. I would ask the

45. Sir Claude COREA {Ceylan) [traduitdel'anglais]:
J'ai demande la parole au sujet de la motion dont le
Conseil de securite etait sllsi il y a un moment. Je
constate que le representaIlt de 1'Union sovietique, qui
avait pr6sent6 cette motion, en a maintenant demand6

ract~re

central

si noUB
que le
1 resouxi~me
~ dis-

Iposees
~apport

de vue
lastoUB

I

7

..

,~

jUt

, ,\.
,
•

r,..

.

. '",

' .4'

. ' ,
•

•

~

"

.

~

,

_I:.~ . . . •

.

if_

•
•

:...

~,.

t,

.

.

j
,.

•

.

•

• '.'

'.' I

."

, __

~.

-•

•

,,,'

.

",.., :

,-:'.

representative of the Soviet Union to consider the
matter further. Some of us-at any rate my delegation-felt very strongly inclined to support the proposal that the meeting of the Secmity Council should
be postponed, and I heard no objection although
several statements were made by representatives
around this table. There appeared to be unanimity of
view that the Security Council shQuld pay heed to the
request of the Central Government of the Republic of
the Congo.

le retrait. N6anmoins, je VOl1drais demander au
representant de 1'Unicn sovietique d'accorder plus
d'attention A. la question. Certains d'entre nous - en
tout cas ma delegation - etaient furtement encllns A.
appuyer la proposition tendant 1 ajourner la seance
du Ccnseil de securite, et je n'al entendu aucune
objection ~ cet egard bien aup ;;lUl:neurs representants
aient pris la parole. Il cemble donc que, de l'avis
unanime, le Conseil de securite doive faire droit ll. la
demande duGouvernement central de 1:> Republiquedu
Congo.

46. I find it difficult to ignore the request conveyed
to this meeting by the Secretary-General, that is,
the request of the GovernuJ",nt of the Republic of
the Congo which was sent to us through the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Leopoldville.
47. The:re is one very important point here. The
representative of the United states referred to the
fact that we were not quite sure whether there was a
central government in the Republic and I think that
there was perhaps some justification for asking that
question, but the best proof that there is a government which we can take note of at this stage in the
Republic of the Congo is the authority of the Secretary-General himself through his Special Representative, who, in forwarding this i'aquest, must be
presumed to advise the Security Council that there
is a central government functioning. And this is a
fortunate circumstance if it is so. Our difficulty has
been that we have always felt some doubt as to whether there was such a central government and how
it was constituted.
48. The situation is certainly stm not uncomplicated, because we have before us another document
to which I need not refer except to say that if there
is any strong argument for a p'.)stponement of the
consideration of this matter until some representatives from the Congo arrive here to help in the discussion of this question, this subsequent document
which is nti)W in our hands gives strength to that argument.

46. J e trouve difficile de passer outre A. la demande
que le Secretaire general a transmise au Conseil,
c'est-A.-dire lla demande du Gouvernement congolais
qui nous a ete adressee par 1'intermediaire du represbntant special du Secretaire general A. Leopoldville.

49. I do not know whether the representative of the
Soviet Union will persist in his decision to withdraw
the proposal and, if so, whether some similar proposal will be made to the Council by some other
representative, because there is a definite feeling
that we should not reject the desire of the Congolese
Republic to have its representatives here when we
discuss this question.
50. One other word before I conclude: it must be
quite clear that no attempt has been made to lay down
any conditions here. Although there were certair..
words used to the effect that unless we had this in
mind we would not agree to a postponement, there
was no intention to lay down any :::ondition; there is
no necessity to lay down any condition because the
two points that were advanced round this table are
really covered by our previous resolutions. They are
necessary as special and specific conditions for any
action which we shall take.
51. I would refer representatives to the Council's
resolution of 22 July [S/4405] on the question which
is certainly agitating the minds of all of us. We agree
entir.ely with what the representative of Tunisia said
at the conclusion of our last meeting when he drew
particular attention to the urgent necessity that

49. J'ignore si le representant de 1'Union sovietique
persistera dans sa decision de retirer sa proposition
et, dans ce ca.s, si quelque proposition analogue ne
sera pas presentee au Conseil par un autre representant, car il semble admis que nous ne devrions pas
nous opposer au desir du Gouvernement congolais
d'~re represente ici quand nous discuterons la
question.

'.,

.

.'

'. "

";':

nothing should be
situation as a re
side parties.
expressed in tbe
ing words:

"Requests all
which might te
and order and t
the Congo of it
any action whi
integrity and th
public of the Co

52. Now, that is
on Monday next
the day it was pa
lay down any spe
cept perhaps to dr
resolution and to
we give it here, a
Tunisia-that that
decision is reache

47. n y a Ill. un point tr~s important. Le representant
des Etats-Unis a fait remarquer que nous ne somme~
pas enti~rement stlrs qu 'H existe un gouvernement
central dans la Republique et je crois que cette
observation est peut-~tre quelque peu justifiee; mais
la meilleure preuve que nous puissions avoir en ce
moment de 1'existence de ce gouvernement emane du
Secretaire general lui-m~me par 1'intermediaire de
son representant speci&! qui, en transmettant cette
demande, doit I!tre cense informer le Conseil qu'il
existe un gouvernement central en fonction. Et, s'il
en est ainsi, i1 faut sVen feliciter. La difficulte est
que nous avons toujours ept'ouve quelque doute au sujet
de l'existence et de la composition de ce gouvernement.

53. Similarly, in
by our resolution
[8/4426] we have
of the authority 0
we expect him t
authority; we have
has been given b
tary-General and
that unless and
that authority or
tary-General will
has.

48. La situation, certes, n'est toujours pas claire,
parce que nous sommes saisis d'un autre document que
je n'ai pas besoin de mentionner, sauf pour dire que,
s'il existe un argument de poids en faveurd'un ajournement de l'examen de la question afin de permettre
aux representants du Congo de venir pr@ter leur concours dans la discussion, ce nouveau document que
nous avons sous les yeux renforce cet argument.

54. It may be t
General will have
further instructio
do not want to do
cleared up with t
of the Congo he
structions, chan
way that the Sec
think it necessa
tions with regard
eral already has t

55. Therefore, I
no attempt really
but to emphasize
has a right to em
these matters sh
action ShOUld be
the Security Coun
sider this matter,

50. Quelques mots encore avant de terminer: i1 doit
parfaitement clair qu'aucune tentative n'a ete
faite ici pour poser des conditions. Bien qu ' on ait dit
q-";'G si telle n'etait pas notre intention, nous n'accepterions pas 1'ajournement, nous n'avions nullement
dans l'idee de poser des conditions quelles qu'elles
soient; il n'est pas necessaire de poser de condition
car les deux points qui ont ete mentionnes iei ont en
fait ete traites dans nos resolutions precedentes,
comme constituant des conditions particuli~res et
precises de toute mesure que nous pourrions prendre.
~tre

56. For these re
would still strongl
sion until Monday
that you may deci
to give the repre
take part in our d
our permission t
matter more full
press the hope t
which the Securit

51. Je renvoie les membres du Conseil A. la resolution du 22 juillet du Conseil [S/4405] sur la question
qui, certainement, noUB preoccupe tous. Nous approuvons enti~rement ce qu'a dit le representant de la
Tunisie ll. la fin de notre derni~re seance, 10rE;'i,dl a
appele specialement 1'attention sur la necessite UT8

I

I

1
nothing should be done in the Congo to aggravate the
situation as a result of any intervention by any outside parties. That is the thought which the Council
expressed in tbe resolution of 22 July. in the following words:
":Requests all States to refrain from any action
which might tend to impede the restoration of law
and order and the exercise by the Government of
the Congo of its authority and also to refrain from
any action which might undermine the territorial
integrity and the political independence of the Republic of the Congo" [S/4405, para. 2].

gente de ne rien faire au Congo qui soit de nature h
aggraver la situation par suite d'une intervention
exterieure. C'est l'idee exprimee dans la resolution
du 22 juillet, aux termes de 1aquelle le Conseil de
securite:

52. Now, that is as valid today and wiU be as valid
on Monday next when we resume as it was valid on
the day it was passed. So there is no need for us to
lay down any special condition on this occasion, except perhaps to draw attention to the existence of this
resolution and to our feeling-and the emphasis that
we give it here, as was done by the representative of
Tunisia-that that should be adhered to until some
decision is reached by this Council.

52. Cette resolution est aussi valable aUjourd'hui
qu'elle l'etait le jour de son adoption et elle le sera
tout autant lundi prochain quand nous reprendrons .
nos travaux. n n'est donc pas necessaire que nous
pORions des conditions particuli~res en cette occasion.
mais nous pouvons peut-~tre appeler 1'attention sur
I'existence de cette resolution, aiDSi que sur notre
opinion - en soulignant 1'importance que nous lui
donnons, comme l'a faitle representant de la Tunisie selon laquelle cette resolution doit atre obsenee
jusqu'll ce que le Conseil prenne d'autres decisions.

53. Similarly. in regard to the Secretary-General.
by our resolutions of 14 July [S/4387] and 9 August
[S/4426] we have laid down very clearly the extent
of the authority of the Secretary-General. and what
we expect him to do. We have not withdrawn that
authority; we have not superseded that authority which
has been given by the Security Council to the Secretary-General and it must, therefore. be presumed
that unless and until the Security Council changes
that authority or alters those instructions, the Secretary-General will prooeed on the authority which he
has.

53. De m~me, pour ce qui est du 8ecretaire general,
nous avons tr~s clairement defini, par nos resolutions
du 14 juillet [8/4387] etdu9 aoQt[S/44261, l'6tendue de
SOD autorite et ce que nous attendons de lui. Nous ne
lui avons pas retire cettE\ autorite; nous n'avona pas
remplace cette autorite conferee par le Conseil de
securite au Secretaire general et 11 faut donc admettre
qu'aussi longtemps que le Conseil n'aura pas change
cette autorite ou modifie ces instructions, le Secrataire general continuera h agir en vertu de cette
autorite.

54. It may be that the position of the SecretaryGeneral will have to be strengthened. It may be that
further instructions will have to be given now. but we
do not want to do that until we have the matter fully
cleared up with the representatives of the Republic
of the Congo here; we might then give further instructions. change the whole situation. or act in any
way that the Security Council thinks best. I do not
think it necessary. therefore. to lay down any conditions with regard to that either. The Secretary-General already has the Council's authority to act.

54. Il se peut que la position du Secretaire general
doive atre renforcee. Il se peut que de nouvellea
instructions doivent ~re donnees maintenant, mais
nous ne voulons pas le faire jusqu'Aceque nous ayons
enti~rement eclairci la question avec les representants
de la Republique du Congo; c'est alors quenous pourrons donner des instructions ulterieures, modifier
1'ensemble de la situation ou agir de la fac;on que le
Conseil de securite jugera la mailleure. Je ne pense
donc pas qu'il soit necessaire. ! ce sujet non plus, de
poser des conditions quelconques. Le Conseil de securite a dejA donne au Secretaire generall'autorite pour
agir.

55. Therefore. I should like to point out that there is
no attempt really to lay down any conditions here.
but to emphasize the feeling-which every member
has a right to emphasize if he wishes to do so-that
these matters should be kept in mind and that ~~
action ShOU'd be taken contrary to the decisions of
the Security Council until we meet next time to consider this matter. if it is to be postponed today.

55. Par consequent, je voudrais faire observer qu'il
n'existe vraiment ici aucune tentafive de DOS er des
conditions quelconques. mais qu'il s'agit de- souligner
l'opinion -. comme tout membre a le droit de le faire
- que nous est5.mons qulil ne faut pas perdre ces
questions de vue et qu'il ne faut prendre aucune mesur,e
contraire aux decisions du Conseil de securii:e avant
que nous nous reunlssiona de nouveau pour etudier
cette question, si son examen eat renvoye.

56. For these reasons I submit that my delegation
would still strongly support deferment of this discussion until Monday. 12 September. or any other day
that you may decide, Mr. President, in order, first,
to give the representatives of the Congo the right to
take part in our deliberations-which they have asked
our permission to do-and, second, to go into this
matter more fully with their collaboration. We express the hope that in the meantime the decisions
which the Security Council has already made will

56. Pou..' ces raisons, j'affirme que ma d«;}egation
continuera d'appuyer fermement 1'ajournement de
cette discussion jusqu'au lundi 12 s~ptembre ou
jusqu'h toote autre date que vous pourriez fixer,
Monsieur le President, afin, tout d'abord, de donner
aux representants du Congo le droit de prendre part
h nos deliberations - come ils 1'0nt demande - et
ensuite d'etudier cette question plus h fond. avec leur
collaboration. Nous exprimons l'espoir qu'entretemps tous les Etats Membl-es de 1'Organisation des

"Prie tous les Etats de s'abstenir de toute action
qui pourrait tendre h emp~cher le retablissement de

l'ordre public et l'l'xercice de son autorite par le
Gouvernement congoiais, et aussi de s'abstenir de
toute action qui pOUl'rait saper 1'integrite territoriale et 1'illdependan,"le poUtique de la R~publique
du Congo" [S/4405. par. 2].

9

I-

•

.~

continue to be honoured by all states Members of the
United Nations.

Nations Unies continue1'ont ~ observer les decisions
que le Conseil de securite a dej~ prises.

57. The SECRETARY-GENERAL: I believe that a
few clarifications might be useful to the members
of U· 3 Council at this stage.

57. Le SECRETAIRE GENERAL (traduit de l'anglals):
Je crois que quelques eclaircissements pourraient
~tre utHes aux membres du Conseil ~ ce stade.

58. The representative of the Soviet Unionexp!"essed
some concern about the fact that the request for a
postponement of the consideration by the Security
Council of the present item had been passed through
the channel of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Leopoldville. I got the impression that he felt that this was in some way humiliating to the Government. I would like to explain the
situation.

58. Le representant de 1'Union sovietique a exprime
quelque inquietude du fait que la demande d'ajournement de l'examen de la question par le Conseil de
sp.curite a ete faite par l'intermediaire du represent.'Jlt special du St:cretaire general A Leopoldville. J'ai
eu 1'impression qu'il estimait qu'll y avait l~ quelque
chose d'humiliant pour le Gouvernement congolais.Je
voudrais expliquer la situation.

59. We receive communications from the Government in very many ways, and if they are received by
telegram they are just as welcome and will be treated
here in exactly the same way as if they are passed
through our representative in Leopoldville. However,
more and more the Central Government has chosen
to go through our representative. I suppose they consider this to be more practical, and it is, because
our line of communication is much more rapid than
theirs. I think that in this case especially they found
it convenient because it was an oral message, and
under such circumstances they obviously gain time
by picking up the telephone instead of typing a telegram and going to a post office in order to send it.
So I do not think there is any reason to read into this
transmittal anything but a practical choice by the
Central Government, and I am very happy if we can
render them assistance in this very simple way,
whatever their considerations may be.

59. Nous recevons les communications duGouvernement congolais de fae;tons tr~s diverses et, si elles
nous parviennent par telegramme, elles sont egalement
bienvenues et traitees exactement de la m~me mani~re
que si elles sont transmises par notre representant
a Leopoldville. Neanmoins, le gouvernement central
a de plus en plus choisi de passer par l'intermediaire
de notre representant. Probablement, il estime que
cette methode est plus pratique, ce qui est vrai, car
nos moyens de communication sont bien plus rapides
que les siens. Je pense que, dans ce cas particulier,
il a trouve cette procedure plus commode parce qu'H
s'agissait d'un message oral, et dans ces conditions
on gagne manifestement du temps en utilisant le
telephone au lieu de dactylographier un telegramme
et d'aller au bureau de postepourlfexpedier.Je pense
donc qu'll n'y a aucune raison de voir dans cette fae;ton
de proceder autre chose qu'un choix pratique du gouvernement central et je suis tr~s heureux que nous
puissions l'aider de cette fae;ton tr~s simple, queUes
que soient ses raisons.

60. The representative of Ceylon felt that somehow
Ambassador Dayal of India, who is now the representative in Leopoldville, had taken a stand on the
constitutional issue by transmitting this telegram.
Most certainly that is not the case. It fonows from
what I have already said that we function in this case
like a telegraph office, and he would be the first to
acknowledge and recognize the validity of the instruction which I told you about yesterday, that our
representatives are to avoid any action by which
directly or indirectly, openly or by implication, they
would pass judgement on the stand taken by either
one of the parties in the constitutional conflict. Thus
nothing at all can be read into this transmittal of the
message, as regards '- stand by Ambassador Dayal
on the constitutional issue.

60. Le representant de Ceylan a estime que, d'une
certaine fae;ton, M. Dayal, ambassadeur de I'Inde, qui
est actuellement notre representant ~ Leopoldville,
a pris position sur la question constitutionnelle en
transmettant ce telegramme. Ce n'est tr~s certainement pat; ie cas. n resulte de ce que j'ai dej~ dit que
nous jouons le rale dans ce cas d'un bureau telegraphique et M. Dayal serait le premier ~ reconna1tre
et il respecter la validite de 1'instruction dont je vous
ai parle hier, ~ savoir que nos representants doivent
eviter toute action par laquelle, directement ou
indirectement, ouvertement ou implicitement, ils
exprimeraient un jugement sur la position prise par
l'une ou 1'autre des parties dans le conflit constitutlonnel. Ainsi, on ne peut nullement voir, dans la
transmission de ce message, une prise de position
quelconque de M. Dayal il l'egard de la question
constitutionnelle.

Le representant de I'Union sovietique a pose une
question ~ ses coll~gues, et clest a eux, manifestement, qu'il appartient de repondre. La question etait
de savoir si 1'0n avait 1'intention d'etendre les pouvoirs du Secretaire general ou de lui donner un mandat
qui irait plus loin que ceux qui lui ont ete donnes aux
termes des resolutions du Conseil de securite, discutees et lnterpretees par le Conseilde securite. Comme
je l'ai dit, c'est certainement auxmembresduConseil
qu'il appartient de repondre il cette G.uestion mais je
pense qu'il pourrait ~tre utile au representant de
I'Union sovietique que je lui rappelle ce que j'ai
demande.
61.

61. The representative of the Soviet Union directed
a question to his COlleagues, and it is for his colleagues, obviously, to reply. The question was whether
there was some intention to widen the powers of the
Secretary-General or to give him a mandate that
would carry us further than the mandates which you
find in the Security Council resolutions as debated
here and as interpreted by the Security CounciL As
I said, it is def'oltely for the members of the Council to reply to 1;lat question, but I think that it might
be of interest to the representative of the Soviet
Union if I were to remind him of what I have asked
for.

10

62. First of al
sideration-I ha
money because
General, I have
with the Prime
in order to ma
pay salaries-no
salaries of the
matter must be
way to straighte
Governments of
doubt they will
they have so ofte

63. The other
of urgency waR t
I told the Coun
decision had bee
my part, I woul
as possible but
situation was s
bility upon mys
move might have

64. The membe
judge for thems
munications fro
two authorities t
each other. I ha
think I should, to
the Security Co
bility.
65. I can imagi
cil may question
tional issue. In
have before the
from Mr. Lum
through Mr. D
yesterday and c
terms. However,
himself describe
should like to q
is describing wh
these issues in
permitted to quot
[Continued in F

"In their inte
Chambers furt
by Prime Mini
of State, Mr.
invested with
has the power t
[Continued in En

This letter is si
the quotation I h
himself acknowl
Kasavubu is no 10
66. All the sam
why letters from
to the Security C
of procedure and
well to put on
Secretary-Gener
Minister. If he
reign Minister,
State. For him

.

';":':w3'iFf,~-.ry,.-:¥·.. ::..;./~r_:.:;~',

~-

,',,,'<', ~'E:?~,2.-,.-:-:-.:':!:

I

62. First of all-and that is the overriding consideration-I have asked for money. I have asked for
money because I do not feel happy if, as SecretaryGeneral, I have to advance money, in consultation
with the Prime Minister, out of United Nations funds
in order to make it possible for the Government to
pay salaries-not the salaries of the Cabinet, but the
salaries of the servants of the Cabinet. I think this
matter must be straightened out, and there is one
way to straighten it out: that is, by an appeal to the
Governments of Member states, to which I have no
doubt they will respond with the generosity which
they have so often demonstrated.

62. Tout d'abcrd - et ctest la questionessentieUe _
j'ai demande des fonds. Je Pal fait parce que je ne
serais pas satisfait si, en tant que8ecretairegeneral,
je devais, en consultation llTec le Premier Ministre,
pr~ter des fonds preleves sur le compte des Nations
Unies pour permettre au gouvernement de payer des
traitements, non pas ceux des membres du Cabinet
mais ceux des fonctionnaires du gouvernement. Je
crois que cette question doit ~tre precisee et il y a un
moyen de le faire: adresser un appel aux gouvernements des Etats Membres. Je suls persuade qu'ils
repondront avec la generosite dont Hs ont fait si
souvent preuve.

63. The other point I raised yesterday with a sense
of urgency waR the point about airports and the radio.
I told the Council under what circumstances that
decision had been taken. I told the Council that, for
my part, I would be happy to see it reversed as soon
as possible but that, frankly, I did not feel that the
situation was such that I should take the responsibility upon myself, with all the consequences that
move might have.

63. L'autre point que j'ai souleve bier en le considerant comme urgent concerne les aerodromes et la
radio. J'ai dit au Conseil dans queUes circonstances
cette decision avait ete prise. Je lui ai dit que, pour
ma part, je Berate heureux de la voir rapporter d~s
que cela serait possible mais que, franchement, je
ne pensais pas que la situation etait teUe que je doive
assumer moi-m~me cette responsabilite, avec toutes
les consequences que cette mesure pourrait entrai'her.

64. The members of the Council are in a position to
judge for themselves. They have before them communications from two authorities in the country, from
two authorities that are still in sharp opposition to
each other. I have referred my responsibility, as I
think I should, to the Security Council, and I think that
the Security Council should shoulder its responsibility.
65. I can imagine that some members of the Council may question the attitude I take on the constitutional issue. In fact, the members of the Council will
have before them in a few minutes, I think, a letter
from Mr. Lumumba-that letter, too, transmitted
through Mr. Dayal-which challenges what I said
yesterday and challenges it in, let me say, vigorous
terms. However, in that very letter, Mr. Lumumba
himself describes the constitutional situation, and I
should like to quote one sentence from his letter. He
is describing what the situation is after the debate on
these issues in the Parliament. Perhaps I may be
permitted to quote it in French:

64. Les membres du Conseil sont en mesure de juger
par eux-m~mes. ns ont rec;u des communications de
deux autorites dans le pays, deux autorites qui sont
encore nettement opposees Pune ~ l'autre. Comme je
croyais devoir le faire, j'ai saisi le Conseil de securite et j'estime que celui-ci devrait prendre ses
responsabilites.
65. J'imagine que certains membres du Conseil
mettent en question mon attitude ~ l'~gard du probl~me constitutionnel. En fait, je pense queleConseH
sera saisi dans quelques minutes d'une lettre de
M. Lumumba - transmise elle aussi par M. Dayal qui conteste ce que j'ai declare mer - et le conteste
en termes energiques si je puis dire. Cependant, dans
cette m~me lettre, M. Lumumba lui-m~me decrit la
situation constitutionnelle et je voudrais citer une
phrase de sa lettre. n depeint la situation apr~s le
debat sur ces questions au Parlement. Permettez-moi
de citer ce passage en franc;ais:

[Continued in French]

[Le Secretaire general poursuit en fran98-is.J
"Dans leur interpretation, les Chambres legislatives
congolaises ajoutent que le gouvernement preside
par le premier ministre Patrice Lumumba et le
chef de 1'Etat, M. Kasavubu, ayant s6parement obtenu
l'investiture du Parlement, c'est ce dernier seul qui
a le pouvoir de revoquer l'un ou l'autre." [8/4498.]

"In their interpretation the Congolese legislative

Chambers further state that the Government head.ed
by Prime Minister Patrice Lumumba and the Head
of State, Mr. Kasavubu, having been separately
invested with office by Parliament, the latter alone
has the power to dismiss one or the other.l! [8/4498.]

I

I

"~"".';'.~:"~''''' ,,:<,·~··_,:-,::;~::..::<.::.-;::-~-.z:S~2:.:.:~~~~-s::~~~~~"''UJGJ_l......n;;:...- - - - - - - - - - - - - -....

[Continued in English]

[Le Secretaire general poursuit en anglais.J

This letter is signed by Mr. Lumumba, and I think that
the quotation I have given shows that Mr. Lumumba
himself acknowledges that his decision that Mr.
Kasavubu is no longer President is not valid.

Cette lettre est sign6e de M. Lumumba et je pense
que la citation que je viens de lire indique que
M. Lurnumba lui-m~me reconnaft que sa decision de
ne plus considerer M. Kasawbu comme President
n'est pas valable.

66. All the same, I can see that members may ask
why letters from a Head of state have been circulated
to the Security Council. That leads me to a question
of procedure and protocol which I think it is just as
well to put on record. The rule has been that the
Secretary-General communicates with the Foreign
Minister. If he does no~ commt' cate with the Foreign Minister, he communicates with the Head of
state. For him to communicate with the Prime

66. J e conc;ois que certains membres pourraient se
demander pourquoi des lettres d'un chef d'Etat ont ete
distribuees au Conseil de securite. Cela me conduit
~ une question de procedure et de protocole qu'il est
indique, je pense, de preciser. Selon la regIe etablie,
le 8ecretaire general correspond avec le ministre des
affaires etrangeres. 8'il ne correspond pas avec le
ministre des affaires etrangeres, il correspond avec
le chef de 1'Etat. nest exceptionnel qu'il corresponde
11

. •.'•j'•.
;

.
I:",;"::':"""'.

. •;;;'TIl?GF':.

~-'

C'"

.~=,"".=-=

"'"
Minister is the exception. I should like to add just
one thing: Practically the whole correspondence regarding the setting up of the United Nations Force
has been a correspondence with the Heads of State of
the African countries concerned. I thin~ that that disposes of any doubt as to the protJriety q~ circulating
these various communications from Mr. l'tllsavubu.

avec le premier ministre. Je voudrais simplement
ajouter ceci: presque toute la correspondance concernant la mise sur pied de la Force des Nations Unies
s'est falte avec les chefs d'Etat des pays africains
interesses. J e pense que cela dissipe tout doute sur la
question de savoir s'il convenait de distribuer ces
diverses communications de M. Kasavubu.

67. The PRESIDENT: I call upon the representative
of Ceylon, who wishes to exercise his right of reply.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Je donne
la parole au representant de Ceylan, qui desire exercer son droit de rcponse.

68. Sir Claude COREA (Ceylon): In exercise of my
right of reply I want just to make a brief comment
on the statement made by the Secretary-General a
moment ago. I feel that the Secretary-General has
misunderstood the statement I made when I spoke a
little earlier, and I would like that misunderstanding
to be corrected. The Secretary-General suggested
that when I referred to the telegram from Ambassador Dayal I implied that he, Ambassador Dayal, had
impl1cated himself in the constitutional position. I
am sorry if I was not clear, but I do not remember
making any such statement in the course of my remarks. What I intended to say-and, as far as I
remember, what I did slly-was that the very f9.ct that
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
had sent a telegram as from the Central Government
of the Republic of the Congo proved that there was a
central government of the Republic of the Congo in
existence.

68. Sir Claude COREA (Ceylan) [traduitdel'anglais):
Je voudrais simplement, en exer~ant mon droit de
reponse, formuler une br~ve observation ~ propos de
la declaration que vient de faire le Secretaire general.
Je crois qu'il a mal interprcte la declaration que j'a!
faite il y a un moment et je voudrais dissiper ce
malentendu. Le Secretaire general apense qu'en mentionnant le telegramme de M. Dayal, j'attribuais ~
celui-ci une prise de position dans la question constitutionnelle. J e regrette de ne pas avoir 6te clair mais
je ne me souviens pas d'avoir dii; rien de pareil. Ce
que je voulais dire - et, autant que je m 'en souvienne,
ce que j'ai dit - c'etait que le fait mOme que le
representant special du Secretaire general avait envoye un telegramme en provenance du Gouvernement
central de la R6publique du Congo prouvait l'existence
de ce gouvernement.

69. I did not go beyond that and say what that government of the Republic of the Congo consisted of-whether it consisted of one set of persons or another set
of persons-and it may be remembered that soon
after that I referred to another document which had
come into our hands and which tells us a different
story. Thus the point I really meant to bring out was
that there was a central government in the Republic
of the Congo, and that the fact that the SecretaryGeneral's representative referred to the Central
Government of the Republic of the Congo in his telegram proved it. That was the only point.

69. Je ntai pas ete plus loin et je n'ai pas dit en quoi

member, the
And we have
[S/4498, S/45
during the me
tions.
75. In view

is rather co
thought. Acco
::13 of the pro
the meeting
may privately
course to foll

67.

76. The PRE
Una is formal
ing for half a
be put to the C

77. Since I h
the Council th
minutes.
The meetin
sumed at 6.10

79. Mr. SLIM

wish to raise
this afternoon,
ments and inf
fused. I think
and closely b
consulted thos
cially concer
delegations, an
to the Counci
and without i
propose, in ac
3, of the pro
Security Coun
day. I have ma
that, in the c
ever that the P
reaffirm the 5
so that nothin
worse before
decide what ac

consistait ce gouvernement, - s'il etait compose de
tel ou tel groupe de personnes - et 1'on se souviendra
que. peu apr~s, j'ai mentionne un autre document qui
nous etait parvenu et qui faisait part d'une autre
situation. Ainsi. le point que j'ai voulu vraiment relever etait qu'il existait un gouvernement central de la
Republique du Congo, et que le fait que le representant
du Secretaire general 1'avatt mentionne dans son
telegramme le prouvait. C'est tout ce que j'ai dit.

70•. I would be the last person to allege in any way,
or even to suggest, that so experienced and able an
officer as Ambassador Dayal could be charged with
taking any side in any constitutional dispute. I think
that his experience and ability are such as to ensure
that no one could attribute such an attitude to him,
and certainly, as far as I am concerned. I would not
attribute any such conduct to him. I would like to
make that perfectly clear.

70. Je serais le dernier ~ soutenir de quelque fa~on
que ce soit, ou m~me ~ Buggerer, qu i un fonctionnaire
aussi capable et experimentc que M. Dayal puisse
~tre accuse de prendre position dans un differend
constitutionnel quelconque. J'estlme que son experience et ses aptitudes sont telles que personne ne
pourrait 1ui attribuer pareille attitude et certainement.
en ce qui me concerne, je ne lalui attribuerai pas. Je
voudrais que cela soit parfaitement clair.

71. The SECRETARY-GENERAL: I should like to
apologize to the representative of Ceylon if I misunderstood him. The misunderstanding in this case
may have served a useful purpose because it clarified the character of our mail and telegraph service.

71. Le SECRETAffiE GENERAL (traduitde l'anglais):
Je prie le representant de Ceylan de m'excuser si je
l'ai mal compris. Ce malentendu aura peut-~tre ete
utile, car il a precise le caract~re de notre service
postal et telegraphique.

72. The PRESIDENT: I call upon the representative
of Argentina on a point of order.

73. Mr. AMADEO (Argentina) (translated from
Spanish): I must point out that, withol1t realizing it,
we are gradually becoming involved in a discussion of substance. We must therefore reconsider the
purely procedural matter with which we began our
discussion.

72. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Je donne la
parole au representant de I' Argentine pour une motion
d'ordre.
73. M. AMADEO (Argentine) [traduit de l'espagnol):
J e remarque que nous nous engageons insensiblement
dans un debat de fond et que noUEl abordons de ce fait
des questions qui nous obligent ~ remettre en question
la fa~on dont nous avons aborde notre debat en considerant qu'il ne s'agissait que de procedure.

74.; The representative of the Soviet Union has just
withdrawn his motion for an adjournment. But another

74. D'une part, le representant de l'Union sovietique
vient de retirer sa proposition d'ajournement. Un

12

80. The PRE
stat~ment of

before us a f
proceedings u
objection, I wil
81. Mr. KUZ
pUblics) (trans
stances, the S
that there sho
however, to th
African countri
take account of
Council. For
refrain from e

I

;-"".::;:.IT:}~":T:""'····"""~=·'"~"~~="-'

....

:l

--

member, the representative of Ceylon, is pressing it.
And we have before us at least three new documents
[S/4498, S/4500, S/4502], which have been distributed
during the meeting and which clearly raise new questions.
75. In view of all these circumstances, the situation
is rather confused and calls for some preliminary
thought. Accordingly, as a point of order under rule
::13 of the provisional rules of procedure, I move that
the meeting be suspended for half an hour, so that we
may privately exchange views and decide on the best
course to follow.
.

autre membre du Conseil, le representant de Ceylan,
insiste pour I'ajournement. Nous sommes saisis d'au
moins trois documents nouveaux distribulls au cours de
la s6ance [S/4498, S/4500, S/4502] et qui posent des
questions manifestement nouvellea.

76. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Argentina is formally proposing the suspension of the meeting for half an hour. Under rule 33 this motion has to
be put to the Council without debate.

76. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de I'anglais): Le representant de l'Argentine propose formellement que la
seance soit suspendue pour une demi-heure. Aux
termes de Particle 33,cettemotiondoit~trepresentee
au Conseil sans donner lieu A un debat.

77 • Since I hear no objection from any member of
the Council the meeting will be suspended for thirty
minutes.

77. Puisque aucun membre du Gonseil n 'y fait objection, la seance sera suspandue pendant 30 minutes.

The meeting was suspended at 5.10 p.m. and resumed at 6.10 p.m.

a 18 h 10.

75. Nous nous trouvons de ce fait dans une situation
quelque peu confuse, qui exige une certaine reflexion
preliminaire. Je depose done, conformement ~ Particle 33 du r~glement interieur provisoire, une motion
d'ordre et je demande une suspension de seanced'une
demi-heure, pour nous permettre de nous concerter
en prive et de rechercher la voie A suivre.

La s~ance est suspendue

78. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Tunisia on a point of order.

78. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de I'anglais): Jedonne la
parole au representant de la Tunisie pour une motion
d'ordre.

79. Mr. SLIM (Tunisia) (translated from French): I
wish to raise a point of order. Since our debate began
this afternoon, we have been inundated with new documents and information which leave us somewhat confused. I think we need to study the situation calmly
and closely before we can define our position. I have
consulted those of my African friends who are specially concerned in this matter, as well as certain
delegations, and I think it is my duty to put a proposal
to the Council. Because of present circumstances,
and without in any way prejudging the situation, I
propose, in accordance with rule 33, sub-paragraph
3, of the provisional rulE;S of procedure, that the
Security Council should adjourn until 3 p.m. on Monday. I have made this formal proposal because I think
that, in the circumstances, it is more urgent than
ever that the President of the Security Council should
reaffirm the solemn appeal which I made yesterday,
so that nothing will be done to make the situation
worse before the Security Council meets again to
decide what action should be taken.

79. M. SLIM (Tunisie): Je desire presenter une motion
d'ordre. Depuis le debut de notre debat de cet apr~s­
midi, le Conseil est envahi A tout moment par de nouveaux documents et de nouvelles informations qui
creent une certaine confusion dans notre esprit. Je
crois que nous avons besoin d1€ltudier mtlrement et
calmement la situation pour pouvoir definir notre
position. Apr~s avoir consulte mes amis africains
specialement interesses ~ la question, et apr~s avoir
consulte aussi un certain nombre de delegations, je
crois qu'il est de mon devoir de presenterune proposition au Conseil. Compte tenu des circonstances
actuelles, et sans prejuger en aucune faQon la situation,
je propose formellement que, conformement 11 Particle 33, alintla £, en r~glement interieur provisoire,
le Conseil de securite s'ajourne A lundi 15heures. En
presentant cette proposition formelle, j'estime que,
vu lea circonstances presentes, il est plus urgent et
plus nllcessaire que jamais que le Prllsident du
Conseil de securite reprenne I'appel que j'ai adresse
bier et le confirme solennellement afin qu'aucune
action ne soit entreprise qui puisse aggraver la
situation en attendant que le Conseil reprenne le debat
et decide des mesures A prendre.

80. The PRESIDENT: The Council has heard the

representative of Tunisia. We have
before us a formal motion for adjournment of the
proceedings until 3 p.m. on Monday. If there is no
objection, I will declare the motion carried.

80. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de Panglais): Le Conseil
a entendu la declaration du representant de la Tunisie.
Nous sommes maintenant saisis d'une proposition officielle d'ajournement jusqu'A lundi a 15 heures. S'il
n 'y a pas d'objection, jc declarerai que cette proposition est adoptee.

81. Mr. KUZNETSOV (Unio11 of SO\ "Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): In the circumstances, the Soviet delegation would have preferred
that there should be no suspension. We are sensitive,
however, to the wishes of the delegations from the
African countries and we are aware that we must also
take account of the wishes of members of the Security
Council. For this reason the Soviet delegation will
refrain from expressing its views on this question.

81. M. KOUZNETSOV (Union des Republiques sociaHstes sovietiques) [traduit du rusae]: La delegation
sovietique aurait prefere, dans les circonstances
actuelles, qu'il n'y ait pas d'~nterruption. Noustenons
compte cependant de I' opinion des delegations des pays
africains et nous comprenons qu'il faille prendre en
consideration celle des membres du Conseil de securite. En consequence, la delegation sovietique s'abstiendra d'exprimer ses propres vues sur la question.

stat~ment of the

a
11

t
t
11

e
11

I

a 17 h 10; ells est reprise

13

i!

I

82. The PRESIDENT: If there are no objections. I
will declare the motion carried.

the Presid
its part wo
tions we m
understandi
in which it
assumption
the Secreta
Nations ar
question b
Security Co
obligations
granted an
rights.

82. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): S'il n'y a
pas d'objection, je declarerai que la proposition est
adoptee.

n en est ainsi decide.

It was so decided.
83. The PRESIDENT: In consideration of the decision to adjourn the meeting, as President of this
Council, certain that I am interpreting the consensus
of opinion around this table, I should like to stress
how important it is that, in conformity with the letter
and spirit of the Charter of the United Nations, no
action should be taken by any party which might
worsen the already very grave situation with which
we are confronted in the Congo. The representative of
Tunisia, at the close of last night's meeting, made an
appeal to that effect. As many speakers have previously referred to his statement, I should like to quote
a pertinent part of it:

83. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Etant donne
la decision d'ajourner la discussion, je voudrais souligner, en ma qualite de President du Conseil et dans
la certitude d'interpreter l'opinion generale de mes
coll~gues, combien il est important que, conformement
~ la lettre et ~l'espritdelaChartedes Nations Unies,
al1cune partie ne prenne une mesure quelconque qui
risque d'aggraver la situation deja tr~s serieuse qui
r~gne au Congo. A la fin de la seance d'mer soil', le
representant de la Tunisie a lance un appel dans ce
sense Comme beaucoup de membres ont mentionne sa
declaration, je voudrais en citeI' tU;lpassagepertinent:

"The clear and precise statement made at this
meeting by the Secretary-General served to emphasize still further the gravity of the situation to
which the Council must give its serious attention.

"L'expose clair et precis que nous a fait le Secretaire general au cours de cette reunion souligne
encore plus la gravite de la situation sur laquelle le
Conseil doit se pencher avec tout le serieux necessaire.

"Now that the matter is before it, the Council
must, in full awareness of its responsibilities, take
such decisions as it deems proper to maintain
international peace and security. Since, however, a
motion for adjournment has been made my delegation wishes to express the fervent hope that, until
such time as the Security Council has decided what
measures to take at the close of the debate, in conformity with the spirit if not the letter of Article
40 of the United Nations Charter no action will be
taken in the Republic of the Congo which might
aggravate an already serious situation." [896th
meeting, paras. 159 and 160.]

"Maintenant que le Conseil est saisi, il importe
qu'il prenne les d~cisicns qu'il estimera utiles, en
pleine conscience de ses responsabilites, en vue du
maintien de la paix et de la securite internationales.
Mais, compte tenu de la demande d'ajournement du
debat et en attendant que le Conseil de securite ait
decide des mesures ~ prendre en conclusion de ce
debat, ma delegation se permet d'exprimer tr~s
serieusement le vceu que, conformement a l'esprit,
sinon ~ la lettre, de l'Article 40 de la Charte des
Nations Unies, aucune action ne soitentreprisedans
la Republique du Congo qui soit de nature ~ aggraver
une situation dej~ assez grave par elle-m~me."
[896~me seanc e, par. 159 et 160.)

84. In this connexion, may I remind the Council that
it has already taken, on two previous occasions, a
very definite position on this point. Operative paragraph 2 of the resolution adopted by the Council on
22 July [S/4405] contains a specific request to all
States "to refrain from any action which might tend
to imoede the restoration of law and order" in the
Congo: Similarly, in operative paragraph 5 of the
resolution adopted on 9 August [S/4426], the Council:

84. A cet egal'd, puis-je rappeler au Conseil qu'll a
deja. pris, en deux circonstances precedentes. une
position tr~s nette sur ce point. Le paragraphe 2 du
dispositif de la resolution que le Conseil a adoptee le
22 juillet [S/4405] prie nettement tous les Etats "de
s'abstenir de toute action qui pourrait tendre ~ emprJcher le retablissement de l'ordre public" auCongo.
De mame, aux termes du paragraphe 5 du dispositif
de la rllsolution adoptee le 9 aoilt [S/4426], le Conseil:

"Calls upon all Member States, in accordance
with Articles 25 and 49 of the Charter of the United
Nations, to accept and carry out the decisions of
the Security Council and to afford mutual assistance
in carrying out measures decided upon by the Security Council. 1I

"Invite tous les Etats Membres, conformement aux
Articles 25 et 49 de la Charte des Nations Unies, a
accepter et a executer les decisions du Conseil de
securite et a s'offrir mutuellement assistance dans
I' execution des mesures decidees par le Conseil."

85. The decisions which have been made by the
Council in its wisdom appear to be of the utmost
relevance at this juncture, in the face of the grave
situation and the serious events of which the Secretary-General has apprised us. The Council, by deciding to postpone until Monday its final deliberations,
has taken a serious responsibility, because of the
critical circumstances at present prevailing in that
country. In this awareness, I am sure that I am
interpreting the consensus of the Council when I
reiterate a strong appeal that no action should be
taken that could by any means aggravate the present
situation until the resumption of our debate.
86. Mr. KUZNETSOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): In connexion with

85. Les decisions que le Conseil a prises apr~s mOore
reflexion semblent atre enti~rement pertinentes en
l'occurrence, etant donne la gravite de la situation et
des evenements dontle Secretaire general nous a donne
ccnnaissance. En decictant d') remettre ~ lundi ses
discussions finales, le Conseil a assume une lourde
responsabilite, du fait de la situation critique qui
r~gne en ce moment dans ce pays. Ayant conscience
de cela, je suis certain d'interpreter l'avis generaldu
Conseil en adressant de nouveau un appel pressant
pour qu'on s'abstienne,d'ici~lareprisedenosdebats,
de toute mesure de nature ~ aggraver de quelque fac;on
la situation actuelIe.

87. In part

that suspen
not mean t
dorses in a
tary-Gener
88. The P

89. Mr. L
have the fio

91. Mr. L

explanation
statement,
92. The P
grant that
hear no obj
sentative of
93. Mr. L
necessary t
statement
proceedings
intended th
position of t
delegation t

94. My del
statement,
ties concern
Congo.

95. Howeve
reference to
remarks whi
we think tha
and might Cl
tainly will
reserve my
next meeting

96. The PR
statement in
which came
I welcomed.
in the situat'
to make it.
some comm
his right to
That means
his comment
That will be
make his co

86. M. KOUZNETSOV (Union des Republiques socialistes sovletiques) [traduit du russe): A la suite de la
14

I

ya
est

me

)U-

ms

leS

ent
es,
qui
qui
, le
ca
sa
'nt:

re-

iUe
~ le

3S-

rte
en
du
es.
du
ait
ce

~~s
~it,

les
ms
,er

e."
1a
me
du
le
'de

m?;o.

itif
lil:
LUX

,A
de
LllS

1. "
tre
en
et
me
',es
'de
lui

Ice

du
mt
ts,
'on
ala

the President's statement, the Soviet delegation for
its part woul~ like to make it clear that the observations we made during the present discussion on our
understanding of this suspension and the conditions
in which it is now to take place still stand. It is our
assumption that all members of the Security Council,
the Secretary-General and all Members of the United
Nations are guided in their attitude on the Congo
question by the three resolutions adopted by the
Security Council which clearly define the rights and
obligations of all concerJ'led•. And nobody is being
granted any additional powers or any additional
rights.

declaration que vient de faire le President, la delegation sovietique voudrait souligner qu'elle maintient
ce qu'elle a dit au cours de la discussion d'aujourd'hui concernant la manH~re dont elIe interpr~te
l'ajournement des travaux du Conseil et les conditions.
dans lesquelIes it a lieu. Elle consid~re en effet que
la conduite de tous les membres du Conseil de securite,
du Secretaire general et de tous les Etats Membres a.
l'egard du Congo est fixee par les trois resolutions du
Conseil de securite, ql'i ont ete adoptees et qui definissent clairement les droits et les obligations de
chacun. Et personne ne re~oit aucun pouvoir ou aucun
droit supplementaire.

87. In particular I should like to repeat once more
that suspension of our discussion until Monday does
not mean that the Security Council recognizes or endorses in any way the statements made in the Secretary-General 's fourth report.

87. Je voudrais notamment souligner une foisdeplus
que le renvoi de la discussion a. lundi ne signifie pas
que le Conseil de securite admet ou approuve en aucune
faQon les vues exposees par le Secretaire general dans
son quatri~me rapport.

88. The PRESIDENT: The meeting is adjourned.

88. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): La seance
est levlle.

89. Mr. LEWANDOWSKI (Poland): I should like to
have the flo~)r, Mr. President.

89. M. LEWANDOWSKI (Pologne) [traduit de l'anglais]: Je voudrais prendre la parole, Monsieur le
President.

90. The PRESIDENT: May I remind the members of
the Council that the meeting is adjourned.

90. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Puis-je
rappeler aux membres du Conseil que la seance est
levee?

91. Mr. LEWANDOWSKI (Po~and): May I make an
explanation of my position in connexion with your
statement, Mr. President?

91. M. LEWANDOWSKI (Pologne) [traduit de l'anglais]: Permettez-moi, Monsieur le President, d'expliquer ma position a. 1'egard de votre declaration.

92. The PRESIDENT: If there is no objection, I will
grant that right to the representative of Poland. I
hear no objection, and I give the floor to the representative of Poland.

92. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): S'il n'y a
pas d'objection, j'accorderai ce droit au representant
de la Pologne. N'ayant pas entendu d'objection, je
donne la parole au representant de la Pologne.

93. Mr. LEWANDOWSKI (Poland): I considered it
necessary to take the floor in connexion with the
statement made by the President at the end of our
proceedings today. Since I felt that the President
intended that that statement should represent the
position of the Council, I deemed it necessary for my
delegation to make the following observations.

93. M. LEWANDOWSKI (Pologne) [traduit de l'anglais]: 11 m'a paru necessaire de prendre la. parole
au sujet de la declaration qu'a faite le President a. la
fin de notre seance d'aujourd'hui. Ayant estime que le
President, par cette declaration, entendait refleter
l'attitude du Conseil, j'ai estime necessaire de faire,
au nom de ma delegation, les remarques suivantes.

94. My delegation fully agrees with that part of your
statement, Mr. President, which calls upon all parties concerned not to aggravate the situation in the
Congo.

94. Ma delegation approuve enti~rementle passage de
votre declaration, Monsieur le President, oil vous
faites appel a. toutes les parties interessees pour
qu'elIes n'aggravent pas la situation au Congo.

95. However, we do not feel it necessary to add the
reference to all the other problems and the other
remarks which you deemed it advisable to add, since
we think that that unnecessarily enlarges this issue
and might call Jor further discussion which I certainly will not embark upon at this time. I would
reserve my right to comment on these matters at the
next meeting of the Security Council.

95. Cependant, nous n'estimons pas necessaire de
mentionner, comme vous avez cru devoir le faire,
tous les autres probl~mes et les autres observations,
car cela elargit inutilement la question et pourrait
entrafuer d'autres discussions auxquelles je ne prendrai certainement pas part en ce moment. J e me
reserve le droit de formuler des observations sur ces
questions a. la prochaine seance du Conseil de securite.

96. The PRESIDENT: I deemed it fit to make my
statement in response to suggestions and requests
which came from members of this Council and which
I welcomed. I thought that the statement might help
in the situation, and it was in that light that I decided
to make it. The representative of Poland has made
some comments on my statement and has reserved
his right to elaborate on them at a future meeting.
That means that I am not in a position to comment on
his comments on the considerations advanced by me.
That will be done when he has had an opportunity to
make his comments. I do think, however, that my

96. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglai1'l): 11 m'a
semble a. propos de faire ma declaration en reponse
~ des suggestions et demandes des membres du Conseil, que j'ai ete heureux d'accueillir. J'ai cru que
cette declaration pourrait ~tre utile dans lea circonstances actuelles, et c'est dans cet esprit que j'ai
decide de la faire. Le representant de la Pologne a
formule certaines observations sur ma declaration et
s'est reserve le droit de les developper a. une prochaine seance. 11 en resulte que je ne suis pas en
mesure de faire des remarques sur ses observations;
je le ferai lorsqu'il aura une possibilite de lea
15

I

:I,·
i

developper. J e suis convaincu neanmoins que ma
declaration repondait! une sitv.ationquil'avaitrendue
necessaire et j'espere que, compte tenu de cette
situation, tpus les membres du Conseill'approuveront.
97. La seance est levee. NOUB noUB reunirons !
nouveau lundi ! 15 heures.

statement responded to a situation which made it
necessary, and I hope that, in the light of that situation, <iJI the members of the Council will approve it.
97. The meeting is adjourned, and we shall meet
again at 3 p.m. on Monday.
The meeting rose at 6.30 p.m.

La st§ance est levt§e

16

a 18 h 30.

SALES AGENTS FOR UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
DEPOSITAIRES DES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
ARGENTINA.ARGENTINE
Editorial Sudamerlcana, S.A., Alslna 500,
Buenos Aires.
AUSTRALlA·AUSTRALlE
Melbourne University Preu, 369/71 Lonsdole Street, Melbourne C.l.
AUSTRIA·AUTRICHE
Gerold & Ca., Graben 31, Wien, 1.
B. Wijller.torff, Morku, SllIlkulStrasse ID,
Salzburg.
BELGIUM·BELGIQUE
Agence et Messagerles de la Presse,
S.A., 14-22, rue du Persll, Bruxelles.
BOLlVIA·BOLlVIE
L1breria Selecciones, Casllla 972, La Paz.
BRAZIL·BRESIL
L1vraria Aglr, Rua Mexico 98-B, Calxa
Postal 321'1, Rio de Janelra.
BURMA.BIRMANIE
Curator, Govt. Book Depot, Rangoon.
CAMBODIA-CAMBODGE
Entreprise khmere de Iibralrie, PhnomPenh.
CANADA
The Queen's Printer, Ottawa, Ontario.
CEYLON·CEYLAN
Lake House Book'hop, Assoc. Newspapers
of Ceylon, P.O. Box 244, Colombo.
CHILE.CHILI
Editoriol del Paclfico, Ahumada 57,
Santiago.
Llbreria Iven', Ca,lIIa 205, Santiago.
CHINA·CHINE
The World Book Co., Ltd., 99 Chung
King Road, 1st Section, Taipeh, Taiwan.
The Commercial Press, Ltd., 211 Honan
Rd., Shanghai.
COLOMBIA·COLOMBIE
L1breria Buchholz, 80got6.
Librerfa America, Medellin.
L1breria Naclonal, L1da., Barranqullla.
COSTA RICA
Impr..nta 'I Librerra Treios, Apartado
1313, L~ Jo....
CUBA
La Casa Belga. O'Reilly 455, La Habana.
CZECHOSLOVAKIA.TCHECOSLOVAQUIE
Ce.koslovenskY Splsovatel, N6radnl Tilda
9, Praha 1.
DENMARK.DANEMARK
Einar Munk,gaard, Ltd., N;rregade 6,
K;~.nhavn, K.
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC.
REPUBLlQUE DOMINICAINE
L1brerfa Domlnlcana, Mereedes 49, Cludad Truiilla.
ECUADOR.EQUATEUR
L1brerra Clentrflca, Guayaqull & Qulto.
EL SAlVADOR.SALVADOR
Manuel Navas y Cra., 1a. Avenlda sur
37, San Salvador.
ETHIOPIA.ETHIOPIE
Internatlanal Press Agency, P.C. Box
120, Addis Ababa.
FINLAND·FINLANDE
Akateemlnen Kirjakauppa, 2 Ke.kuskatu,
Kelslnkl.
FRANCE
Editions A. Pedone, 13, rue Saufflot,
Paris (Ve).
GERMANY.AUEMAGNE
R. Elsonsehmidt, Sc~wanthaler Straue
59, Frankfurt/Main.
Elwert & Meurer, Hauplstra.se 101,
Berlln.Sch?neberg.
Alexander Horn, Sp'iegelgaue 9, Wte..
bQ~':!n.

W. E. Saarbach, Gertrudenstrasse 30,
Koln (1).

GHANA
University Book.hop, University College
of Ghana, 1'.0. Box Legon.
GREECE·GRECE
Kauffmann Bookshop, 28 Stadlon Street,
Athene,.
GUATEMALA
Sociedad Econ6mico-Financiera, 6a Av.
14-33, Guatemnla City.
t,AITI
Libralrle "A la Caravelle", Boite postale
l11-B, Port-au-Prlnce.
HONDURAS
Libreria 'Panamericana, Tegucigalpa.

llONG KONG·HONG·KONG
The Swindon Book Co., 25 Nathan Road,
Kowloon.
ICELAND.ISLANDE
Bokaverzlun Sigfu,ar Eymundssanar H.
F., Au'turstraeti 18, Reykjavik.
INDIA·INDE
Orient Longmans, Calculta, Bombay, Ma·
dras, New Delhi & Hyderabad.
Oxford Boo.. & Stationery Co., New
Delhi & Calculla.
P. Varadach"ry & Co., Madras.
INDONESIA·INDONESIE
Fembangunan, Ltd., Gunung Sahari 84,
Djakarta.
IRAN
"Guity", 4B2 Ferdawsl Avenue, Teheran.
IRAQ.IRAK
Mackenzie's Bookshop, Baghdad.
IRELAND·IRLANDE
Stationery Office, Dublin.
ISRAEL
Blumstein'. Book,tores, 35 Allenby Rd.
and 48 Nachlat Benjamln St., Tel Aviv.
ITALY·ITALlE
Libreria Commlssionaria Sansonl, Via
Gino Coppon: 26, Firenze, & Via D. A.
Azunl IS/A, Roma.
JAPAN·JAPON
Maruzen Company, Ltd., 6 Torl·Nlchome,
Nihonba,hl, Tokyo.
JORDAN·JORDANIE
Jaseph I. Bahaus & Ca., Dar.ul-Kutub,
Box 66, Amman.
KOREA.COREE
Eul,Yoll Publl.hlng Co., Ltd., 5, 2·KA,
Chongna, Seaul.
LEBANON·L1BAN
Khayat's College Book Cooperative
92·94, rue BII.., Beirut.
LIBERIA
J. Momolu Kamara, Manrovla.
LUXEMBOURG
L1hralrie J. Schummer, Luxembaurg.
MEXICO.MEXiQUE
Editorial Herme., S.A., Ignaclo Marlseal
41, Mexico, D.F.
MOROCCO.MAROC
Bureau d'etudes et de partlclpations
Industrielles, B, rue Mlchaux-Bellalre,
Rabat.
NETHERLAND5-PAY5-BAS
N.V. Martinus Nijhoff, Lange Voorhout
9, 's-Gravenhage.
NEW ZEALAND.NOUVELLE.ZELANDE
United Nations Association of New Zealand, C.P.O. lOll, Wellington.
NORWAY.NORVEGE
Johan Grundt Tanum Forlag, Kr. Iougust.gt. 7A, Oslo.

Orders and inquiries from cauntrie. where .ales og.nt. have
not yet bun appoint"d may b. sent to: Sales and Circufation
Section, Unit.d Nations, N.w York, U.S.A.; ar Sale. Section,
Unit.d Nation. Office, Pa/ai. des Nation., G.n.va, Switzerland.

Litho in V.N.

PAKISTAN
The Pakistan Ca-operatlve Baak Saclety,
Dacca, East Pakistan.
Publishers United, Ltd., Lahare.
Thomas & Thomas, Karachl, 3.
PANAMA
Jo,e Menendez, Apartado 2052, Av. 810,
,ur 21-5B, Panam6.
PARAGUAY
Agenda de Libreria' de Salvador Nlzza,
Calie Pte. Franco No. 39-43, Asuncl6n.
PERU·PEROU
Librerfa Internacional del Feru, S.A.,
Lima.
PHILIPPINES
Alemor's Book Store, 769 Rizal Avenue,
Manila.
PORTUGAL
Livraria Rodrlgues, 186 Rua Aurea, L1..
boa.
SINGAPORE.SINGAPOUR
The City Book Store, Ltd., Collyer Quay.
SPAIN·ESPAGNE
Libreria Bosch, 11 Ronda Universldad,
Barcelonc.
Libreria Mundl-Prensa, Castello 37, Ma·
drid.
SWEDEN·SUEDE
C. E. Fritze', Kungl. Hovbokhandel A-B,
Fred,gatan 2, Stockholm.
SWITZERLAND.SUISSE
Libralrle Payot, 5.10., Lausanne, Gen~ve.
Hans Raunhardt, Klrehga..e 17, Zurich 1.
THAILAND·THAILANDE
Pramuan Mlt, Ltd., 55 Chakrawat Road,
Wal Tuk, Bangkok.
TURKEY·TURQUIE
Libra'rie Hachette, 469 I,tlklal Caddesl,
Beyoglu, I,tanbul.
UNION OF SOUTH AFRICA·
UNION SUD·AFRICAINE
Van Schaik's Bookstore (Pty.), Ltd., Box
724, Pretoria.
UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST
REPUBLlCS.UNION DES REPUBLlQUES
SOCIALlSTES SOVIETIQUES
Mezhdunarodnaya Knyiga, Smolenskaya
Ploshchad, Moskva.
UNITED ARAB REPUBLIC·
REPUBLlQUE ARABE UNIE
L1bralrle "La Renaissance d'Egypte", 9
Sh. Adly Pasha, Cairo.
UNITED KINGDOM.ROYAUME.UNI
H. M. Stationery OHlce, P.O. Box 569,
London, 5.15.1.
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA·
ETATS·UNIS D'AMERIQUE
International Documents Service, Calum·
bia University Preu, 2960 Broadway,
New York ';,1, N. Y.
URUGUI':f
Repre••ntad6n de Edltorlales, Prof. H.
D'Elia, Plaza Cagancha 1342, 1· plso,
Montovldea.

s
o

p

V~;~EZUELA

Li~'reria del Este, Av. Miranda, Na. 52,
Edf. Galip6n, Caracas.
VIST.NAM
Libralrle.Papeterle Xu6n Tbu, 185, rue
Tu.Dr" B.P. 283, Saigon.
YUQOSLAVIA.YOUGOSLAVIE
Cankarjeva Zalo~ba, Ljubljana, SIovenla.
DrtQvno
Preduzete,
Jugollovenlka
Knjiga, Terazlje 27/11, Beograd.
Prosvieta, 5, Trg Bratslva i Jedlnslva,
Zagreb.
[6!lBll

o

s

Le' command., et aumandits d. ,.nseigftemen's emanant d.
pay. au if n'oxisle pal encore de' d6positaire. pewont al,.
adre..... a la Section d.. venter ., de la dislribuli"",
Organi.ation de. Nations Unie., New·York (flats-Unf. d' Ami·
rique); ou a fa Section de. vent••, Orgonisalion de. Nalion.
Unie., Palais des Nalion., Geneve (Suiu.).

Price: $V.S. 0.35; '1./6 stg.; Sw. fr. 1.50
(or equivalent in other currencies)

D

A

26737-November 1960-1,775

(

L
