A/63/PV.104

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-third session

104th plenary meeting
Wednesday, 9 September 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. d’Escoto Brockmann . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nicaragua)

In the absence of the President, Mr. YáñezBarnuevo (Spain), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Agenda item 122 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/63/725/Add.6)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I
would like, in keeping with established practice, to
invite the attention of the General Assembly to
document A/63/725/Add.6, in which the SecretaryGeneral informs the President of the General Assembly
that, since the issuance of his communication
contained in documents A/63/725 and addenda 1 to 5,
Chad has made the payments necessary to reduce its
arrears below the amount specified in Article 19 of the
Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly takes
note of the information contained in this document?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
Fifth report of the General Committee
(A/63/250/Add.4)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): In the
first paragraph of the report, the General Committee

decided to recommend to the General Assembly that
the item entitled “Question of the Comorian island of
Mayotte” be deferred to the sixty-fourth session of the
General Assembly and that it be included in the draft
agenda of that session.
May I take it that the Assembly approves that
recommendation?
It was so decided.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
General Assembly has thus concluded its consideration
of the fifth report of the General Committee.
Agenda item 41 (continued)
Implementation of the Declaration of Commitment
on HIV/AIDS and the Political Declaration
on HIV/AIDS
Draft decision (A/63/L.73)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish):
Members will recall that the Assembly held a debate on
this item at its 88th to 90th plenary meetings, on
16 and 17 June 2009.
Members will recall the letter dated 4 September
2009 from the President of the General Assembly to all
Permanent Representatives, to which he attached, for
their perusal, several proposed changes to the text of
draft decision A/63/L.73. In the same letter, he
indicated his intention to orally present to the General
Assembly those revisions, as follows.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

09-50531 (E)

*0950531*

A/63/PV.104

In the first preambular paragraph, before the
word “decides”, insert the following text: “and
recalling its decision 55/488”. The new paragraph
would therefore read: “The General Assembly, guided
by the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS and
the Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS and recalling its
decision 55/488, decides....”
In subparagraph (a) of the draft decision, which
reads, “Take note of the following documents:”, the
President proposes that we delete the word
“documents”. The new subparagraph would therefore
read, “Take note of the following:”. In subparagraph
(a) (ii), he proposes to insert the words “The
submission of” at the beginning of the subparagraph.
The new subparagraph (a) (ii) would therefore read,
“The submission of the report of the Joint Inspection
Unit”, with the rest of the text remaining unchanged.
We shall now proceed to consider draft decision
A/63/L.73, as orally revised.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft decision A/63/L.73, as orally revised?
Draft decision A/63/L.73, as orally revised, was
adopted.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
call on the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic,
who wishes to speak on a point of order.
Ms. Halabi (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Sir, my country’s delegation would like to
introduce some oral amendments to the amendments
you just proposed on this decision.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
decision has already been taken and so it is not
possible to submit amendments at this stage of the
procedure. What the delegation of Syria is able to do is
express its opinion for the record, if it so desires.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Ms. Halabi (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Let me say that my delegation did inform the
Secretariat with respect to our position on this matter.
We said that we had an oral amendment to propose and
that we wanted to present it prior to the adoption of the
decision. For that reason, my delegation cannot agree
to the adoption of this decision. We reported our
proposal to the Secretariat before the adoption of the
decision.

2

I also pointed out that my country wanted to
introduce this amendment before the adoption of the
decision, but I was not seen. That is why I would like
to retain my right to present this amendment to the
decision, so that it can then be examined.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): As I
said before, the decision has already been adopted. I
put the decision up for consideration of the Assembly.
Nobody asked for the floor at that point in time, and I
asked whether I could take it that the decision was then
adopted by consensus, and that was the case. So the
moment has passed and therefore this intervention
from the Syrian delegation can be considered to be an
explanation of vote for the record of the meeting. All
we can do now is to conclude our examination of this
item and move on to the next one.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
conclude its consideration of agenda item 41?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 113 (continued)
Multilingualism
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/338)
Note by the Secretary-General (A/63/349)
Draft resolution (A/63/L.70/Rev.1)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I give
the floor to the representative of Senegal to introduce
draft resolution A/63/L.70/Rev.1.
Mr. Badji (Senegal) (spoke in French): It is
today a tremendous honour for me and a great pleasure
to present to the General Assembly of the United
Nations at its sixty-third session this draft resolution
under agenda item 113 on multilingualism. This draft
resolution, which my country, Senegal, has coordinated
this year, is the outcome of intense meetings of
negotiations during which the constructive spirit truly
prevailed.
The 2008 report of the Secretary-General on
multilingualism (A/63/338) gives us the state of play
with respect to multilingualism in our Organization and
has served as the basis, owing to its global and crosscutting nature, for draft resolution A/63/L.70/Rev.1,
which members have before them.
In this report, the text recalls our individual and
collective commitment to make our diversity a major

09-50531

A/63/PV.104

asset by promoting our exchanges, which are aimed at
improving the world in which we live. We are therefore
pleased that we have been able to design and put
together a document that highlights the need to have a
United Nations where the six official languages are
used in order to have a system of communication that
is more flexible and more representative of our
mutually enriching specificities. This approach, which
is based on the synergies of our common interests
through outstanding cooperation and effective
partnership, contributes to promoting multilingualism
within the United Nations, which is one of the stalwart
beacons of our universal institution.
As such, this draft resolution underscores the
need to strictly comply with the rules on multilingualism
in the Organization. At the same time, this text calls for
the distribution in due time of the official documents of
the United Nations in the six official languages, which
means that the equitable treatment of the official
languages of the United Nations is necessary for each
Member State to be able to express, promote and
defend its positions in its language of choice.
To support this great undertaking, the draft
welcomes the cooperation agreements that have been
reached by the Department of Public Information with
university institutions worldwide aimed at increasing
the number of web pages that are available in certain
official languages, and requests the Secretary-General,
in coordination with the offices that provide the
content, to extend such cooperation agreements in all
official languages of the United Nations.
Furthermore, this document calls on the
Secretariat to encourage its staff to take ownership of
multilingualism and to ensure that recruitment reflects
the multilingual diversity of the United Nations. In this
regard, the General Assembly requests the SecretaryGeneral to maintain and step up his efforts aimed
particularly at strengthening cooperation with the
institutions that train linguistic specialists so as to meet
the needs of the six official languages of the United
Nations.
The draft resolution also highlights the obligation
to improve multilingualism, both internally and
externally. It is clear, on the one hand, that vibrant
multilingualism is the guarantor of more effective
communication among the different departments and
services of the Secretariat.

09-50531

In that same spirit, the General Assembly takes
note of the appointment of Mr. Kiyotaka Akasaka,
Under-Secretary-General for Communications and
Public Information, as the new coordinator for
multilingualism. I welcome his readiness and
commitment to multilingualism and call on the
Secretary-General to continue to develop the informal
network of focal points responsible for supporting
multilingualism.
However, the United Nations cannot be detached
from local populations. That means the importance of
communication with them in their respective
languages. In that connection, United Nations
Information Centres are vital communication points;
hence, once again, the urgent need for there to be a
truly multilingual staff available at the Secretariat.
To conclude, allow me to express my great
appreciation to the many delegations that actively
participated in the consultations on this draft
resolution, which, I hope, will shortly be adopted by
consensus, in keeping with the long-standing tradition.
I would also like to give special mention to all the
Member States that have agreed resolutely to
co-sponsor the draft resolution — a sign of their full
support for the multilingual work of the United
Nations. I would be remiss not to underscore the
valuable input of the skilful services of the Secretariat,
which, throughout this process, have provided us with
clarifications and assistance on the various points
about which they have been asked.
To end, I would like to put forward some technical
corrections to draft resolution A/63/L.70/Rev.1.
(spoke in English)
In paragraph 21, the words “of the Department of
Management” should be deleted because, as delegates
may know, the Office of Information and
Communications Technology is not part of the
Department of Management. In paragraph 27, the
footnote symbol in the second line should be “2”,
referring to A/63/338. In paragraph 14 (a), the word
“that” at the beginning of the fourth line should be
deleted. In paragraph 15, there should be a comma
after the word “particular” in the third line. In
paragraph 20, there should be a comma after the word
“regard” in the third line. In paragraph 25, there should
be a comma after the word “mandated” in the third
line.

3

A/63/PV.104

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
the representative of Senegal for introducing the text of
draft resolution A/63/L.70/Rev.1. I hope that the
delegation of Senegal and the sponsors will help the
Secretariat with the small drafting changes that have
been orally presented.
I give the floor to the representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Jomaa (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): As we
consider agenda item 113, on multilingualism, I am
very glad to take the floor to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his informative report on the position of
multilingualism within the Secretariat (A/63/338) and
his recommendations and conclusions to ensure that
multilingualism remains at the heart of the United
Nations.
I would also like to thank the Director-General of
UNESCO for his report on the activities undertaken
during the 2008 International Year of Languages, since
that organization has been a bellwether in that field. I
would also like to commend the efforts of that
organization in the area of the conservation, protection
and support of all languages.
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
the delegation of Senegal, the coordinator of the draft
resolution (A/63/L.70/Rev.1) before us today, for its
efforts during the consultations that enabled us to reach
a balanced draft resolution. We are very pleased to see
that, and we hope that the draft resolution will be
implemented by all parties concerned.
(spoke in French)
Tunisia, a country that is proud of its Arabic
language, has made access to foreign languages one of
the axes of its education policy, a choice that arises
from our strong belief that openness to others can only
nurture in our society the attributes of tolerance,
moderation and dialogue — values that are part of its
identity and its history.
My country, which gives special importance to
this biannual item on the agenda, believes that
multilingualism in the United Nations, which is seen in
the use of its official languages on an equal footing, is
the basis of the universality of our Organization and
one of the major ways to achieve the objectives of its
Charter and the noble values that it enshrines.

cultural diversity and the spreading of universal values.
It is also a way — by no means the least effective — to
protect against the uniformity and standardization of
language in this era of globalization and to ensure that
the identities and specific cultural attributes of each of
us are respected. In that context, we are pleased to see,
in the draft resolution before us, a reaffirmation of the
necessity to fully implement resolutions relating to the
language arrangements for the official United Nations
languages and the working languages of the
Secretariat.
(spoke in English)
While appreciating the various efforts and
initiatives being undertaken to achieve further progress
in the promotion of multilingualism at the United
Nations, particularly in the areas of conference
management, Internet communication and public
information, we still believe that greater endeavours
are required to ensure that the principle of equal
treatment for the six official languages, as mandated by
the General Assembly, is fully respected.
We continue to witness a disturbing trend of long
delays in the simultaneous issuance of United Nations
documents in all official languages, as well as the
worrisome practice of issuing advance copies of
documents in English alone. The web content of some
departments of our Organization is still accessible in
just one language, and disparities between the use of
English and that of the five other official languages
continue to prevail in many activities of public
information.
The draft resolution we are about to adopt today
contains many relevant recommendations aimed at
addressing these drawbacks. We strongly support these
recommendations and encourage the Secretary-General
to continue his efforts to ensure that all language
services be given equal treatment and provided with
equally favourable working conditions and resources.
We would like to highlight particular areas where
action is needed most. Providing appropriate staffing
capacity for all the official languages and adequate
financial resources and technological infrastructure to
the Department of Public Information is of paramount
importance to achieving parity among the official
languages in the various activities of that department.

To defend the parity of the languages of the
United Nations is above all to fight for the respect of

4

09-50531

A/63/PV.104

(spoke in Spanish)
The promotion of the image of the United
Nations in the eyes of international public opinion
includes increasing awareness of its work, programmes
and goals. In this respect, I wish to pay tribute to the
efforts undertaken by the information centres of the
United Nations and all of the work being carried out to
disseminate information to citizens using vernacular
languages.
Finally, I would like to reaffirm that the principle
of multilingualism is very important to the United
Nations because it is an essential pillar of interaction
among peoples and an instrument that guarantees the
greater participation of all in our work. Multilingualism
is the equivalent of multilateralism in the areas of
languages, cultures and civilizations.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We
shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/63/L.70/Rev.1, as orally corrected.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/63/L.70/Rev.1, as orally corrected, of
which the following countries have joined as sponsors:
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Belarus, Canada,
Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Madagascar,
Panama, Peru, Portugal, Rwanda, Slovenia, South
Africa, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Uganda and Ukraine.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/63/L.70/Rev.1, as orally corrected?
Draft resolution A/63/L.70/Rev.1, as orally
corrected, was adopted (resolution 63/306).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
give the floor to the representative of France to make a
statement after the adoption.
Mr. Sutter (France) (spoke in French): It is my
honour to speak today on behalf of the Frenchspeaking group. At the outset, I wish to express our
utmost gratitude and sincere appreciation to the
delegation of Senegal, and in particular to the
Ambassador of Senegal, who coordinated the
negotiations on resolution 63/306 on multilingualism,
which we have just adopted by consensus.
In our view, the resolution meets two needs. It
ensures a comprehensive approach to multilingualism
and promotes an ambitious and reasonable vision.
First, the text guarantees a comprehensive approach to

09-50531

multilingualism, as the General Assembly underlines
the need for full implementation of the resolutions
establishing language arrangements for the official
languages of the United Nations and the working
languages of the Secretariat. The cross-cutting nature
of the resolution is also evident in the variety of
subjects the Assembly has been able to address as a
whole, including conference services, the activities of
the Department of Public Information, human
resources management, peacekeeping operations and
special political missions.
We are all aware that the United Nations work
needs to be better understood. The quality and
accuracy of dialogues with local populations are
prerequisites to ensuring the effectiveness of the
United Nations wherever it operates. Given the robust
presence of the United Nations in the French-speaking
countries in particular, including in the context of its
peacekeeping activities, we rely on the SecretaryGeneral and all relevant departments to fully
implement this resolution and to take better account of
language needs. The implementation of United Nations
mandates could thereby be improved considerably. In
linguistic terms, it is not local populations that must
adapt to the United Nations, but the United Nations
that must adapt to local populations.
The text just adopted by the Assembly also defends
a balanced, ambitious vision for multilingualism. It is
balanced because the resolution places no added
burden on the budget, and ambitious because the
General Assembly has strengthened its language with
respect to a number of important and above all specific
items. I refer to the call to strengthen cooperation
between the United Nations and institutions of higher
learning to increase the number of Internet pages
available, as is now the case with regard to a number of
the official languages of the United Nations. I also
refer to the strengthening of cooperation between the
United Nations and institutions that train language
specialists in order to better prepare for the future and
to ensure the best possible conditions for the new
generation of linguists, to whom I pay special tribute
today.
In all of these areas, the French-speaking group is
counting on the commitment of the Secretary-General
and his staff. We hope to see specific gains in the near
term, and we will be vigilant in that respect. Our hope
is also that, as the General Assembly has requested, the
Secretary-General will be assisted by an enhanced

5

A/63/PV.104

informal network of focal points whose job is to
support the multilingualism coordinator, UnderSecretary-General Akasaka. We reiterate our full
confidence in him and wish him every success.
The adoption of resolution 63/306 on
multilingualism is naturally not an end in itself. It is
nevertheless an important milestone for United Nations
activities, because multilingualism is for us the
linguistic, cultural and indeed civilizational equivalent
of multilateralism.
The French-speaking group also commends the
fact that meetings were organized before and during
the negotiations with representatives of other language
groups, signalling their interest in and commitment to
the principles of multilingualism. We welcome these
extremely fruitful informal exchanges, and such
exercises should be continued.
This is why the French-speaking group, with the
valuable support of the International Organization of la
Francophonie and its Permanent Observer to the United
Nations, who is here with us today, hopes that all
Member States, and in particular representatives of all
the language groups, will confirm their commitment in
this regard by pursuing the cooperation and
coordination that are necessary and indeed
indispensable to the implementation of the resolution.
The right to use one’s language, the ability to
communicate and thus to understand and be
understood, and the preservation of a heritage that is
often centuries or millennia old should clearly be at the
very heart of the United Nations mission. It is therefore
essential that we mobilize more than ever to give life to
the principle of multilingualism inside and outside the
United Nations. That is the very aim of the resolution,
and we look forward to genuine progress in the service
of all.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We
have heard the last speaker in the debate on this item.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
conclude its consideration of agenda item 113?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 159
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian
Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and
Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and
Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory
of Neighbouring States between 1 January and
31 December 1994
Letters from the Secretary-General (A/63/940,
A/63/941, A/63/942 and A/63/947)
Letter from the President of the Security
Council (A/63/956)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): In
connection with agenda item 159, the Assembly has
before it documents A/63/940, A/63/941 and A/63/942,
in which the Secretary-General transmits letters dated
respectively 1 July, 15 June and 29 May 2009 from
Judge Dennis Byron, President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.
In document A/63/940, the Secretary-General
informs the Assembly that the President of the Tribunal
states that the Russian Federation intends to replace
Judge Sergei Aleckseevich Egorov when he resigns
from the Tribunal. The Secretary-General also conveys
the request of the President that, though replaced,
Judge Egorov should be permitted to continue to serve
at the International Tribunal until the completion of the
cases to which he was assigned. Since the Tribunal
would therefore have two permanent judges from the
Russian Federation serving at the same time, the
Secretary-General conveys the request of the President
that the General Assembly allow derogation from the
statutory prohibition against two judges of the same
nationality serving at the Tribunal at the same time.
In document A/63/941, the Secretary-General
informs the Assembly that the President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda requests
that the General Assembly
“(a) Allow one judge to engage in another
professional occupation in his home country and
to work part-time at the International Tribunal
while drafting his final judgement;
“(b) Permit the Tribunal to recruit an
additional ad litem judge from among the former
permanent judges of the International Tribunal

6

09-50531

A/63/PV.104

for the Former Yugoslavia or the ad litem judges
of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia who have not been assigned to any
case”.
In document A/63/942, the Secretary-General
informs the Assembly of the request of the President of
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda that the
General Assembly
“(a) Expand the membership of the
Appeals Chamber by authorizing the President to
redeploy four permanent judges from the Trial
Chambers to the Appeals Chamber;
“(b) Extend the term of office of judges of
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda”.
In addition, the President asks the General Assembly
“to allow one judge to engage in another
professional occupation in his home country and
to work part-time while drafting his final
judgement, and reconsider the entitlements of ad
litem judges”.
In document A/63/956, the President of the
Security Council transmits to the President of the
General Assembly the text of Council resolution 1878
(2009) of 7 July 2009, whereby the Council, inter alia:
“1. Decides to review the extension of the
term of office of the permanent judges at the
International Tribunal, who are members of the
Appeals Chamber, by 31 December 2009, in light
of the progress of the International Tribunal in the
implementation of the Completion Strategy;
“2. Decides to extend the term of office of
the following permanent judges at the
International Tribunal, who are members of the
Trial Chambers, until 31 December 2010, or until
the completion of the cases to which they are
assigned if sooner:
– Charles Michael Dennis Byron (Saint Kitts
and Nevis)
– Joseph Asoka Nihal de Silva (Sri Lanka)
– Khalida Rachid Khan (Pakistan)
– Arlette Ramaroson (Madagascar)
– William H. Sekule (United Republic of
Tanzania)

09-50531

“3. Decides that the term of office of the
permanent judge appointed to replace Sergei
Aleckseevich Egorov (Russian Federation) shall
extend until 31 December 2010, or until the
completion of the cases to which he or she will be
assigned if sooner;
“4. Decides to extend the term of office of
the following ad litem judges, currently serving at
the International Tribunal, until 31 December
2010, or until the completion of the cases to
which they are assigned if sooner:
– Aydin Sefa Akay (Turkey)
– Florence Rita Arrey (Cameroon)
– Solomy Balungi Bossa (Uganda)
– Taghrid Hikmet (Jordan)
– Vagn Joensen (Denmark)
– Gberdao Gustave Kam (Burkina Faso)
– Joseph Edward Chiondo Masanche (United
Republic of Tanzania)
– Lee Gacugia Muthoga (Kenya)
– Seon Ki Park (Republic of Korea)
– Mparany
Mamy
(Madagascar)

Richard

Rajohnson

– Emile Francis Short (Ghana)
“5. Decides to allow ad litem judge
Joensen to serve in the International Tribunal
beyond the cumulative period of service provided
for under article 12 ter, paragraph 2, of the
Statute of the International Tribunal;
“6. Decides, in light of the exceptional
circumstances, that notwithstanding article
12 bis, paragraph 3, of the Statute of the
International Tribunal, Judge Joseph Asoka Nihal
de Silva and Judge Emile Francis Short may work
part-time and engage in another judicial
occupation or occupation of equivalent
independent status in their home countries during
the remainder of their terms of office until the
completion of the cases to which they are
assigned; takes note of the intention of the
International Tribunal to complete the cases by
mid-2010; and underscores that this exceptional
authorization shall not be considered as

7

A/63/PV.104

establishing a precedent. The President of the
International
Tribunal
shall
have
the
responsibility to ensure that this arrangement is
compatible
with
the
independence
and
impartiality of the judges, does not give rise to
conflicts of interest and does not delay the
delivery of the judgment;
“7. Decides that notwithstanding article
11, paragraph 1, of the Statute of the International
Tribunal, and on an exceptional basis, Judge
Egorov, once replaced as a member of the
International Tribunal, complete the cases which
he began before his resignation; and takes note of
the intention of the International Tribunal to
complete the cases by the end of 2009;
“8. Decides to amend article 13,
paragraph 3 of the Statute of the International
Tribunal as set out in the annex to this
resolution”.
If there is no objection, I propose that the
Assembly decide to endorse the recommendation of the
Secretary-General that was endorsed by the Security
Council in its resolution 1878 (2009) of 7 July 2009.
It was so decided.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
invite the attention of the Assembly to document
A/63/947, in which the Secretary-General informs the
General Assembly of the appointment of Professor
Bakhtiyar Tuzmukhamedov as a permanent judge of
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda,
effective 18 August 2009 until 31 December 2010, or
until the completion of the cases to which he will be
assigned, if sooner.
May I take it that the General Assembly takes
note of the appointment of Professor Bakhtiyar
Tuzmukhamedov as a permanent judge of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, effective
18 August 2009 until 31 December 2010, or until the
completion of the cases to which he will be assigned, if
sooner?
It was so decided.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): In
light of the fact that the General Assembly is expected
to act on further requests from the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda at the sixty-fourth
session, may I propose that the General Assembly

8

include in the draft agenda for the sixty-fourth session
an item entitled “International Criminal Tribunal for
the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide
and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the
Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January
and 31 December 1994”?
It was so decided.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): May I
also propose that the Assembly consider this item
directly in plenary meeting?
It was so decided.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): May I
take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
conclude its consideration of agenda item 159?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 160
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
the Former Yugoslavia since 1991
Letters from the Secretary-General (A/63/942
and A/63/946)
Letter from the President of the Security
Council (A/63/957)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): In
document A/63/942, the Secretary-General transmits a
letter dated 27 May 2009 from Judge Patrick Robinson,
President of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, and refers to a request by the President for
the General Assembly to
“(a) Expand the membership of the
Appeals Chamber by authorizing the President to
redeploy four permanent judges from the Trial
Chambers to the Appeals Chamber;
“(b) Extend the term of office of judges of
the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia;
“(c) Authorize the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia to exceed temporarily

09-50531

A/63/PV.104

the statutory maximum number of ad litem judges
serving at the Tribunal”.
In document A/63/957, the President of the
Security Council transmits to the President of the
General Assembly the text of Council resolution 1877
(2009), adopted on 7 July 2009, whereby the Council,
inter alia,
“1. Decides to review the extension of the
term of office of the permanent judges at the
International Tribunal, who are members of the
Appeals Chamber, by 31 December 2009, in light
of the progress of the International Tribunal in the
implementation of the Completion Strategy;
“2. Decides to extend the term of office of
the following permanent judges at the
International Tribunal until 31 December 2010, or
until the completion of the cases to which they
are assigned if sooner:
– Carmel Agius (Malta)
– Jean-Claude Antonetti (France)
– Christoph Flügge (Germany)
– O-Gon Kwon (South Korea)
– Bakone Justice Moloto (South Africa)
– Alphons Orie (Netherlands)
– Kevin Parker (Australia)
– Patrick Robinson (Jamaica);
“3. Decides that the term of office of the
permanent judges appointed to replace Iain
Bonomy
(United
Kingdom),
Mohamed
Shahabuddeen (Guyana) and Christine Van den
Wyngaert
(Belgium)
shall
extend
until
31 December 2010, or until the completion of the
cases to which they will be assigned if sooner;
“4. Decides to extend the term of office of
the following ad litem judges, currently serving at
the International Tribunal, until 31 December
2010, or until the completion of the cases to
which they are assigned if sooner:
– Melville Baird (Trinidad and Tobago)
– Pedro David (Argentina)
– Elizabeth Gwaunza (Zimbabwe)

– Uldis Kinis (Latvia)
– Flavia Lattanzi (Italy)
– Antoine Kesia-Mbe Mindua (Democratic
Republic of the Congo)
– Michèle Picard (France)
– Árpád Prandler (Hungary)
– Stefan Trechsel (Switzerland);
“5. Decides to extend the term of office of
the following ad litem judges, who are not
currently appointed to serve at the International
Tribunal, until 31 December 2010, or until the
completion of any cases to which they may be
assigned if sooner:
– Frans Bauduin (Netherlands)
– Burton Hall (Bahamas)
– Raimo Lahti (Finland)
– Jawdat Naboty (Syrian Arab Republic)
– Chioma Egondu Nwosu-Iheme (Nigeria)
– Prisca Matimba Nyambe (Zambia)
– Brynmor Pollard (Guyana)
– Vonimbolana Rasoazanany (Madagascar)
– Tan Sri Dato Lamin Haji Mohd Yunus
(Malaysia);
“6. Decides to allow ad litem judges
Harhoff, Lattanzi, Mindua, Prandler and Trechsel
to serve in the International Tribunal beyond the
cumulative period of service provided for under
article 13 ter, paragraph 2, of the Statute of the
International Tribunal;
“7. Decides that upon the request of the
President of the International Tribunal, the
Secretary-General may appoint additional ad
litem judges in order to complete existing trials or
conduct additional trials, notwithstanding that the
total number of ad litem judges serving at the
International Tribunal will from time to time
temporarily exceed the maximum of twelve
provided for in article 12, paragraph 1, of the
Statute of the International Tribunal, to a
maximum of thirteen at any one time, returning to
a maximum of twelve by 31 December 2009;

– Frederik Harhoff (Denmark)

09-50531

9

A/63/PV.104

“8. Decides to amend article 14,
paragraph 3, and article 14, paragraph 4, of the
Statute of the International Tribunal and to
replace those paragraphs with the provisions set
out in the annex to this resolution”.
If there is no objection, I shall take it that the
Assembly decides to endorse the recommendation of
the Secretary-General that was endorsed by the
Security Council in its resolution 1877 (2009), of
7 July 2009.
It was so decided.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I
should now like to draw the attention of the General
Assembly to document A/63/946, in which the
Secretary-General informs the Assembly of the
appointment of Mr. Guy Delvoie, Mr. Howard
Morrison and Sir Burton Hall as permanent judges of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
effective 1 September 2009, 31 August 2009 and
7 August 2009, respectively, until 31 December 2010,
or until the completion of the cases to which they will
be assigned if sooner.
May I take it that the General Assembly takes
note of the appointment of Judge Guy Delvoie, Judge
Howard Morrison and Judge Burton Hall to the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia for
terms of office effective 1 September 2009, 31 August
2009 and 7 August 2009, respectively, until
31 December 2010, or until the completion of the cases
to which they will be assigned if sooner?
It was so decided.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): In the
light of the fact that the General Assembly is expected
to act on further requests from the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia during the sixtyfourth session, I propose that the General Assembly
include in the draft agenda for the sixty-fourth session
an item entitled “International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991”. If there is no objection, I shall take it that
the Assembly agrees to that proposal.
It was so decided.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I also
propose that the General Assembly consider that item

10

directly in plenary meeting. Unless I hear any
objection, I shall take it that the Assembly agrees to
that proposal.
It was so decided.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): May I
take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
conclude its consideration of agenda item 160?
It was so decided.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): For
reasons that I will shortly explain, I will speak in
English while considering the next agenda item. I shall
do so on an exceptional basis, in particular given the
resolution on multilingualism that we have just adopted
by consensus.
Agenda item 13
Protracted conflicts in the GUAM area and their
implications for international peace, security
and development
Draft resolution (A/63/L.79)
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/950)
Amendments (A/63/L.81 to A/63/L.98)
The Acting President: I should like to inform the
General Assembly that the amendments under
consideration have been issued in English only.
I give the floor to the representative of Georgia to
introduce draft resolution A/63/L.79.
Mr. Lomaia (Georgia): On behalf of Georgia, I
would like today to introduce draft resolution
A/63/L.79, concerning the status of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees from Abkhazia,
Georgia, and the Tskhinvali region of South Ossetia,
Georgia. The draft resolution reaffirms the inalienable
right of all IDPs and refugees to return to their homes
in both Georgian provinces.
To begin, I would like to take note of the latest
report (A/63/950) of the Secretary-General on the
status of IDPs and refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia,
and to commend his engagement in addressing this
important issue. We hope that next year the SecretaryGeneral will place greater emphasis on the reasons that
those who have been displaced are unable to return to
their homes. We also hope that he will elaborate
concrete recommendations on how the international

09-50531

A/63/PV.104

community can help to ensure the safe, unhindered and
dignified return of IDPs to their places of residence.

cause for the General Assembly to consider anew the
question of Georgia’s IDPs and refugees.

I believe that the Assembly will agree on why we
need to adopt this draft resolution. For more than
15 years, several hundred thousand men, women and
children from these regions have been unable to return
to the communities where they were born and where
their ancestors are buried. These are people from the
most diverse backgrounds, representing scores of
ethnicities — Georgians, Greeks, Russians, Armenians,
Ukrainians, Estonians and Germans. They are
Christians, Muslims and Jews. They are victims of acts
of ethnic cleansing that have been repeatedly
condemned by almost every relevant international
body, including this body.

The draft resolution sets three important goals.
One represents a moral and legal commitment to the
rights of the displaced. The second proposes a
reporting mechanism to the General Assembly. The
third goal is to expand the geographic scope of the
General Assembly’s involvement in order to include
IDPs from the Tskhinvali region of South Ossetia.

Those individuals were forced to flee from their
communities and, ever since, have been denied the
essential right to live in safety and dignity in their
rightful homes. Only a very brave few have remained
in, or returned to, their original homes. Those
courageous souls suffer the constant fear of insecurity
and poverty, living under permanent threat of expulsion
as well as of forced conscription, passportization, the
threat of losing their ethnic identity and the denial of
their right to education in their native language.
Dramatic events have taken place since the
adoption of resolution 62/249 on the status of IDPs and
refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia, in May 2008. In
August of last year, a new armed conflict forced from
their homes a new wave of 160,000 IDPs and refugees.
The conflict also took the lives of hundreds of peaceful
civilians. Thus, a new chapter was written in the
tragedy of the displacement of my compatriots. Up to
38,000 IDPs from last year’s armed conflict are unable
to return to their homes. In his report to the Human
Rights Council in February 2009, Mr. Walter Kälin,
Representative of the Secretary-General on the human
rights of internally displaced persons, stated that “an
estimated 37,600 will not be able to return in the
foreseeable future” (A/HRC/10/13/Add.2, para. 58).
A similar story has unfolded in the Kodori Gorge,
which is also known as Upper Abkhazia, whose
population has been entirely expelled. Today, that
region serves as a base for an illegal foreign military
presence, thus precluding any possibility for the local
population to return to their homes. We strongly
believe that last year’s armed conflict and the new
wave of displacement and misery it created are ample

09-50531

The draft resolution that we seek to have adopted
speaks to the essence of our humanitarian mission in
the General Assembly. It reaffirms the inalienable right
of IDPs and refugees to return to their homes in a
dignified and safe manner. In doing so, it sends a
powerful signal to all IDPs and refugees everywhere in
the world that the international community stands by
them. Furthermore, in establishing an annual reporting
procedure by the Secretary-General, the draft
resolution would introduce an effective instrument for
monitoring the situation in the conflict-affected areas
of Georgia.
The draft resolution before the Assembly falls
within the scope of the resolutions on the protection of
and assistance to internally displaced persons, as well
as the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement.
Moreover, the draft resolution encompasses the
objectives set forth by the participants of the second
working group of the Geneva discussions, elaborated
during the second and third rounds in November and
December of last year.
I must stress that the draft resolution will by no
means impede the ongoing Geneva talks or their
arrangements. To the contrary, it is designed to
reinforce the process by addressing the undisputed
right of every individual to return to his or her home
and to lead a safe, secure and dignified life. Surely,
there cannot be any objection to the affirmation of that
principle. While this issue has been discussed in
Geneva, unfortunately we have been unable to reach
any concrete agreement there. In adopting this draft
resolution, the General Assembly will give new
impetus to those discussions.
Allow me to draw the Assembly’s attention to an
issue addressed in the new draft resolution that did not
appear in last year’s resolution. This concerns the
question of humanitarian access to the war-affected
regions of my country — a problem that emerged only
after last year’s armed conflict. Unfortunately,

11

A/63/PV.104

humanitarian aid coming from the rest of Georgia to
the Tskhinvali region of South Ossetia has been
completely blocked. This blockade has transformed
that territory into a black hole where people are
deprived of basic human rights and humanitarian aid is
simply not allowed. That has dramatic negative
consequences that we need to reverse. We therefore
have before us a unique opportunity — to quote
paragraph 4 of the draft resolution — to once again
underline
“the urgent need for unimpeded access for
humanitarian activities to all internally displaced
people, refugees and other persons residing in all
conflict-affected areas throughout Georgia”.
Over the past 15 years, too little progress has
been made in helping Georgia’s displaced persons to
return to their homes.
Moreover, with every passing year, the situation
has deteriorated. We have already witnessed three
waves of forced displacement since the beginning of
the 1990s. Consequently, people who have waited in
vain for results have been losing their faith in the
United Nations. Today, as we speak, hundreds of
thousands are looking hopefully towards this house,
waiting for a positive decision from the General
Assembly. The Assembly must hear the silent plea. The
international community must no longer accept the
current situation, wherein the displaced are prevented
from returning to their cherished homes. Therefore, I
urge representatives to vote in favour of the draft
resolution before them.
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of the Russian Federation on a point of
order.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The draft resolution before the General
Assembly in document A/63/L.79 has nothing in
common with the lofty humanitarian goals and
concerns referred to by its authors. Moreover, this
initiative is motivated exclusively by political concerns
and based on the expedient calculations of the
Georgian side, which is seeking to shirk its
responsibilities for a situation that, as it happens, arose
as a result of the policies of the Georgian authorities
that culminated in the attack on Tskhinvali on the
evening of 7-8 August last year.

12

The draft resolution has been advanced by the
authors in a confrontational manner. The delegation of
the Russian Federation was the only one that did not
receive a copy. Moreover, in a spirit of good will, we
set forth proposals for amendments to the text in order
to reach a possible consensus, but these were not
responded to nor was there any attempt to consult with
the Abkhaz or South Ossetian sides.
The Russian side’s readiness to work in earnest
and constructively is evident in the amendments we
circulated on the draft resolution. The adoption of the
draft resolution would considerably undermine the
ongoing discussions in Geneva, within which issues
related to the situation of refugees and internally
displaced persons are also being addressed.
The Georgian side is well aware of that, but it
prefers to insist on pressing its own initiatives. Its
approach is clearly not motivated by a desire to ease
the plight of those who are in a situation of forced
displacement. The adoption of the draft resolution
would only help to distract us from genuine, practical
work in the region and would in no way assist in
building the trust between the Georgian and Abkhaz
and South Ossetian sides that is a necessary condition
for a settlement, including with respect to the
temporarily displaced persons and refugees. This fact
should be understood by one and all, regardless of their
assessment of the geopolitical situation in the region.
In view of the foregoing, the delegation of the
Russian Federation, pursuant to rule 74 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, moves a no-action
motion on the draft resolution and requests that it be
put to the vote. By closing consideration of an
initiative that is in essence politically motivated and
confrontational, the General Assembly and States
Members of the United Nations would be doing much
more for the refugees and internally displaced persons
from Abkhazia and South Ossetia than they would by
voting on this heinous proposed text.
The Acting President: The representative of the
Russian Federation has, invoking rule 74 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, moved that no
action be taken on draft resolution A/63/L.79. Let me
remind delegations that rule 74 reads as follows:
“During the discussion of any matter, a
representative may move the adjournment of the
debate on the item under discussion. In addition
to the proposer of the motion, two representatives

09-50531

A/63/PV.104

may speak in favour of, and two against, the
motion, after which the motion shall be
immediately put to the vote.”
I would therefore invite delegations that so wish
to speak either for or against the motion. There will be
no more than two delegations speaking in favour and
no more than two speaking against.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): The
motion that has just been presented seeks to prevent the
General Assembly from considering a proposal that has
been submitted to us for substantive reasons. France is
opposed in principle to such motions. The General
Assembly should be able to debate any subject,
whatever the substantive difficulties, and for that
reason my delegation will vote against this motion and
calls on other delegations to do likewise, irrespective
of how they intend to vote on the substance of the
proposed text.
Mr. Hermida Castillo (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): The delegation of Nicaragua supports the
motion for no action presented by the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation with regard
to the draft resolution contained in document
A/63/L.79. We consider that initiatives on such
important issues as assistance to refugees and
internally displaced persons should be the subject of
broad consensus and the product of an open,
transparent and participatory process, particularly
among the countries concerned.
As we understand it, the discussions being held in
Geneva, which include all parties involved, are at a
delicate stage. That is why initiatives such as draft
resolution A/63/L.79, which contains biased proposals
and represents the views of only one of the parties to
the conflict, will not lead to positive and necessary
results in this matter or help to create an environment
of mutual trust between the parties.
The delegation of Nicaragua therefore supports
the motion for no action and urges other delegations to
support it as well.
Mr. Yaroshevich (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): I
shall be very brief. Belarus has great respect for the
concerns of the delegation of Georgia, whose
representative introduced draft resolution A/63/L.79.
At the same time, however, we must note that it is
based on resolution 62/249, in the voting on which
more than 85 per cent of Member States either

09-50531

abstained or did not participate. Of all the resolutions
before the General Assembly at the past session, that
resolution received the lowest number of votes. That
was a unique situation, in our opinion, and did not
reflect a lack of interest on the part of Member States
to the plight of internally displaced persons and
refugees in the Caucasus region. It simply meant that
the vast majority of Member States believe that
existing problems must be resolved through
negotiations rather than through confrontation or
substantive resolutions.
The adoption of this kind of draft resolution
could undermine the discussions under way in Geneva.
Belarus has always emphasized on principle that
resolutions and decisions adopted by the United
Nations are valuable and relevant only when they
provide a solution to complex international situations
and contribute to bringing partners together to achieve
mutual understanding. Unfortunately, this draft
resolution is insufficiently focused on that. We
therefore believe that a no-action motion is warranted
in this case and call on delegations to support the
proposal of the Russian Federation.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom strongly urges delegations to vote against
this motion. We do so for reasons of principle. A
motion to adjourn an item sine die represents an
attempt to prevent the consideration of a resolution on
procedural grounds. The calling of such a motion aims
at denying the States Members of the United Nations
their sovereign right to bring before the General
Assembly any concern that they themselves deem to
merit its attention, and at limiting the agenda of the
Assembly. This runs contrary to the good practice of
the General Assembly.
No-action motions contradict one of the ideas on
which the creation of the United Nations was based,
namely, that issues of concern to Member States shall
be addressed and discussed openly. Each proposal
presented in the General Assembly deserves
consideration on its own merits. So we strongly urge
delegations to vote against this no-action motion,
regardless of their views and voting intentions on the
substance of the draft resolution.
The Acting President: In accordance with rule
74 of the rules of procedure of the Assembly, I shall
now put to the vote the motion submitted by the
representative of the Russian Federation, namely, that

13

A/63/PV.104

no action be taken on draft resolution A/63/L.79. A
recorded vote has been requested on the motion.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Armenia, Bahrain, Belarus, Bolivia,
China, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, India, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Kazakhstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mongolia, Myanmar, Namibia, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Russian Federation, Serbia, Somalia, Sri
Lanka, Syrian Arab Republic, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Latvia,
Liberia,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Malta,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Romania, Saint Lucia, San Marino,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Timor-Leste, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu
Abstaining:
Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Benin, Bhutan,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Cameroon, Colombia, Cyprus, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Egypt, El
Salvador, Fiji, Gabon, Ghana, Guyana, Indonesia,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Malaysia, Mauritius, Morocco, Nepal, Pakistan,
Panama, Philippines, Qatar, Republic of
Moldova, Rwanda, Samoa, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Singapore, South Africa, Suriname,
Swaziland, Thailand, Togo, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uzbekistan, Zambia
The motion was rejected by 64 votes to 29, with
50 abstentions.

14

The Acting President: In accordance with rule
90 of the rules of procedure, the Assembly will first
take decisions on the amendments to the draft
resolution, which are contained in documents
A/63/L.81 to A/63/L.98.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Russian Federation.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The outcome of the vote that has just been
held again reaffirms the fact that a specific group of
countries continues to employ double standards with
regard to this issue and to adopt a politicized approach,
to the detriment of practical steps to bring about a
settlement to existing humanitarian problems in the
region. Those are the same countries whose politicized
approach has prevented the Security Council from
extending the mandate of the United Nations presence
in Abkhazia and Georgia, and that stubbornly
prevented the South Ossetian and Abkhaz sides from
reporting to the world community the truth of the
situation, including as regards the protection of
refugees and internally displaced persons.
In the light of the fact that the sponsors and
supporters of this initiative persist in their rejection of
reasonable dialogue, the Russian Federation will
refrain from asking for a vote on the previously
submitted amendments to the text. Those that vote for
the current counterproductive draft will therefore bear
full responsibility for the consequences of its possible
adoption.
The Acting President: I understand that the
amendments have now been withdrawn. We shall
therefore proceed to take action on draft resolution
A/63/L.79.
A number of delegations have asked for the floor
in explanation of vote or position before the taking of
action on the draft resolution. Before giving the floor
to speakers in explanation of vote before the voting,
may I remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Tsymbaliuk (Ukraine): Ukraine will vote in
favour of draft resolution A/63/L.79, entitled “Status of
internally displaced persons and refugees from
Abkhazia, Georgia and the Tskhinvali region/South
Ossetia, Georgia”.

09-50531

A/63/PV.104

We have carefully studied the report of the
Secretary-General on the status of internally displaced
persons and refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia
(A/63/950). Much to our regret, it concludes that the
conditions ultimately required to allow for the
organized return of displaced persons have not been
met. Therefore, Ukraine agrees with the appeal to the
international community to take the necessary actions.
We believe that the adoption of this draft resolution
would be a step forward in that direction.
We would like to draw the attention of all
delegations to the fact that the draft resolution before
us emphasizes the right, the necessity and the urgency
of the safe and dignified return to their homes of all
internally displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees,
regardless of their ethnic backgrounds. That would
make it possible to take practical steps to ensure
respect for human rights and create favourable security
conditions conducive to the voluntary, safe, dignified
and unhindered return of all IDPs and refugees to their
places of origin.
Thus, we consider the draft resolution to be
humanitarian in nature, pursuing purely humanitarian
objectives. Moreover, the Secretary-General clearly
states in his report that the return of displaced persons
is a strictly humanitarian issue and that it is not
acceptable to link returns with questions of political
status. Therefore, we can hardly agree that the
submission of this draft resolution was politically
motivated.
We would also like to refer to the Geneva
discussions, the participants in which have considered
the matter of refugees and displaced persons on the
basis of internationally recognized principles. In that
regard, we are confident that all practical steps to settle
the issue of IDPs and refugees should be taken in full
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Georgia within its internationally recognized borders.
The geographic terms contained in the text of the draft
resolution reflect a widely recognized situation.
We hope that the draft resolution before us will
be adopted by the General Assembly. Its adoption
would be a solid step towards the resolution of a longstanding problem, as well as an important signal of
United Nations solidarity with the hundreds of
thousands of Georgia’s suffering displaced persons.
Mrs. Intelmann (Estonia): Estonia will vote in
favour of draft resolution A/63/L.79. Our decision

09-50531

proceeds from a strong and long-standing commitment
to fundamental humanitarian principles.
The draft resolution under consideration deals
with the plight of internally displaced persons (IDPs)
in Georgia following the 1992 conflict. Their condition
has been of concern for many, many years.
Unfortunately, the situation has significantly
deteriorated over the past year. The armed conflict in
August 2008 has led to further displacement. We are
deeply concerned about the humanitarian and human
rights situation, the unresolved issue of property rights
and the lack of visible progress in the return of IDPs.
According to the Secretary-General’s report
(A/63/950), there are currently almost 300,000 IDPs
residing in Georgia, most of them displaced since
1992. Owing to the lack of progress in their return,
they need constant international support and attention,
including from the United Nations system.
In 2006, Member States decided to include in the
agenda of the General Assembly the item “Protracted
conflicts in the GUAM area and their implications for
international peace, security and development”. Under
that item, we have been able to discuss many important
issues. Most of those issues remain unresolved, and it
is understandable that the countries concerned should
decide to bring them to the table of the United Nations.
While the draft resolution under consideration
today is humanitarian in nature, we cannot deny the
fact that there is a complex of unresolved, deep and
long-standing political issues that have caused and
continue to cause internal displacement in Georgia. For
many years, some of those issues were regularly
considered by the Security Council, and the Council
had mandated a United Nations presence in Georgia.
Regrettably, that field activity was recently
discontinued. We strongly believe that the United
Nations cannot and should not disengage further from
trying to find a solution to the situation in Georgia.
My delegation also takes this opportunity to
reaffirm its firm support for the security and stability
of Georgia, based on full respect for the principles of
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Together with other European Union (EU) member
States and in line with EU decisions, we also reaffirm
our full commitment to the Geneva talks, and hope that
they will produce concrete and sustainable results in
the nearest future.

15

A/63/PV.104

Mr. Penke (Latvia): Latvia reaffirms its firm
support for the security and stability of Georgia, based
on full respect for the principles of independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity, recognized by
international law, including the Helsinki Final Act of
the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Since the adoption of a similar resolution in May
2008, the situation on the ground has not improved.
Quite to the contrary, as a result of the armed conflict
in August 2008, even more people have been forced to
flee their homes and are still unable to return.
Latvia welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the status of internally displaced persons
and refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia (A/63/950), and
fully agrees with the Secretary-General’s conclusion
that it is essential to recognize the return of refugees
and internally displaced persons as both a human right
and a humanitarian issue, and as an issue that must be
addressed urgently.
We strongly believe that the General Assembly
should express itself on this matter, and we thank the
delegation of Georgia for its constructive work and
flexibility in preparing the text before us today. We
believe that this draft resolution reflects, properly and
in a balanced manner, the humanitarian nature of the
issue. Latvia is firmly committed to fundamental
humanitarian principles. Therefore, we will vote in
favour of the draft resolution and respectfully request
all delegations to do likewise.
Mr. Palouš (Czech Republic): The Czech
Republic continues to be strongly committed to
fundamental humanitarian principles. It is deeply
concerned over the humanitarian and human rights
situation of internally displaced persons (IDPs) in
Georgia. Recent conflicts in that country have led to
the displacement of many people, many of them for
many years. Those people have been denied the right to
return to their homes and to recover their property, as
well as other human rights.
There has been no progress in addressing these
issues; to the contrary, the situation has deteriorated.
Therefore, we believe that there is also an urgent need
to consider this important and complex issue within the
framework of the General Assembly, under the agenda
item “Protracted conflicts in the GUAM area and their
implications for international peace, security and

16

development”. For that reason, the Czech Republic will
vote in favour of draft resolution A/63/L.79.
The Czech Republic deeply regrets that
agreement has not been reached on the future of the
monitoring missions in Georgia being carried out by
the United Nations and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, and we believe that the
international community should continue its active
engagement. The Czech Republic remains committed
to the Geneva process, as also underlined by
conclusions reached at the meeting of the European
Union’s General Affairs and External Relations
Council held on 27 July 2009.
Finally, let me reaffirm the Czech Republic’s
strong support for the security and stability of Georgia,
based on full respect for the principles of
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity,
recognized by international law, including the Helsinki
Final Act of the Conference on Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
Mr. Čekuolis (Lithuania): I would like to start by
reiterating Lithuania’s firm support for the security and
stability of Georgia and its sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity.
My delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution (A/63/L.79). The background of our
reasoning in support of the draft resolution arises from
Lithuania’s strong commitment to fundamental
humanitarian principles, and I would like in particular
to stress the humanitarian nature of the draft. It is a
matter of both justice and urgent necessity that
hundreds of thousands of people displaced from
Georgia’s constituent parts of Abkhazia and South
Ossetia should be able to return in safety and dignity to
their homes and communities.
We note and welcome the report of the SecretaryGeneral (A/63/950) on the implementation of
resolution 62/249 of 15 May 2008, which states that
the conditions ultimately required to allow for the
organized return of displaced persons have not been
met. Our reading is that the General Assembly should
continue to keep its attention on this issue and to take
action. It is also our belief that adoption of the draft
resolution would send a positive signal to the Geneva
talks, where, inter alia, issues related to the voluntary
safe, dignified and unhindered return of displaced
persons are on the table.

09-50531

A/63/PV.104

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/63/L.79, entitled “Status of internally
displaced persons and refugees from Abkhazia,
Georgia and Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia,
Georgia”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania,
Saint Lucia, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Vanuatu
Against:
Algeria, Armenia, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Ecuador, Ethiopia, India, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Myanmar, Nicaragua, Russian Federation, Sri
Lanka, Syrian Arab Republic, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh,
Barbados,
Benin,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Cameroon, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo,
Costa Rica, Cyprus, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, Fiji,
Gabon, Ghana, Guatemala, Guyana, Indonesia,
Israel, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Rwanda, Samoa,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, South

09-50531

Africa, Suriname, Swaziland, Switzerland,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Yemen, Zambia
Draft resolution A/63/L.79 was adopted by
48 votes to 19, with 78 abstentions (resolution
63/307).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Bhutan advised
the Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in an explanation of vote on the resolution
just adopted, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): I am taking the floor to
briefly explain our position.
First, I wish to underline that regardless of our
position on the issue at hand today, we believe that it is
the basic right of any delegation to bring an issue to the
attention of the General Assembly and, if deemed
necessary, to submit a draft resolution. I would also
like to reiterate Turkey’s firm and unwavering
commitment to the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Georgia within its internationally
recognized borders. We remain concerned that the
conflicts in the Abkhazia and South Ossetia regions of
Georgia are still unresolved and that the situation also
has serious economic, social and humanitarian
consequences.
Turkey supports all efforts aimed at the peaceful
resolution of these conflicts and urges all parties to
work towards a comprehensive and sustainable peace
that will also provide for the return of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees. We attach
importance to the discussions being carried out in
Geneva to address the issue of the voluntary, safe,
dignified and unhindered return of IDPs and refugees,
and hope that they will soon have positive outcomes.
In the meantime, we call on all parties to refrain from
taking any steps that would aggravate the situation and
to take urgent action to build confidence and
favourable security conditions.
As a country of the region and a neighbour of
Georgia, Turkey stands ready to contribute to the
peaceful resolution of these long-standing conflicts. It
is our deep conviction that steps in that direction will

17

A/63/PV.104

enhance the stability and prosperity of the Caucasus
region as a whole.
The Acting President: I call on the
representative of the Russian Federation on a point of
order.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I wish to draw attention to the fact that at
least two delegations that were indicated on the board
as having voted in favour had in fact abstained in the
voting. Therefore, the results declared at the outcome
of the voting are not fully valid.
The Acting President: With reference to the
observation made by the representative of the Russian
Federation, I wish to draw attention to the print-out of
the voting results that has now been distributed to all
delegations. I am looking at the page right now and the
observations made by the delegation of Bhutan are
fully reflected there. So I do not think that this
impinges in any way on the validity of the voting or on
the results as announced. At any rate, any delegation
can place its intended vote on record, if it is not that
which appeared on the panel.
We shall now hear the remaining speakers in
explanation of vote on the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Portugal’s vote
in favour of resolution 63/307 is in line with our strong
commitment to fundamental humanitarian principles as
expressed, inter alia, in the European consensus on
humanitarian aid jointly agreed by the Council of
Ministers of the European Union; the representatives of
the Governments of the member States meeting within
the Council, the European Parliament and European
Commission signed on 18 December 2007; and the
Council of Europe’s recommendation on internally
displaced persons adopted by the Council of Ministers
on 5 April 2006.
The European Union’s General Affairs and
External Relations Council met on 27 July 2009, fully
committed to the Geneva talks under the continued
co-chairmanship of this forum by the European Union,
the United Nations and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe. The Council also recalled
its conclusions of 13 October 2008 and those of the
European Council of September 2008. Portugal,
naturally, abides by this commitment.

18

Ms. Halabi (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I take the floor to explain our vote on
resolution 63/307.
My delegation sympathizes with all humanitarian
causes throughout the world. We are concerned by the
suffering of refugees and the resulting burdens
imposed upon host countries. We should have liked the
matter to be resolved bilaterally, but as it concerns a
purely humanitarian situation in Georgia, we recognize
the merits of its being addressed in the relevant forum,
the Human Rights Council, in implementation of the
Medvedev-Sarkozy plan.
The issue of refugees can be resolved only
through dialogue between the parties concerned based
on the principles of international law and international
humanitarian law. Since the resolution submitted by
Georgia does not refer to that basis, we voted in favour
of the no-action motion and against the resolution.
Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan) (spoke in Russian):
The delegation of Kazakhstan advocated against
putting resolution 63/307 to the vote by voting in
favour of the no-action motion. Although Kazakhstan
had no objection in principle to the consideration of the
resolution on the status of temporarily displaced
persons and refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia and the
region of Tskhinvali, Georgia, we felt that it had been
premature to submit the resolution because additional
time was needed for consultations between the primary
parties — the Georgians and the Russians — who had
considerable and fundamental differences on the
resolution. In view of the fact that our colleagues are
involved in major discussions in Geneva, we acted on
the principle that the United Nations and the General
Assembly must resort to every possible means to
narrow differences as much as possible.
In general, with regard to the resolution adopted
today, my delegation asserts that, as a responsible party
to international law, the Republic of Kazakhstan fully
respects the principle of the territorial integrity of all
States Members of the United Nations. Taking into
account the fact that recognition is a unilateral,
voluntary and legal political act on the part of the
recognizing State, which is guided by its own, mainly
political
interests,
Kazakhstan
reaffirms
its
commitment to the aforementioned principles.
Mr. Morejón (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I will
speak briefly. We note the important comments made
today with regard to today’s vote. Ecuador voted

09-50531

A/63/PV.104

against the no-action motion today because we believe
that all Member States have the right to present matters
to the General Assembly. That principle governs our
foreign policy.
Ecuador voted against the resolution submitted by
Georgia because we hope the matter will be dealt with
in the human rights forum in Geneva in a positive
atmosphere and in full respect for the relevant
international human rights instruments. As members
are aware, Ecuador attaches particular importance to
the issue of refugees, as evidenced in our exemplary
policy of guaranteeing the exercise of their human
rights.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote.
I now call on the representative of Georgia, who
wishes to make a statement following the adoption of
resolution 63/307.
Mr. Lomaia (Georgia): We have just adopted a
resolution that reinforces the hopes of hundreds of
thousands of men, women and children — citizens of
Georgia of various ethnic origins who were forced to
flee their homes and communities. It is with them in
mind that I would like to thank the members of the
General Assembly.
This timely resolution demonstrates that the
international community stands firmly upon the norms
and principles of international law. It reaffirms the
right of all displaced populations, regardless of their
ethnicity, to return to their places of origin in Georgia’s
region of Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali region of South
Ossetia.

I know that the Assembly’s support of this
resolution did not come easily. In fact, it had little to
do with the text itself, and that makes the positive vote
even more worthy. Unfortunately, the moral clarity that
we felt towards this resolution was confronted with
extraneous attempts to politicize our initiative.
However, at the end of the day, truth and dignity
prevailed.
Despite all the unfair moves used to block this
resolution, we stand ready to fully engage with all
interested parties, provided that the fundamental
principles of international humanitarian law and
territorial integrity are respected. We are confident that
the adoption of this resolution will re-energize and
strengthen consolidated international efforts aimed at
achieving its ultimate goals.
I am delighted to see that the General Assembly
has lived up to its expectations. I can only hope that,
during the sixty-fourth session, we will be able to
discuss the progress made in, and take relevant steps to
further, the process of the return of internally displaced
persons and refugees.
Finally, on behalf of all those who have endured
violent treatment because of their ethnic background,
we would like once again to express our heartfelt
gratitude to each and every State that voted in favour
of this resolution. It will never be forgotten by the
people of my country.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 13?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 12.35 p.m.

09-50531

19
