S/PRST/2004/48

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 December 2004
English
Original: French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5103rd meeting of the Security Council, held on 16 December 2004, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Côte d’Ivoire”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council commends the efforts made by the African Union
and, in particular, the personal involvement of President Thabo Mbeki,
President of the Republic of South Africa, to promote dialogue and relaunch
the peace and national reconciliation process in Côte d’Ivoire. It expresses its
full support for the facilitation mission undertaken by President Mbeki on
behalf of the African Union.
“The Security Council welcomes the encouraging prospects resulting
from these efforts and the commitments made by all Ivorian parties, demands
that all Ivorian parties fully comply with their commitments, and underlines
that it will monitor with vigilance their full implementation.
“The Security Council reaffirms its conviction that the full
implementation of resolution 1572 (2004) is a key element in ensuring that all
Ivorian parties commit themselves fully to the implementation of the peace
and national reconciliation process in Côte d’Ivoire, and deplores the fact that
the signatories of the Linas-Marcoussis and Accra III Agreements have not
implemented by 15 December 2004 all their commitments under the Accra III
Agreement.
“The Security Council underlines that any failure by any Ivorian party to
respect their commitments made to President Mbeki would constitute a threat
to the implementation of peace and national reconciliation process as defined
in the Linas-Marcoussis and Accra III Agreements, and recalls in this regard
the measures referred to in paragraphs 9 and 11 of resolution 1572 (2004).
“The Security Council requests the Committee established by the
resolution 1572 (2004) to continue its work, taking fully into account the
developments of the peace process in Côte d’Ivoire arising from the
facilitation efforts undertaken by the African Union.
“In addition, the Security Council demands that all Ivorian parties stop
all incitement to violence and hatred in broadcast, written and other media, and
calls upon the Committee to monitor this closely without delay.

04-65113 (E) 161204

*0465113*

S/PRST/2004/48

“The Security Council also demands that all Ivorian parties ensure
freedom of the press and unlimited access to information throughout Côte
d’Ivoire.
“The Security Council expresses its intention to consider without delay
further steps to ensure the effective monitoring and implementation of the
arms embargo imposed by resolution 1572 (2004).
“The Security Council expresses its appreciation to the Special
Representative of the Secretary General, Mr Albert Tevoedjre, for his
unsparing efforts to support the restoration of a durable peace in Côte d’Ivoire
under challenging circumstances.”

2
