TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR
tll
MEETING: 20 MAY 1968

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l425/Rev.2)

,......... ...............

Page
1

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 25 April 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8560);
(b) Report of the Secretary-General under General Assembly resolution
2254 (ES-V) relating to Jerusalem (S/8146) . . . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . , , , .

1

S/PV.1425

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given,
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Sentn’ty Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN HUNDRED AND TWENTY-FIFTH MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 20 May 1968, at 4.30 p.m.
President: Lord CARADON
(United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).

4. Before calling on the speaker on my list, I would draw
attention to a draft resolution sponsored by Pakistan and
Senegal and circulated this afternoon in document S/8590.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

5. I now call on the representative of Pakistan.
6. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): During the present debate on
the situation in Jerusalem which began with our 142 1st
meeting, the Council has heard comprehensive statements
from the parties. Mindful of the appeal which you made,
Mr. President, at both the 1423rd and 1424th meetings for
bringing the debate urgently to a conchtsion, we feel the
time has arrived to place a specific proposal before the
Council Accordingly, on behalf of the delegation of
Senegal and my own, I have the honour to introduce a draft
resolution, the text of which is set forth ln document
S/8590. It is not necessaryfor me to read the text. I have
been given to understand that in the text distributed in
French some changes are needed to make it reflect more
accurately the provisions of the English text. I hope that
the necessarycorrections will be made.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l425/Rev.2)

1. Adoption of the agenda.

.

2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 25 April 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/8560);
ibl Report of the Secretary-General under General
Assembly resolution 2254 (ES-V) relating to Jerusalem (S/8146).
Adoption of the agenda

7. It must be mentioned here that the text in document
S/8590 has not been authored only by the two co-sponsors.
It is the product of prolonged and careful consultations
among the seven Asian, African and Latin American
delegations, during which, I am happy to say, every
delegation without exception made important contributions to it.

The agenda was adopted,
The situation in the Middle East:
(al Letter dated 25 April 1966 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed -to the President of
the Security Council (S/8560);
(b) Report of the Secretary-General under General Assembly resolution 2254 (ES-V) relating to Jerusalem
(S/8146)

8. I should like to make it clear that the draft resolution
before us does not in any way embody a decision of the
Council regarding the position of the city of Jerusalem. It is
in essencea proposal of an interim nature. It seeks only to
reaffirm the General Assembly resolutions on Jerusalem.
Any variation from those resolutions is due either to events
which have occurred since they were adopted or simply to
the fact that this is a draft resolution for the Security
Council and not for the General Assembly. Members of the
Council will note that because of its limited scope it does
not include a call for the withdrawal of Israel’s forces and
other personnel from the Holy City. Such a call would fall
within the ambit of measures contemplated in another
resolution which would pertain to the substantive aspects
of the Middle East problem. The draft resolution seeks
merely to preclude any measures or any actions which
constitute attempts to change the status of the city.

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance dvith the decision
previously taken by the Council, I shall now invite, the
representatives of Jordan and Israel to take places at the
Council table in order to participate, without the right to
vote, in the discussion.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. H. El-Farra
(Jordan) and Mr. I’, Tekoah (Israel) took places at the
Council table.

2. The PRESIDENT: The Council will now continue its
consideration of the question before it.
3. I wish to apologize to the Council for the delay in
calling the meeting to order this evening and to say that the
time has been fully occupied by continuous consultations
between ourselves. I very much regret that this delay has
been necessary.

9. It has been observed during this debate that the
question of Jerusalem is linked with the whole Middle East
question. No one could possibly dispute that proposition.
1

forbids those measures and actions which have already been
taken or are contemplated by Israel in an attempt to change
the status of Jerusalem. The draft resolution is very clear
and speaks for itself. All of US know the limits of measures
and actions that can be taken under military occupation. It
is neither necessary nor relevant to spell them out here.

In the statement which my delegation made on 6 May at
the 1422nd meeting of the Council we stated:
“The Holy City of Jerusalem is, of course, included in
the territories from which, under the United Nations
Charter and specifically under resolution 242 (1967),
Israel has the inescapable obligation to withdraw.”
[1422nd meeting, para. 30./

1.5. Israel does not disavow the intention to annex
Jerusalem. Nothing could be clearer than the following
statement in the report of the Secretary-General of 12
September 1967:

That, however, does not mean that no specific action is
called for in respect of Jerusalem. A negative proposition of
that kind would ignore three realities which are the cardinal
and distinctive features of the situation existing in the Holy
City.

“In the numerous conversations which the Personal
Representative had with Israel leaders, including the
Prime Minister and the Minister for Foreign Affairs, it was
made clear beyond any doubt that Israel was taking every
step to place under its sovereignty rhose parts of the city
which were not controlled by Israel before June 1967.
The statutory bases for this had already been created, and
the administrative authorities had started to apply Israel
laws and regulations in those parts of the city.

10. First, Jerusalem has been the subject of two resolutions unanimously adopted by the General Assembly
subsequent to the hostilities in the Middle East in June
1967. Those resolutions were supported by fourteen
members of the Council. Resolution 2253 (ES-V) expressed
concern at the situation prevailing in Jerusalem and
considered that the measures taken by Israel to change the
status of the city were invalid. On that basis, it called upon
Israel to rescind all measures already taken and to desist
forthwith from taking any action which would alter the
status of Jerusalem. Resolution 2254 (ES-V) reiterated that
call, deplored the failure of Israel to comply with it and
requested the Secretary-General to report on its implementation. Pursuant to this resolution, the Security Council
received the Secretary-General’s report [S/8146], based on
the report of his personal representative. The Council has
taken cognizance of that report. Neither the report nor
Israel’s attitude permits of any doubt about Israel’s
non-compliance with the General Assembly resolutions.

“.. .
“The Israel authorities stated unequivocally that the
‘process of integration was irreversible and not nego.
tiable.” (Ibid., paras. 33 and 35. J
16. On the basis of these undisputed facts, the legal
measures and administrative actions which the draft resolution forbids are those which, on Israel’s own showing and
according to its announced policy and purpose, are designed to incorporate Jerusalem in the territory of Israel or
are based upon Israel’s assertion of sovereignty over
Jerusalem.

11. Secondly, while the Council has been rightly concerned with all acts which aggravate tension in the area, the
measures taken by Israel in an attempt to change the status
of Jerusalem are acts differing in character from breaches of
the cease-fire. They pose a sharp and specific challenge to
the principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of
territory by war. This challenge has to be met, and the
principle vindicated, if the prospect of the establishment of
a just and lasting peace in the Middle East is to be
preserved. It is for this reason that a preambular paragraph
in the draft resolution reaffirms that principle.

17. I would, in conclusion, point out that at a time when
the Council has still reason to entertain the hope that
efforts towards a political settlement of the Middle East
problem may bear fruit, it is important that the Council do
its best to prevent actions and occurrences which deepen
and further complicate the conflict and render a settlement
still more difficult. Israel’s annexation of a territory which
was not under its control before June 1967 and which, in
the case of Jerusalem, affects the interests of the popula.
tions of a large number of countries is the outstanding act
of this nature. The draft resolution which I have now
introduced is designed solely to prevent a fresh and
dangerous expansion of the Middle East conflict.

12. Thirdly, the unique and special importance of Jerusalem to the international commun%y has been recognized
in various resolutions of the ‘United Nations. Because of the
association of the Holy City with three world religions, the
situation in Jerusalem exercises the universal conscience in
a quite special way.

18. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): The Security Council has now
been considering for more than three weeks the item
submitted by Jordan on the situation created in Jerusalem
as the result of Israel’s aggression’against the neighbouring
Arab States last June and its subsequent annexationist
activities in the occupied Arab territories, including the
Arab sector of Jerusalem.

13. For these three reasons, it is imperative that the
Council pronounce itself clearly and unmistakably in order
to prevent an unwarranted and forcible change in the status
of Jerusalem and the continued violations of General
Assembly resolutions 2253 (ES-V) and 2254 (ES-V).

19. At first, with the general agreement of the Security:
Council, measures were taken to accelerate the con*
sideration of this question; the discussion, however, 1s
becoming excessively and unjustifiably protracted. The
representatives of Pakistan and Senegal have now submitted

14. The question may be asked: What are the legal
measures and administrative actions which the draft resolution seeks to invalidate and forbid? It invalidates and

2

a draft resolution on the item under discussion [S/8.590/.
The distinguished representative of Pakistan has introduced
this draft resolution to the Security Council eloquently and
in detail, and has explained its substance and contents. It
contains the fundamental provisions required to prevent the
further deterioration of the situation in Jerusalem-namely,
the recognition of the illegality of Israel’s activities in the
occupied Arab sector of Jerusalem, the demand that the
measures already taken by Israel to annex the Arab sector
of the city should be rescinded, and the demand that Israel
should not take such measures in the future.
20. The draft resolution reaffirms the principle that the
acquisition of territory by means of conquest, occupation
and aggression is inadmissible. This, as has been repeatedly
pointed out in the Security Council, was one of the basic
principles underlying the Council’s earlier resolution,
21. The Soviet delegation has had the opportunity of
familiarizing itself with this draft, since you, Mr. President,
were kind enough to communicate its contents to us several
days ago. Of course, ,the draft contains some provisions
which, in our delegation’s view, it would be well to

strengthen. We understand, however, that these formulations reflect the particular positions of individual StatesMembers of the Security Council which have taken part in
the consultations and in the preparation of the draft
resolution-and that this fact has made it possible for the
representatives of Pakistan and Senegal to submit the draft
in question. The Soviet delegation expresses its agreement
with this draft resolution and will support it. Our delegation hopes that the Security Council will adopt this draft
resolution on the question of the situation in Jerusalem and
thereby make the provisions of the resolution binding upon
Israel. If, however, the aggressor does not comply with this
decision of the Security Council, the Security Council will
be obliged to take such measures as will compel that
compliance.
22. The PRESIDENT: I have no other speakers on my list
for today. Consequently, following consultations with all
members of the Security Council, I propose, if there is no
objection, to adjourn this meeting of the Council, to meet
again at 3 o’clock tomorrow afternoon.
The meeting rose at 6.50 p-m.

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Notions
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

may be obtained
bookstore
or write

from bookstores
ond distributors
to: United
Notions,
Soles Section,

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

SE PROCURER

throughout
New York

!.

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unier
sent en vente
dons les libroirier
et ler q gencec
dipositoirer
du monde entier.
Informer-voor
aup&
de votre tibroirie
ou odrerrez-vow
6:
Notions
Unies, Section
des venter, New York ou GenBve.
HAH

COMO

IlOflY‘lMTb

CONSEGUIR

M3~AHIIR

PUELICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

Los publicocioner
de las Naciones
Unidar
e&n
en todor porter
del mundo. Conrulte
o IV librero
Ventar. Nuevo
York o Ginebro.

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

06bEAMHEHHblX

OPrAHM3AuHH

UNIDAS

en vente en librerior
o dirijore
o: N&ones

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

HAL(IAfl

y caras distribuidoros
Unidos,
Secci6n

in other currencies)

de

35664-September

1972-2,100
